{"newspaper":"Belfast Telegraph","id:"1317"}
____
  
News
Ukip warns on migration
REBECCA BLACK   
484 words
1 March 2014
Belfast Telegraph
WBEL
1; Northwest
2
English
© 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)   
Party's Northern Ireland councillor echoes Farage fears
UKIP's ONLY councillor in Northern Ireland has echoed his party leader's comment that parts of the UK have become unrecognisable due to immigration. Henry Reilly (below) has said parts of Northern Ireland have also become unrecognisable through immigration and said he receives complaints that people cannot get jobs because of so many foreign nationals.
Speaking at the opening of his party's spring conference in Torquay yesterday, Ukip leader Nigel Farage claimed that "open door, mass immigration" had hurt the poorest in the UK.
Newry and Mourne councillor Henry Reilly, who will run for Ukip in this May's European elections said parts of Northern Ireland are unrecognisable because of immigration. "It's not as bad here but it certainly has the potential to get as bad," he told the Belfast Telegraph.
"There are small pockets over here from where we get complaints from people that they can't get jobs at all, immigrants seem to be the priority. They include down here in my own area (Mournes), Dungannon and Portadown. "We constantly get complaints from people that their children cannot get worthwhile employment.
Any sort of manual handling work is very hard for local people to get.
"If you are well-qualified here it is easy to get work, but unskilled labour is virtually impossible. The foreign nationals tie the system up so their own people will get employment."
Ukip currently has one MLA — David McNarry — and one councillor in Northern Ireland. But Mr Reilly said they have strong hopes of increasing those numbers this May in the local council and European elections.
He said he has been getting a good response canvassing.
"The European Union really does influence every aspect of our lives now, as a councillor I see it every day," he said.
"We had the debacle down here with the fishermen, even if we want to give them some money we can't because of EU rules.
"In Northern Ireland everywhere we go, we are getting a fantastic response. I don't want to put figures on it but I'd be very disappointed if we don't get more than one next time round.
"I actually think we are on the pitch now for a European seat because the response we are getting is phenomenal and there are so many people disillusioned with the DUP and UUP. We have a realistic chance of getting a European seat in Northern Ireland."
quote Henry Reilly said: "We constantly get complaints from people that their children cannot get worthwhile employment. Any sort of manual handling work is very hard for local people to get. If you are well qualified here it is easy to get work, but unskilled labour is virtually impossible.
Foreign nationals tie the system up so their own people will get employment."
Document WBEL000020140301ea310000i
