{"newspaper":"Belfast Telegraph","id:"3112"}
____
  
News
Family flee after shots are fired through window
CLAIRE WILLIAMSON   
645 words
25 April 2014
Belfast Telegraph
WBEL
1; National
5
English
© 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)   
NINE children, including a sleeping toddler, were in a house as four shots were fired through the living room window in yet another hatefuelled attack.
In what has been labelled "a new low" in targeting minority members of society, two parents along with their five daughters and four young grandchildren escaped injury at their home in Whiterock Gardens in west Belfast in the gun attack on Wednesday night.
Distraught mother Kathleen Doherty said any member of her family could have been killed in the ordeal.
The shooting comes after the Belfast Telegraph reported there were two racist attacks every day in Northern Ireland, with figures jumping by an alarming 43% in the past year.
Just days ago three young Polish nationals were attacked by a 15-strong mob armed with golf clubs near Lawnmount Street, on the boundary between the east and south of the city.
The Doherty family say they have been singled out simply because they are members of the Travelling community.
They had only moved into the area on Friday and had barely unpacked their belongings before their window was shattered by gunshots.
Mrs Doherty (44) said her husband had a lucky escape as he walked out of the room just minutes before the four shots tore into their home.
Still visibly distressed, Mrs Doherty said: "The shock of what really happened is hitting me today.
"I've been trying to make a home for my family and this is what happens."
She continued: "It's because we are Travelling people, we are not settled people and they don't want us in their neighbourhood — it has to be.
"When the shots came through the window they shouted, 'Get out you gypsy b*******.' "It's discrimination, a hatred attack on the Travelling community. It could have taken one of my kids, grandkids, or my life last night."
The family have now fled from their house in fear and are staying with a relative.
One daughter said: "It's the most tragic thing that has ever happened. I can't believe somebody tried to kill us."
Some residents in the area expressed their shock at the late evening attack, while others declined to comment.
A woman resident said: "It's not fair on the family — any of those kids could have been in the living room.
"It happened at 10 o'clock; children could have been playing out in the street."
The west Belfast attack has been widely condemned by politicians.
Alliance MLA Anna Lo said the incident plumbed new depths in hatred.
"It is absolutely a new low for shots to be fired in an attack.
"In the last while we have heard about immigrants being attacked, but not Travellers.
"I think this is a bit different to those of the past and I certainly don't want to see it repeated. It's something we all should all be concerned about."
West Belfast MLA Pat Sheehan (below) said: "Guns have no place on our streets and the fact that anyone in the house at the time could have been seriously injured or worse highlights the recklessness of this attack."
He added: "While any attack is reprehensible, we must establish the facts before claims like this are made which can stigmatise a community.
"All of the residents of the Whiterock area want to get on with their lives in peace without this type of incident."
SDLP councillor Tim Attwood called it "sinister".
"This was a serious incident where shots were fired and it''s even more sinister now that police are treating it as a hate crime."
Police have asked anyone who may have witnessed this incident or anyone who has any information to contact them on the non-emergency number 101 or use the anonymous Crimestoppers number, 0800 555 111.
Document WBEL000020140425ea4p0002v
