{"newspaper":"Belfast Telegraph","id:"3260"}
____
  
News
FARAGE ON... immigrants and gay marriage
384 words
15 May 2014
Belfast Telegraph
WBEL
1; National
11
English
© 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)   
ABORTION "No party position at all. My deputy leader is a Catholic who is very conservative on the issue. I would be less so. It is a free vote for our representatives."
RESTRICTING IMMIGRATION "You have not seen in Northern Ireland quite the same problems as we have seen in many parts of London and the South East. There are two problems — lack of social housing and exploding house prices, chiefly because of money coming in from Russia or from the Arab states.
"So the crisis in London and the South East is that people whose families have lived for generations in the community can no longer afford to live there, and there isn''t the social housing available for them. Does that matter? Yes, I think it does."
SANYA-JEET THANDI'S RESIGNATION Thandi was an Asian member of Ukip who quit on Tuesday after accusing the party of racism. "She appeared on Channel 4 News last Tuesday in a live debate to say we had the most equitable of race and immigration policies of any of the parties, and a week on she has changed her mind. We haven''t changed in a week. I suspect that she has been subject to a great degree of peer pressure."
SOCIAL BENEFITS FOR IMMIGRANTS IN THE FUTURE "We want to try and help people who have lived in communities for generations to stay in those communities. They should have a priority. We shouldn''t be giving social housing, in-work tax benefits or out-of-work benefits, to people who immediately come into this country."
HOW ABOUT IMMIGRANTS WHO ARE HERE NOW? "Y"You can't retrospectively take anything away from someone who was legally entitled to it when they came here."
GAY MARRIAGE "In England there is no chance of it being repealed, the debate is about whether the churches are going to be forced to conduct gay marriages. In Northern Ireland, we should not sanction gay marriage until we have broken our link with the European Court of Human Rights and we know we can protect the faith communities. If the faith communities are protected, it is still a redefinition of marriage, but it is something that is probably going to have to happen anyway."
Document WBEL000020140515ea5f0008z
