{"newspaper":"Belfast Telegraph","id:"3053"}
____
  
Features
It's about time we stood up for Cameron and for Christianity
Alf McCreary   
629 words
26 April 2014
Belfast Telegraph
WBEL
1; National
34
English
© 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)   
What an unholy row there's been over the Prime Minister's claim in last week's Church Times that Britain is a Christian country.
Mr Cameron reflected upon his own faith, which has given him comfort, and he also expressed his desire to infuse politics with "Christian ideals and values".
Soon after the article appeared, a list of academics, broadcasters and other self-important people wrote a niggling letter to a national newspaper expressing concern at the "negative consequences" of the Prime Minister's remarks which, they claimed, could "foster alienation and division in our society".
What utter tosh! These self-proclaimed liberals who prize our 'multi-cultural society' ' are clearly not multi-cultural enough to tolerate Christianity which has played such a crucial and historic role in shaping Britain, and has helped to make it 'great''.
This is all part of a concerted negative campaign by a large number of secularists who are more intolerant of Christian beliefs than even the most blinkered members of this remarkable worldwide faith.
There was a time when humanists, atheists and others would pay little attention to the claims of Christians. If non-believers had no interest in God why should they worry about others who held Christian beliefs? Nowadays, however, the nonbelievers and secularists are better organised, and when they get their trousers in a philosophical twist, they furiously write to the papers to try to downgrade Christianity which is still part of the rich cultural and spiritual fabric of our society.
As the late Michael Winner often said: "Calm down dears". Nobody is trying to start a witch hunt of non-believers, so why don't you settle down and allow others to follow their own beliefs without all this clap-trap about the 'divisiveness' ' of Christianity? Compared to other major religions, Christianity is remarkably tolerant. Only a few days ago a devout rally driver in the Tour of Ireland circuit was asked to remove a 'Jesus' ' sticker from his vehicle. He did so graciously, but I wonder what would have happened if a driver had displayed a sticker praising the prophet Mohammed? Of course there should be room for the beliefs of all ethnic groups in our society, though sadly the PSNI say that at least two racehate incidents are reported to them each day in Northern Ireland. Some of these attacks are orchestrated by paramilitaries whose inbuilt hatred of 'the other side' ' here is being extended to decent, hardworking immigrants in our midst.
What we need is more tolerance all round, and a bit more respect for true Christianity and its massive contribution to the good of all. However, the real danger to Christianity is from within, and not from the prejudice of non-believers. Recently the UK's most senior judge Baroness Hale said that the churches are not tough enough.
She told a conference at Yale Law School that the Church of England is "very undemanding".
She added: "It has no dietary laws, no dress codes for men or women and very little that its members can say is actually required by way of observance. Religious observance is much more common among minority communities".
The Baroness said, however, that she understood why Christians felt that they were not sufficiently respected in Britain, and she advised them to use human rights legislation to enable the courts "to balance the competing rights of individuals and the community".
So its time for Christians to speak up for themselves, and not to allow secularists and others to attack them at every opportunity. As the old hymn says "Stand up, stand up for Jesus".
And why not?
'Secularists ought to let others follow their beliefs'
Document WBEL000020140426ea4q0003c
