{"newspaper":"Belfast Telegraph","id:"1406"}
____
  
Business
Top director's recipe for success
MARGARET CANNING   
551 words
3 March 2014
Belfast Telegraph
WBEL
1; National
20,21
English
© 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)   
Industry expert tells business community of his strategy for UK
CAPTAIN of world industry, Sir John Parker, who started out as a Harland and Wolff apprentice, has stressed the importance of skills during an address to business people in Belfast.
Co Down-born Sir John, who has worked for five FTSE 100 companies and is now chairman of mining giant Anglo American, addressed the annual leadership talk hosted by accountancy firm FPM.
He told a packed lecture theatre at the University of Ulster's Business School that good management was crucial — though with one caveat. "Good management does make a difference. But never get so high up that you can't find time to go down."
After serving his apprenticeship in Harland and Wolff's ship design team, Sir John's first leadership role was as managing director of shipbuilding company Austin & Pickersgill (A&P) from 1974 to 1978.
He later returned to Harland and Wolff to serve as chairman and chief executive for 10 years from 1983, leading a turnaround in the yard's fortunes and its absorption into the private sector. Sir John (below) has chaired five FTSE 100 companies, including National Grid, from which he stepped down in December 2011.
He is vice-chairman of marine terminal company DP World (Dubai) and a non-executive director of cruise ship company Carnival Corporation and aerospace firm EADS (Airbus). He has also chaired the Court of the Bank of England and is president of the Royal Academy of Engineers.
Sir John said his additional board roles were not in conflict with his stewardship of Anglo American, but revealed that separate interests meant that a fellow board member left the boardroom when a particular commodity arose in discussions.
The industrialist also set out his industrial strategy for the UK. "Education, the skills agenda, universities, research and development, industrial activity — it all needs to be more aligned and that I think is starting to happen."
Speaking afterwards, he stressed that immigration could help answer some shortfalls in skills. "I think if you have got real skill shortages and you can't train your own people to the extent that's required, then your economy will be stifled if it doesn't have the skills, so it's very important that for specialised skills that we can recruit from overseas markets."
FPM managing partner, Feargal McCormack, said: "It is clear to see why Sir John Parker has been one of the most sought-after company chairmen and directors for the past three decades."
Professor Marie McHugh, dean of the Ulster Business School at the university, said: "As a business school that is committed to developing the entrepreneurial flair, business, management and leadership skills of its students, it was an honour to welcome such an internationally renowned and respected figure as Sir John Parker, to share with us his thoughts on his approach to business."
factfile Apprentice then member of ship design team at Harland and Wolff: 1959-1974 Managing director of Austin & Pickersgill: 1974 to 1978 Board of the British Shipbuilders Corporation 1978-1983 Managing director and chief executive of Harland & Wolff 1983-1993 Chairman and chief executive of Babcock International 1993-2000 Chairman of National Grid plc: 2002-2011
Document WBEL000020140303ea330005t
