{"newspaper":"Belfast Telegraph","id:"3259"}
____
  
News
All smiles... but Farage won't back local Ukip-ers on the flag or unionist unity
LIAM CLARKE   
564 words
15 May 2014
Belfast Telegraph
WBEL
1; National
11
English
© 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)   
CONTROVERSIAL Ukip leader Nigel Farage found himself at odds with his own party's representatives on key issues in Northern Ireland as he tried to distance himself from hardline loyalism.
Ukip is best known for its opposition to European integration and anti-immigration policies — but when it came to issues of British identity in Northern Ireland, Mr Farage and his local party had major differences.
Mr Farage made a pre-election trip to Belfast yesterday to meet the first Ukip candidate to stand in a European campaign here.
He held a press conference in the bar of the Europa hotel, where he enjoyed his traditional pint. However, he was denied the chance to film inside the famous Crown Bar, a National Trust property, just across the road.
Ukip is fielding one European candidate here and 22 council candidates — including two recent defectors from the DUP.
Ukip''s main platform is pulling out of Europe — a policy shared by the TUV, and to some degree by the DUP. Peter Robinson, the DUP leader, has gone as far as urging his supporters to transfer to Ukip or the UUP, a move Mr Farage declined to reciprocate.
Asked if he would be advising his supporters to transfer to unionists such as the TUV, Mr Farage replied: "We won''t, no. We will say to people: 'On your first choice vote for the national party here and be part of something quite exciting. With your second vote use it as your conscience tells you'."
" He added: "Don't assume that every single voter who votes for Ukip comes from a hardline Protestant, unionist position.
"Where we have succeeded in England we have done it by drawing from Labour and Conservative, by drawing from across the spectrum, and that is what we are trying to do here in Northern Ireland."
But David McNarry, Ukip's local leader and its only MLA, has often advocated unionist unity.
Asked a similar question, the former Ulster Unionist said: "We are very clear on that — vote for those unionist parties that you believe share the same principles and policies on Europe as Ukip. The DUP and the TUV would be the closest. I think that would cross-pollinate."
Another issue on which they differed was flag-flying. While Mr Farage said the Union flag was very important and should be flown "sometimes, at the very minimum", he demurred when asked about a permanent display at Belfast City Hall.
"There are sensibilities that need to be observed and we all understand that, but flags are very important," he said.
Again, Mr McNarry took a different view: "We are for permanent display in Belfast — we don''t think the flag should ever be taken down."
Mr Farage also said he would not be signing a 'victims' contract' drawn up by campaigning group Innocent Victims United and signed by Mr McNarry and Henry Reilly, the Ukip European candidate. It commits signatories to opposing amnesties for Troubles crimes and a Maze peace centre if any H-Blocks are retained.
Asked if he would sign it, Mr Farage replied: "No. If Henry wants to sign things in Northern Ireland he can do so. I am the leader of a national party... I am not getting involved in individual campaigns."
Document WBEL000020140515ea5f00090
