{"newspaper":"Belfast Telegraph","id:"3113"}
____
  
News
Two ordinary city streets, two abhorrent hate crimes
ADRIAN RUTHERFORD ; CLAIRE WILLIAMSON   
636 words
25 April 2014
Belfast Telegraph
WBEL
1; National
4,5
English
© 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)   
Gang of 15 set upon Polish trio playing football
THREE young Polish nationals were savagely attacked by a 15-strong gang — for refusing to give one of them a cigarette.
The victims were beaten with golf clubs during the terrifying incident, which took place while they were playing football.
One of the victims lost two teeth while the others suffered cuts and bruises.
The brutal attack — which police are treating as racially-motivated — took place between 9pm and 9.30pm near Lawnmount Street in south Belfast on Monday night.
The victims are two men aged in their early 20s and a 19-year-old woman.
All three are Polish nationals. The gang responsible is said to have comprised 14 men and a woman.
Jerome Mullen, who is Poland's Honorary Consul in Northern Ireland, said he had spoken to police about the incident.
"As I understand it, they were out playing football and were approached by these people asking them for a cigarette," he said.
"They didn't have any and it was an excuse for them to engage with them in a violent way.
"Seemingly, the gang started to kick them, attack them and beat them up with golf clubs.
"It is quite a shocking crime and it seems to be following a series this year of attacks on Polish immigrants in various parts of Belfast."
Earlier this month police said the UVF had been orchestrating racist attacks in south and east Belfast. Assistant Chief Constable Will Kerr told the Policing Board that the paramilitarybacked bigotry had contributed to an overall 70% rise in hate crime in the city.
However, police said there was no evidence yet to link paramilitaries to Monday night's attack, although they would be keeping all lines of inquiry open.
PSNI Superintendent Mark McEwan told the BBC it was an "appalling" incident.
"There has been a premeditated element to this," he said.
"When they discovered that this group of people were from another country they then, it would appear, went and retrieved these items and carried out these attacks.
"It was an appalling attack and I would appeal to members of the community who have information about this to come forward." Mr McEwan said it was an opportunity for people to show that racism will not be tolerated.
"We have heard (people) speak out very strongly about how the community in east Belfast and south Belfast don't want this type of activity. There is an opportunity now for people to come forward and show their support by giving information to the police."
The attack has been widely condemned by political representatives.
DUP councillor Gavin Robinson (below) said the community was shocked by the scale and "vicious nature" of the attack.
"I hope that the police will catch those who have been responsible," he said.
"There have been a number of attacks in and around the east Belfast area but this obviously has a scale which is not comparable with the others — and it's a shocking scale."
Alliance councillor Maire Hendron said people must realise racism is unacceptable.
"We must challenge the views of those responsible," she said. "We must send out a clear message that their actions are completely unacceptable.
"My thoughts are with the victims following this sickening attack. I hope they will be able to make swift recoveries from the injuries they sustained.
"No one deserves to be a victim of such an attack."
Sinn Fein councillor Niall O Donnghaile appealed for anyone with information to bring it forward to the PSNI.
"Fifteen people engaged in an assault on people simply because of their race is the most disgusting kind of crime and people like that need taken off the streets," he said.
Document WBEL000020140425ea4p0002t
