{"newspaper":"Belfast Telegraph","id:"3512"}
____
  
News
Racism a blight on our society
393 words
21 April 2014
Belfast Telegraph
WBEL
1; National
19
English
© 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)   
One of the most disturbing aspects of life in Northern Ireland is the significant increase in racist attacks here, and particularly in Belfast. In the past year there has been a 43% increase in the number of incidents, with 70% of these taking place in Belfast.
The majority were in north Belfast, where 27% took place, followed by the east of the city with 23%, and 16% in the south.
Overall there are more than two race attacks reported to police each day, and the reality may be much worse, with equality campaigners expressing concern that up to 80% of the cases go unreported.
Unfortunately Belfast is gaining a reputation as the hate capital of the United Kingdom, and this is something we could well do without, given the bad headlines which we already generate in other ways.
It is also particularly disgraceful that the paramilitary bullies, and particularly the UVF, are involved in this intimidation. They are not content with spewing their usual bigotry and hatred across the religious and community divides, and are now targeting innocent ethnic minorities.
Instead of having to suffer such abuse, our immigrants should be respected for the contribution which they can make to our society.
Such contributions are recognised in so many other parts of the world where large cities like London, Paris and New York are truly great because they have become vibrant melting pots for the talents of people from many different countries.
This makes our racism problems here even more regrettable because we have comparatively few immigrants, and still we are treating many of them very badly.
However, there are encouraging signs that the police and the authorities are increasing their efforts to deal with the problem, and there is the plus factor of the skill and courage of the victims who are choosing to remain with us.
Recently we highlighted the story of Anna Bloch who was targeted in east Belfast but has refused to give in to intimidation and is continuing to make a valuable contribution to life here.
Her story with its work ethic stands in stark contrast to the thugs who attacked her, and illustrates the contribution of so many immigrants.
Thankfully this contribution is admired by the vast majority of our people who welcome immigrants to our midst, and rightly so.
Document WBEL000020140421ea4l0004z
