{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"2959"}
____
  
News
Grooms flown in wed women who Grooms flown in from Hungary to wed women who paid to stay in UK
Nick McCarthy   
940 words
10 May 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
4,5
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
FOUR bogus brides have been jailed for taking part in scam marriages af-af ter being busted by Home Oce investigators.
Azuha Izegbune, 38, was the mastermind of the visa con which saw fake weddings staged at register oces in Birmingham, Stoke and Glasgow.
ƒe crooked former security guard, from Grayshott Road, Erdington, set up the bogus marriages after being paid by the Nigerian brides, who were desperate to remain in the UK.
Izegbune arranged for them to marry Hungarian grooms, who were ‡own in for the fake ceremonies, so the Birmingham-based women could secure European Area Residence Cards.
But the scam was smashed after a Home Oce probe and the wedding scammers have now been sentenced to a total of nine years at Birmingham Crown Court.
Her Honour Judge Elizabeth Stacey said Izegbune had undermined the UK's border controls and described him as "the lynch-pin, the organiser and the Œxer" of an eight-month conspiracy, between December 2012 and September 2013.
ƒe court heard the fake brides handed over an unknown amount of cash in a bid to win the residence cards, which would have given them the legal right to remain in the UK and Europe.
But two of the weddings were stopped midway through and a price list for a £7,500 ceremony was later recovered. It showed just £20 was set aside for the wedding dress, rings and shoes.
Hungarian national Ivett Szanto admitted taking part in one fake marriage with a Nigerian man, who was also seeking a visa. She had conspired with Nigerian-born Izegbune to help set up two further marriages with men she knew from her native Budapest.
ƒe 31-year-old, from Cornwall Road, Handsworth, had one sham marriage stopped mid-ceremony on May 30, 2013, in Stoke.
In sentencing her to 20 months, Judge Stacey said: "Your role in this was much more peripheral. You were a small cog in the wheel. It was Izegbune who was directing you."
Izegbune, who is himself married to a Hungarian, had lived legally in Birmingham since 2009 with dual Nigerian and Hungarian nationality.
ƒe dad-of-two, a former security guard, was jailed for 31 months after pleading guilty to Œve counts of conspiracy to facilitate a breach of UK immigration law.
Judge Stacey told him: "You met registrars, bought plane tickets, acted as witness and interpreter and recruited Ivett Szanto to help you Œnd Hungarian grooms and brides.
"I have read the wonderful testimonies about you. It's just desperately sad that you have used your considerable charm and skills to take part in these activities."
Nigerian women Nwabunwanne Eze, 35, of Washington Drive, Handsworth, Chioma Nwangwu, 28, from Aston Lane, Perry Barr, and Hellen Adedjumo-Dani, 31, from Willmore Road, Perry Barr, were jailed for tak-tak ing part in their own fake marriages.
Nwangu and Adedjumo-Dani married separate grooms at Birmingham register oce in June 2013.
Eze attempted to marry at Glasgow registry oce in August 2013 but the ceremony was raided by investigators. She and Nwangwu pleaded guilty to one charge of breaching immigration law and were jailed for 16 months and 17 months respectively.
Adedjumo-Dani, who is expecting a baby in October, was found guilty after a two-day trial in March of this year and was jailed for 22 months.
ƒe trial heard that she had tried to dupe authorities by taking photos of herself with her fake partner outside McDonald's restaurants across Birmingham, in a dressing gown on her bed and had even saved him under the name 'Babe' in her phone.
The court heard that four members of Eze's close family, including her own mother, were murdered on their farm by a gang of men in a horrific incident in Nigeria in 2009. She had studied Health and Social Care at South Birmingham College after arriving legitimately on a student visa in 2010.
She exhausted all the appeals to stay in the country and took part in the sham marriage just before she would have been forced to leave the country. She has since lodged an application seeking asylum. Nwangwu had worked as a banker in Nigeria before arriving in Birmingham to study management and international business at Birmingham City University in 2011.
She returned home, but came back on a six-month visitor visa and wanted to stay in the UK after that expired to be with her genuine partner - a Nigerian who is legally in the country.
The Nigerian women were all warned that they would face possible deportation once they complete their prison sentences.
A Proceeds of Crime Act hearing is scheduled for Izegbune to be heard in September. Speaking after sentencing Andy Radcliffe, from the Home Office's Criminal and Financial Investigations Team, said: "Izegbune thought he could profit from abusing the marriage system and the UK's immigration laws.
"He was seen by the other individuals as their ticket to either stay in the UK or gain financially. But all five are now behind bars.
"We will continue to work with registrars to tackle this issue. The message to anyone involved in this sort of criminality is clear.
"The Home Office has the resource and expertise to catch up with you and bring you to justice."
'"I have read the wonderful testimonies about you. It's just desperately sad that you have used your considerable charm and skills to take part in these activities." JUDGE ELIZABETH STACEY TO AZUHA IZEGBUNE
Document EVEMAI0020140510ea5a00018
