{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"866"}
____
News
The rise of Nigel's UKIP barmy army
By Jonathan Walker   
445 words
5 May 2014
12:52
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Our political editor Jonathan Walker on the big issues that are hitting the news.
There’s a proud tradition in this country of throwing eggs at politicians.
Most famously, Labour big hitter John Prescott was hit by an egg in the 2001 General Election campaign.
The former Deputy Prime Minister, who was once an amateur boxer, responded by throwing a thunderous left-hook to his assailant’s jaw.
But he’s not the only victim. David Cameron and Labour leader Ed Miliband have both been hit by eggs, although rather than fight back they both promptly scarpered.
So perhaps UKIP leader Nigel Farage should be worried, after he was egged during a campaign visit to Nottingham.
It suggests he’s become part of the establishment. And that’s the last thing he wanted to be.
The UKIP bandwagon shows no sign of stopping – at least, not before the European elections on May 22 – but not because British voters are obsessed with the European Union.
Some of UKIP’s support, at least, comes from people who are annoyed, angry or disappointed with the other parties and warm to Mr Farage because he seems like a genuine person who says what he thinks.
And that leaves the other parties in a bind. When they attack UKIP and Farage as “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists”, to use David Cameron’s words, they do more harm than good.
 
The message is that UKIP are outside mainstream politics. They are something different and rather sinister, in the eyes of the political establishment.
But that’s one of the reasons why people want to vote for them. Being outsiders who scare Mr Cameron is a big part of their appeal.
However, the fact remains that UKIP does seem to have recruited a number of people with unpleasant and very odd views.
There was the William Henwood, the UKIP candidate in Enfield, who said Lenny Henry “should emigrate to a black country”.
Henley UKIP councillor David Silvester said recent floods were God’s punishment for gay marriage.
UKIP Camden candidate Magnus Nielsen claimed that “Islam is organised crime under religious camouflage.”
And Andre Lampitt, a UKIP candidate in Merton who appeared on a party election broadcast, said Ed Miliband was “not a real Brit... he was only born here”, because the London-born politician is the son of immigrants.
There have been occasions in the past when other parties discovered they’d somehow recruited a someone with offensive or extreme views as a candidate.
UKIP isn’t unique. But it does seem to have recruited rather a lot of them.
Document EVEMONL020140505ea55000rt
