{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"1681"}
____
  
News
WALK IN THE PARK
343 words
19 April 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
6
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
SERENDIPITY often plays a big part in where this column goes to next.
I wasn't planning to be reviewing Muntz Park this week any more than I was expecting to be driving past when I couldn't help but jump out of the car to enjoy it.
Sandwiched between Gristhorpe Road and Umberslade Road, just to the south of Raddlebarn Primary School, it's a very welcoming, open example of parkland with a lovely sunny aspect.
Just as I was passing, some large, fluffy white clouds, so typical of April's ability to lift some winter moisture out of the ground, were combining with the sunshine to create lots of shadows on the freshly cut grass.
This effect, along with some newly-budding leaves and fresh blossom, is what makes the British spring so irresistible.
That the park remains so those who don't believe that immigration can have positive effects.
As detailed on the kind of local information board that is regrettably all too rare across Birmingham's fine multitude of parks, the Muntz family was originally from Lithuania.
Philippe Frederic Muntz settled in Birmingham after the 1789-99 French Revolution, investing in a small business that became Muntz Purden.
In the following years, the family were known for 'Muntz metal',' a yellow allow of copper and zinc used to sheathe the wooden hulls of ships, and for buying Umberslade Hall near Tanworth in Arden.
Muntz Park was part of a farm until the expansion of Birmingham led to the family giving three acres of land to the district council on May 20, 1905 for the creation of a park.
Two more acres were sold in 1907 and 1909 to make the park five acres in size.
One of the best features today is a giant hollow at its centre - the remains of an old marl pit.
The hollow is perfect for local school nature trips and for any local children to play traditional games like hide and seek when not using the splendid new playground.
Document EVEMAI0020140419ea4j0000p
