{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"2940"}
____
News
Nick and Nige both receive a Clegg-up from EU debates
By Jonathan Walker   
531 words
31 March 2014
14:55
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Our political editor Jonathan Walker on the big issues that are hitting the news.
It was never a fair fight really.
Blokey Nigel, fresh out the Westminster Arms (a nice pub near the Commons), took on nice Nick in a televised battle to convince voters to back the EU.
Who kept their cool? It was Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg, polite and reasonable to the end, calmly marshalling the facts to explain to us all why the European Union is a good thing.
And who won? That would be UKIP leader Nigel Farage, who may have got a bit red-faced in places, and admitted once or twice he couldn’t be certain that the figures he was quoting were correct, but who nonetheless won viewers over.
An opinion poll immediately after the pair went head to head in a television debate found that 57 per cent thought Mr Farage had come out of it best while 36 per cent felt Nick Clegg performed better overall.
Round two takes place on April 2, when a second debate is broadcast by the BBC.
Agreeing to take part in the debate was a smart move by both politicians. It raises their profile in the run-up to the European elections on May 22, and highlights the fact that, whether you agree with them or not, they both have clear opinions on the European Union which they are not ashamed to defend.
Mr Farage wants us to leave the EU while Mr Clegg wants us to stay because it’s a very good thing.
The Conservative and Labour leaders both agree more or less with Mr Clegg, but they’re far less keen to shout about their support for the EU. Whether or not you agree with Mr Clegg and Mr Farage, you have to give them a little credit for saying what they think.
But the debate, and the public reaction, also highlights a serious problem for the UK, which is that supporters of EU membership have failed to make their case.
I’m one of them. It seems to me that the ability of British-based companies to sell their products and services across Europe without restriction is of almost incalculable benefit to the country.
Yes, we also trade with other countries – but we have to negotiate free trade agreements with them. In fact, the UK is negotiating such an agreement with the US right now, and the fact that we’re doing it as part of the EU rather than alone is a major help.
There’s no way firms like Jaguar Land Rover would be investing so much in the West Midlands if we weren’t in the EU. They’d build their factories in Germany or France instead. But little effort has been made to explain this to people – or to deal with reasonable concerns about issues such as immigration.
The result is support for a UKIP is growing. But if they ever get their way and take us out of Europe, it will be a disaster for jobs and the economy at home.
Document EVEMONL020140331ea3v001jn
