{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"1689"}
____
News
Pregnant Birmingham woman agreed to enter sham marriage to bogus wedding racket organiser
By Nick McCarthy   
383 words
18 April 2014
16:57
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Romana Nistrova, a 23-year-old Czech national from Birmingham, agreed to enter into a sham marriage with Harpal Singh
The organiser of a bogus weddings racket was caught at his own fake marriage to a young would-be bride from Birmingham, a court has heard.
Harpal Singh, 51, made £5,000 a time setting up sham marriages between Czech women and Asian students.
But Indian-born Singh was arrested after registry office staff in Wales became suspicious his divorce papers were fake.
He was stopped from going through with his own fake marriage and found to be carrying a bag of identity cards and “marriage packs” for other bogus weddings.
Romana Nistrova, a 23-year-old Czech national from Birmingham, agreed to enter into a sham marriage with him, was given a 12-month suspended sentence and ordered to do community work.
 
Singh was jailed for four years and five months after he and three other defendants admitted conspiracy.
Judge Neil Bidder told Cardiff Crown Court he would be recommending Singh was deported.
Haider Ali and Awais Ahmed, both 23, from Surrey and London, who had paid to go through sham marriages, were jailed for 12 months but freed because of time spent on remand.
Andrew Davies, prosecuting, said: “Singh would arrange marriages for Pakistani, Indian and Nepalese men who were either about to have visas run out or had overstayed.
“He would arrange for them to marry Czech women who had EU residency and could confer this to any husband.”
The court was told Singh, who lived in London, entered the UK in 2006 on a six-month visa with his wife and three children.
But after two failed immigration applications, he was caught trying to marry at Cardiff Register Office last May.
Judge Bidder told the defendants: “These actions are an attack on the proper system of immigration control and also the institution of marriage.
“You, Singh, planned to make money by exploiting people’s desires to remain in the country and preying on women’s financial hardship.
“Ali and Ahmad intended to avoid immigration controls to remain in the UK. It is a shameful thing that you did – a truly shameful thing.”
Document EVEMONL020140418ea4i001e1
