{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"1007"}
____
News
Morning news headlines for Monday - Pfizer increases takeover bid, Miliband vows to raise minimum wage
By liverpoolecho Administrator   
981 words
19 May 2014
11:02
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
The latest news from around the globe
PFIZER INCREASES ITS TAKEOVER BID
Drugs giant Pfizer stepped up its pursuit of UK rival AstraZeneca by raising the value of its proposed takeover bid to more than £69 billion.
The US company said the offer worth £55 a share was 15% more than its previous proposal on May 2 and also represented its fourth and final approach.
Pfizer added that it will not make a hostile offer direct to AstraZeneca shareholders, instead urging them to press the company’s board to begin substantive engagement over a deal.
MILIBAND VOWS TO RAISE MINIMUM WAGE
Ed Miliband will today commit a Labour government to significantly raising the level of the national minimum wage over the course of the next parliament, closing the gap on average earnings.
The Labour leader will promise to establish a ”clear link” between the the minimum wage and the earnings of other workers to ensure those at the bottom of the pay scale do not get ”left behind” again.
Addressing party activists in the West Midlands, he will say that he wants to build on the achievement of the last Labour government which introduced the minimum wage in the wake of Tony Blair’s landslide general election victory in 1997.
MURDERER ON THE RUN FROM PRISON
A convicted murderer has gone on the run from prison for the third time. Arnold Pickering, 44, from Chadderton, Greater Manchester, failed to return to HMP Kennet in Maghull, Merseyside, after leaving the Category C jail on day release at about 9.30am on Saturday.
Another inmate, Thomas Moffett, 51, from Blackburn, Lancashire, who is serving an indeterminate sentence for a number of robberies carried out in his home town in 2006, also failed to return from day release on Saturday.
Last night Merseyside Police said that officers from Lancashire Constabulary had arrested a 51-year-old man for being unlawfully at large. The man was arrested in Blackburn, Lancashire, at around 9.15pm.
FAMILIES WANT YACHT SEARCH TO GO ON
Relatives and colleagues of four Britons who went missing when a yacht capsized in the mid-Atlantic Ocean have called for the American authorities to renew efforts to find them.
The crew of the Cheeki Rafiki, a 40ft Beneteau performance racer/cruiser yacht, ran into difficulties some 620 miles east of Cape Cod in Massachusetts on Thursday while returning to the UK from a regatta in Antigua.
Contact with the ship’s experienced captain Andrew Bridge, 21, and crew members James Male, 23, Steve Warren, 52, and Paul Goslin, 56, was lost in the early hours of Friday while they diverted to the Azores.
CLEGG PLEDGE ON DEVOLUTION TALKS
The Liberal Democrats will ”act as the guarantors” of more powers for Scotland if it rejects independence, according to the Deputy Prime Minister.
But any final settlement would have to be negotiated with the other pro-UK parties, businesses, civic Scotland and the SNP if they are willing to embrace devolution, Nick Clegg will say in a speech in Edinburgh today.
Lib Dems want Holyrood to raise half of its own revenue and set its own rates of income tax, capital gains tax and inheritance tax.
BAFTA HAT-TRICK FOR BROADCHURCH
Actress Olivia Colman got her third TV Bafta in two years as hit crime drama Broadchurch scored a hat-trick at the annual awards.
Colman, who is set to star in the second series of the show, burst into tears on stage after being named leading actress, saying: ”Oh sorry, not cool” then hailed the show’s writer Chris Chibnall ”a f****** genius”.
Her co-star David Bradley was named best supporting actor for his role in the show, which also picked up the Bafta for best drama.
F1 CHAMPION JACK BRABHAM DIES AT 88
Three-time Formula One champion Sir Jack Brabham has died at his home in Australia at the age of 88, the Australian Grand Prix Corporation said.
The Australian driver - who was knighted in 1979 - won world titles in 1959 and 1960 and became the only F1 driver to win a world championship in a car of his own construction - the rear-engined BT19 - which he drove to the title in 1966.
The following year the Brabham team won its second successive world championship when New Zealander Denny Hulme drove the BT20 to victory.
LIBYAN GENERAL ATTACKS PARLIAMENT
Forces apparently loyal to a renegade Libyan general said they suspended parliament after earlier leading a military assault against MPs.
They were directly challenging the legitimacy of the country’s weak central government three years after the overthrow of dictator Moammar Gadhafi.
Libya’s leadership condemned the attack and vowed to carry on.
COOPER SEEKS REFORMS TO HINDER UKIP
Ukip’s ”hostility and extremism” needs to be challenged, Yvette Cooper said as she claimed it remains too easy for ”dodgy employers” to exploit immigration.
The shadow home secretary warned Nigel Farage’s eurosceptics will continue ”playing on people’s fears” if the Government fails to deal with the impact of immigration.
She called for reforms to stop agencies and employers using cheap overseas labour to halt UK wages and jobs being undercut.
CHARLES AND CAMILLA LAND IN CANADA
The Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall were greeted by dignitaries and the waiting media as they arrived in Canada for the start of a whirlwind four-day tour.
Charles and Camilla flew into Halifax, Nova Scotia, on board a Canadian Forces Airbus as they prepare to carry out dozens of engagements across three provinces.
The royal couple will take part in events to mark a number of important historical anniversaries during the tour, including the First World War centenary and the 150th anniversary of the Charlottetown Conference which led to the Canadian Confederation.
Document EVEMONL020140519ea5j0008e
