{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"1819"}
____
  
News
Cops seize hundreds of cannabis plants after tip-off from residents
Brett Gibbons   
330 words
23 April 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
8
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
POLICE in Birmingham have uncovered a cannabis factory that filled the whole upper storey of a property in Birmingham.
Hundreds of cultivated plants were discovered in the house in Umberslade Road, Selly Oak, following a tip-off from residents. A spokeswoman for West Midlands Police said: "Following a report of suspicious activity and a strong smell from a property in Umberslade Road, Selly Oak Police uncovered a cannabis factory.
"The electricity had been bypassed and approximately 400 plants with a full hydroponics set up were found throughout the top floor of the address.
"Forensic experts are currently examining the scene along with the Cannabis Disposal Team who will destroy the plants.
"No arrests have been made at this stage."
In January we told how police had discovered almost 70,000 cannabis plants in the West Midlands in the previous 12 months - working out at one every eight and a half minutes.
The new figures revealed officers were seizing more than £30 million worth of cannabis in the region every year.
The news makes the West Midlands one of the worst areas in the country for cannabis factories, with police busts in Liverpool only happening every five and a half hours by comparison. It was also revealed that West Midlands Police's specialist Cannabis Disposal Team dismantled 1,200 of the drug growing operations since being launched in October 2010.
The seizures from rented homes, factory units and even abandoned old pubs would have raked in a staggering £100 million for drug dealers, an average of more than £30 million per year.
Many of the factory finds were "large scale" and have been set up by organised gangs who force illegal immigrant 'gardeners' to tend to the plants.
The gangs, which usually have at least ten houses on the go at any given time, rake in about £1 million in cash from the operation every 12 months.
Document EVEMAI0020140423ea4n00031
