{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"995"}
____
Lifestyle
I'm planning to become relatively well off before the Grim Reaper strikes
By Mike Lockley   
1,249 words
19 May 2014
15:51
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Mike Lockley, Midlands Columnist of The Year, gets to grips with life in the big city.
My aged, silver-haired mother eyed me suspiciously over her half-moon glasses and demanded: “I hope you’ve not been smoking again, Michael?”
I shuffled, coloured and, staring at my shoes, mouthed: “Of course not, mother. I haven’t smoked since you informed PE teacher Mr Radcliffe of my fledgling habit and urged him to show me the error of my ways.”
The psychotic sports master gave her his word and, true to his word, made me run ten times around a football pitch. He joined me for the last lap, repeatedly striking my backside with a black plimsoll.
Forty-four years on, I still burn with humiliation.
“What makes you think I’ve started smoking again, mother?” I probed.
“Cigarette butts round my birdbath,” she snapped.
“That would be the starlings,” I lied. “They’re known to swallow fag ends which pass through their bodies. Wouldn’t be surprised if you get a few tobacco plants...”
“I read one out of three smokers die,” my mother railed.
“Do the other two achieve immortality?” I sneered.
“That’s enough of your cheek, young man,” she snapped.
Whisper it, but a week spent caring for mother, a week spent at the semi-detached I once called home, has proved difficult. Bizarrely, she has kept the top-shelf magazines I secreted, as a hormonal youth, in a Subbuteo Continental box under my bed.
The box has long gone. The copies of Fiesta and Men Only are now in a folder, wedged into the bookcase and marked “Mike’s girly magazines”.
This act of housekeeping is proof positive of my mother’s motto: “You never know when you’re going to need something.”
It has been a fraught week spent doing what my mother wants to do, which is mainly watching re-runs of Last Of The Summer Wine and chatting until the wee hours about immigration: “I was 15 before I saw a dark face.”
She has also spent each night thumbing through photographs of Yours Truly.
She has seven of baby me bathing naked in the kitchen sink.
Last night she whooped: “I knew I’d got this one somewhere. It’s you just after that nasty gorilla at Chester Zoo flung orange excrement at you.”
At least the fraught seven days have brought us closer.
I’ve learned things about my mother that I didn’t know.
She enjoys American wrestling and eats like a horse.
She also admired Mussolini for his highly polished boots.
Yes, it has been a trial, but it has shown me the importance of family – even the ones with criminal records.
Admittedly, a large part of that lightbulb moment is the realisation my son’s going to pick my care home.
I’ve got to be nice to him.
I don’t want to spend the autumn of my life at beetle drives and doing tai chi.
I don’t want to alienate relatives because I’m now at an age where I worry about the attendance figures at my own funeral.
I want a decent turn-out.
It’s a big church and I’d hate the service to be cancelled through poor ticket sales and lack of interest.
Obviously, I can’t come right out and say, ‘I’ll come to your funeral, if you come to mine’, but bridges can be built with distant family members.
Am I morbid to fantasise about my own funeral?
“Not at all – I fantasise about your funeral all the time,” said my wife.
Her fantasy is much the same as mine, but with party-poppers and whoopy cushions on pews.
I want Elgar’s Nimrod played as the casket is brought into the church. She wants Russ Abbot’s What An Atmosphere.
“Why on earth,” asked my wife, “do you suddenly want to contact aunts, uncles and cousins you haven’t seen for years?”
To be brutally honest, there are relatives in God’s waiting room who are financially very secure and considerably richer than I.
They’ve got to leave their cash to someone.
Last year one eccentric aunt bequeathed her pile to a dogs’ home.
If I’d gone round, let her stroke me, barked a bit and chased after the odd stick I could’ve been quids in.
For the amount of dosh she left, I’d also wolf down the odd worming tablet.
I’ve asked my cousin Tony, who lives only six miles away, to come out for a meal.
“If only you’d asked before my wife bought that family pack of Monster Munch yoghurt,” he apologised.
“They’ve got to be eaten before March, 2015, but after that give us a bell.”
Think I built bridges there.
I’ve phoned an uncle in some far-flung corner of the Lake District.
“Who the hell has died?” he stammered.
I pointed out no one had died, it was simply a courtesy call. I wanted to know how he was. It had been some time since we’d chatted.
“Eighteen years,” he pointed out, adding quickly: “Listen, if you’re after money…”
“You haven’t changed?” I laughed.
“Actually, I have,” he said. “My left leg was amputated two years ago and I’m attached to an oxygen machine.”
“Life’s good, then?” I chirped. “And are you still playing for that pub football team?”
There was a silence before the line went dead.
“What do you expect?” chided my wife. “For years, you’ve made no effort to keep in touch with relatives. You hardly talk to your own mother, and she only lives up the road.”
“My mother,” I announced grandly, “knows I’m always there for her.”
At that moment the phone rang.
“Can’t at the moment, Mom,” I shouted impatiently down the blower, “Wolves are on telly, but as soon as the final whistle’s blown, I’ll be round.”
“What did she want?” asked Julie.
“Just some chip-pan blaze. Curtains are on fire, apparently. You know how she fusses.”
I’ve started work on a family tree, which is fascinating.
I’ve traced the Lockleys back to an illiterate navvy, but after that…nothing.
“The trail gets a lot colder post Victorian era,” sympathised the historian who runs the family tree night class I’m attending.
“I wouldn’t know,” I huffed. “I’m stuck on 1968.”
“Here’s something!” he shrieked. “A Lockley made page three of the weekly paper after being disqualified for running all three laps of the Wellington Grammar School sports day walking race.
I coloured before admitting: “That was me.”
In a desperate attempt to discover my roots, I underwent ‘regression’ therapy, where an individual is hypnotised in a bid to uncover who he or she was in a dim, distant previous life.
“The bells! The bells!” I shrieked, writhing on the couch.
The hypnotist leaned forward.
“Hundreds and thousands,” I groaned, twitching uncontrollably.
“Hundreds and thousands of what?” gently prodded the hypnotist. “Soldiers? Bodies? Are you in a battle, Mike?”
“No, no,” I moaned, my eyelids fluttering. “Do you want… do you want hundreds and thousands on it, or just the flake?”
The hypnotist sat back and blew out his cheeks. “You’re a piggin’ ice cream man, aren’t you?” he sighed.
Document EVEMONL020140519ea5j001xh
