{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"155"}
____
  
News
Farage 'wins' TV debate on Europe
James Tapsfield   
712 words
3 April 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
NIGEL Farage emerged on top after a bitter face-off with Nick Clegg which saw them brand each other liars and fantasists, according to a poll.
A snap YouGov survey suggested 68 per cent thought the Ukip leader had performed best in their second televised debate, compared to 27 per cent who favoured the Deputy Prime Minister. A Guardian/ICM poll also gave Mr Farage victory, by 69 per cent to 31 per cent.
It followed an hour of increasingly bad-tempered exchanges, with Mr Clegg repeatedly accusing his opponent of "fantasy".
He also picked up Mr Farage for "indefensible" comments in which he suggested he admired Russian president Vladimir Putin for outwitting the EU and western leaders. "I wouldn't be surprised if Nigel Farage soon tells us that the moon landing was a fake, that Barack Obama is not American, that Elvis is not dead," Mr Clegg said.
But Mr Farage retorted that the Liberal Democrat leader was "wilfully lying" about how many laws were imposed on the UK by the EU.
"I said yes to these debates. I thought you would honestly make the pro-EU case," Mr Farage said. "By saying 7 per cent of our laws are made in Brussels, you are wilfully lying to the British people about the extent to which we have given away control of our country and our democracy."
During one of the hardest-fought passages, Mr Farage warned that immigration had been a "disaster" and left the "white working-class effectively as an underclass".
Mr Clegg took a more aggressive and impassioned approach to get his message across and unsettle Mr Farage.
The Ukip leader said the scale of immigration over recent years had "shocked" the country and increased segregation in towns and cities.
But Mr Clegg insisted there were "always problems when you have people".
"The idea that there will be no problems at all where we are not part of the EU... you can't simply wish away the fact that people down the centuries have moved from one country to the next.
"What we need to make sure is that people play by the rules, they don't exploit our generosity through benefits, we make sure we support public services and we make sure we support jobs in our country that go to many British people."
Mr Farage said immigration had benefited "rich people" by suppressing the costs of their staff and services.
"It is good for the rich because it is cheaper nannies and cheaper chauffeurs and cheaper gardeners," he said. "But it is bad news for ordinary Britons. We need to have a control on immigration, on the numbers who come here and over the quality who come here."
Warning of a further wave of immigration from countries such as Greece and Spain, Mr Farage accused the Deputy Prime Minister of being part of a "career political class" who were in cahoots with big business and wanted to maintain the status quo.
The Lib Dem leader lambasted his opponent for expressing admiration for Mr Putin, saying it demonstrated how dogmatic his attitude was that he supported the Russian premier over the EU.
Mr Clegg said Mr Farage had treated the suffering of millions of Syrians at the hands of Bashar Assad's brutal regime like a game.
But Mr Farage said the crisis in Ukraine had been caused by the overthrow of the "democratically elected" Russian-facing president Victor Yanukovych.
"If you look at what's happened with the Ukraine we've had a message that's been sent out for 10 years, and this is not just the EU, David Cameron, Nick Clegg, and I'm afraid and Ed Miliband too, have all been saying to the Ukraine 'look, why don't you come and join the European Union? While you are at it, why don't you join Nato too?"' he said.
"And this is something that has been seen by Putin to be a deeply provocative act. We have given false hope to those western Ukrainians. And did you see them with their EU flags and their banners?" He went on: "This country, Nick, has had enough of getting involved in dangerous foreign wars."
Document EVEMAI0020140403ea430002i
