{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"715"}
____
  
News
Go West for treat
393 words
4 April 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
8
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
THIS classic musical has arrived in Birmingham, bringing a touch of exotic climes and Latin rhythms.
Ushers at the Alex are greeting everyone with cries of ''hola!'' and ''buenos noches!'',' while the bars have been renamed Sharks and Jets.
We've been transported to a hot summer in New York City in the 1950s, where fiery Puerto Rican immigrants face a daily barrage of racist abuse from everyone, including the police.
The basic story was written more than 400 years ago by Shakespeare, as it's based on Romeo and Juliet.
It doesn't feel like we've moved on much in the 60 years since the musical was written by Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim. Immigration issues are still top of the news agenda, while Birmingham knows all about gang warfare.
The rival Montagues and the Capulets of Shakespeare are now teenage gangs - the Puerto Rican Sharks and the American/Polish Jets.
When young, sheltered Latina Maria (Charlotte Baptie) falls instantly in love with Tony (Louis Maskell) at a dance, you just know it's not going to end well.
Confident understudy Baptie did very well to step into the shoes of leading lady Katie Hall, who is out of action for several days after pulling a muscle.
This production of West Side Story returns to the original choreography of Jerome Robbins, which stands up well.
The dancing is excellent, especially during the balletic fight scenes. The girls get their chance, too, with their spirited dancing - barefoot and skirts flying - to the song America proving a real highlight.
So, too, is Tony's spinetingling rendition of Maria, and the young lovers' beautiful duet to Tonight.
The dream-like sequence to Somewhere is mesmerising.
Even audiences who have never seen West Side Story before probably don't realise how many of the songs they know, such as the delightful I Feel Pretty.
When the soundtrack was released in 1961, it spent 54 weeks at the top of the album charts.
Events take a darker and shocking turn in the second half, resulting in audible gasps and moist eyes.
There's a reason why West Side Story often tops lists of the best musicals ever, and this production lives up to the hype.
It's a passionate, colourful, funny and moving show. See it until April 19.
ROZ LAWS
Document EVEMAI0020140404ea440001i
