{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"3075"}
____
News
Nigel Farage says UKIP immigration stance will be a winner in Birmingham
By Jasbir Authi   
391 words
25 April 2014
22:08
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Pint in hand, party leader tells Dudley voters tougher immigration controls will be good for all Midland ethnic communities
UKIP leader Nigel Farage yesterday paused from his now traditional pint-pot pose for the cameras to vow the party’s tough immigration stance would prove a winner in Birmingham.
Diverse ethnic communities in our city demand tighter border control, the 50-year-old announced during a visit to Dudley which saw him tuck into fish and chips and, of course, sample local ale. He walked, smiling, through the town market while clutching a brolly.
Pressing flesh and wooing voters, Mr Farage said: “The British Social Attitude Survey that was published a few weeks ago showed over 60 per cent of the ethnic communities in Britain – and that includes first generation migrants and people who’ve come in the last few years – agree Britain needs tougher border controls than it’s currently got.
“This is not a race issue, it’s actually an issue about jobs. It’s an issue about community. It’s an issue about public services.
“Don’t forget, our population has increased by four million through immigration over the course of the last 15 years. We can’t go on like this and this is something that crosses all religions and all backgrounds.”
Mr Farage added: “We have struggled in Birmingham for a long time to find the right (UKIP) people and today there are half a dozen people who are volunteers who are running the Central Birmingham branch. Nigel Farage in Dudley 
“They are quite young, they are very enthusiastic and that’s why the council candidates that we have got in Birmingham are the highest we have had here by a long way.
“Clearly here in Dudley, we are going to win seats because here’s a well- established branch. In Birmingham, it’s pot luck.”
At Dudley’s Britannia pub, 18-year-old Brandon Smith and his grandfather David Smith, 65, posed for a selfie with Mr Farage.
Brandon, a groundworker, said: “I told him that I was a first time voter and he had some sense. He said ‘well done.’”
David added: “He’s a popular bloke. He won’t get in but he’ll cause an earthquake.”
Document EVEMONL020140425ea4p002jp
