{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"1704"}
____
  
Features
Immigration chiefs hold musician for seven hours
Nick McCarthy   
428 words
18 April 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
28
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
THE Home Office has defended a decision to hold an American musician for seven hours at Birmingham Airport after refusing him entry to the UK.
Grammy award-nominated classical musician Cameron Carpenter was held last month ahead of a concert at the Symphony Hall on March 19.
The organist had been turned back because UK Border Force officials said he didn't have the appropriate documents to be allowed in under the permitted paid engagement scheme for artists and musicians.
He was held for seven hours, questioned, finger-printed and escorted back on to a 7am flight to Berlin, from where he had flown in.
Mr Carpenter had a shower after landing in Germany and caught the next plane to Heathrow where he was this time allowed to enter Britain.
Despite the 26-hour ordeal he still performed his concert in Birmingham.
But the case has now been raised by Lord Clancarty in the House of Lords, who said Carpenter's experience amounted to abuse because he was subjected to all-night sleep deprivation.
Cameron, who has been described as "the bad boy of the organ world" posted a picture of himself putting two fingers up to his deportation notice on his Facebook page, saying: "I got your majesty's service right here, pal."
He described Tascor, which runs the short-term immigration holding centre at Birmingham airport, as "the creepy, vague, Orwellian detention subcontractor (HM Border Force) use to keep people awake in brightly lit rooms filled with tearstained children's toys and assorted religious texts."
The Home Office minister Lord Taylor has written to Lord Clancarty telling him the investigation into allegations of allnight sleep deprivation and other heavy-handedness had established that no mistreatment occurred and no complaint had been received. He said Carpenter had been barred because he lacked a sponsor's certificate but he conceded: "Although the guidelines and policies were correctly followed by officers, Border Force accepts that more could have been done to assist Mr Carpenter."
A Border Force spokesman said: "It is the responsibility of those wanting to come to the UK to state the purpose of their visit and if required provide supporting documentation.
"We have looked into the circumstances of this case. Mr Carpenter did not have the documentation he needed to enter the UK when he arrived at Birmingham Airport and was therefore returned to Germany.
"At Heathrow he sought leave to enter the country under a different category, for which he did have the valid documentation."
Document EVEMAI0020140418ea4i00033
