{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"341"}
____
  
News
TWEETS & POSTS A selection [...]
387 words
2 May 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
49
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
TWEETS & POSTS A selection of your comments left on our website, Twitter and Facebook pages...
SUTTON COLDFIELD RESTAURANT'S 4,000.MILE TAKEAWAY ORDER Wayneo Worrallo Fair play to him. He's providing a service for UN troops. We make the best curries in Birmingham. Keep up the good work.
Natalie Mcfc Timmis Well done him. Some nice publicity for Birmingham from half-way around the world. Yasemin Erçin Please deliver in France as well. I miss Brum's fantastic curries.
Paul Brooks Yet we struggle to get a decent delivery to Quinton.
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT'S £26K BENEFIT SCAM Leeann Turner How can an illegal immigrant claim benefits? The minute I started work earning money, I received a letter stopping my benefit claim. So how can someone who shouldn't be in the country be able to run up such a bill? Complete joke.
Natalie Stewart Media love stirring up a bit of race hatred don't they? Ash Roberts Race hatred? Her race doesn't come into it. The fact is she scammed the system when she had no right to anything.
Richard Dunne You can't blame the immigrants. Blame the system and the civil servants that sit there, smile and sign it off.
Angela Ranson I've worked for 30 years from the age of 15 and am British born. I'm just on sick leave after having cancer and when I went to claim benefits I was told I didn't qualify so needed to apply for E.SA which turned into a million pages of filling out. It's ridiculous for 70 odd quid.. How they get all these benefits is beyond me. Only the UK.
A KNIGHTHOOD FOR OZZY OSBOURNE? Steven Espley You have to wonder how 99% of knighthoods are given out. Only people who deserve them are emergency service and armed forced personnel after years of service. Not someone who bangs a drum or rows a boat.
Nigel Oconnell When's the last time he lived or paid taxes in this country? He lives in luxury in California. Knighthood? Don't think so.
Madeleine Farley If you're going to honour a Brummie, give Stephen Sutton one instead. Far more deserving. Sorry Ozzy! Janet Smith Absolutely not! Amelia Taylor Defo a legend.
Document EVEMAI0020140502ea5200028
