{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"928"}
____
Birmingham couple ordered to pay back nearly £400,000 in false benefits claims
By Jane Tyler   
367 words
3 May 2014
15:02
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Visa fraud operation saw Syed Ahsan Yousuf and Jabin Bi jailed for a total of nearly seven years
A husband and wife team who supplied illegal immigrants with fake documents to help them stay in the UK have been ordered to pay almost £400,000.
The visa fraud operation saw Syed Ahsan Yousuf, 40, and Jabin Bi, 49, jailed for a total of nearly seven years.
Now an investigation by Birmingham City Council has found the couple had also fraudulently claimed benefits and had also submitted false mortgage applications.
Yousuf, and wife Bi, were jailed in March last year after they admitted charging immigrants thousands of pounds in return for forged documents.
At a court hearing in Birmingham Yousuf, of Ivor Road, Sparkhill, was ordered to repay £260,000, and Bi, of Bevington Road, Aston, was ordered to repay £120,000 under the Proceeds of Crime Act.
The scam was uncovered after several applications to remain in the UK were received by the Home Office which were all paid for from the same bank accounts.
The applications were initially for long term residency, based on being in the UK for over 14 years, and were followed by applications for residence cards based on civil partnerships between EU and non-EU nationals.
A Home Office criminal investigation team traced the bank accounts to Yousuf and Jabin Bi.
During the investigation it came to light that Yousuf and Bi were also involved in benefit fraud and fraudulent mortgage applications.
Yousuf was jailed for four years and ten months and Bi was jailed for two years after both pleaded guilty to the offences.
Andy Radcliffe, from Home Office Criminal Investigations, said: “Yousuf and Bi thought they could profit from exploiting immigrants’ desperation to stay in the UK. They were wrong.
“This case shows we work closely with local councils to bring before the courts those involved in scams that aim to defraud both the immigration system and taxpayers.
“And our investigations do not stop once we have secured a conviction. We will rigorously pursue criminals to ensure they pay back their ill-gotten gains.”
Document EVEMONL020140503ea53000gq
