{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"1181"}
____
  
News
Dr Naseem hits back in 'gay desires' storm
JASBIR AUTHI   
403 words
21 March 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
2
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
THE CHAIRMAN of Birmingham Central Mosque has claimed he was misinterpreted over remarks he made comparing homosexuals with murderers and paedophiles.
Free Speech, the BBC3 debate show, deliberately dropped the question "When will it be right to be Muslim and gay?" on its March 12 episode which was filmed at the mosque.
A furious row broke out after the panel and studio audience were denied a chance to answer, with the presenter saying the issue had been dropped in response to the concerns of the mosque.
Afterwards Dr Mohammad Naseem, 89, penned an open letter defending his decision - in which he appeared to compare being gay with criminals including paedophiles.
The letter said: "There are people with homosexual tendency in Muslim countries but they respect the law and control their desire as others do.
"Human beings do have weaknesses and tendencies which Dr Naseem are not socially acceptable and so they try to have a control over them and do not give in.
"A compulsive murderer, gambler, paedophile etc. could present the same logic and ask for accommodation by the society. Are we going to accept on the basis of freedom of action?" Speaking to the Birmingham Mail, Dr Naseem defended his words and said: "I have been misinterpreted. I meant to say homosexuals must have a desire to be homosexual in the same way heterosexuals have a desire to be the same way and so paedophiles have a desire to be paedophiles, and recently there was a woman who was charged with murder because she likes to murder men.
Mohammad "What I am saying this is a compulsive desire to do something and it should not give society an obligation to accept it. This was an analogy I referred to in my letter.
"It does not mean that homosexuals are murderers. I was referring to one common trait to illustrate the point."
Dr Naseem said the TV crew had originally booked the mosque, off Belgrave Middleway, for a programme on immigration.
He said: "On the day, two hours before the programme was going to start, they informed us that the programme was going to discuss homosexuality and this was a subject that we could not discuss then.
"We had to make a decision by the committee who run the mosque and for that reason we could not agree to the request."
Document EVEMAI0020140321ea3l0003l
