{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"543"}
____
  
Features
Pervert faces deportation after girl, 15, was groomed
Nick McCarthy   
387 words
8 April 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
10
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
A PERVERT from Birmingham faces being deported for grooming a deaf schoolgirl on Facebook.
Mohammed Raja turned up at the 15-year-old's school with a suitcase after arranging to meet her.
But the 24-year-old was foiled when two other girls tricked him into getting into their car and drove him to a police station.
Raja, of Ladypool Road, Sparkbrook, was jailed for 16 months at Derby Crown Court after admitting meeting a child following sexual grooming.
The two girls were awarded £1,000 each for their roles in snaring him.
Passing sentence, Judge John Burgess said: "Girls aged 15 are vulnerable anyway because of their age.
"But this girl was particularly vulnerable because of her profound deafness.
"You talked to her over Facebook about marriage and making her pregnant.
"You saw her on Skype and knew she was deaf because you could see both of her hearing aids.
"You are also an overstayer and I imagine the immigration authorities will deport you back to Pakistan when you are released from prison.
"Having you deported is something I am going to recommend."
Karen Davenport-Coles, prosecuting, said Raja befriended the teen on Facebook last September.
She said: "She received a friend request from a stranger, which she accepted, and they started exchanging messages.
"Last November, he arranged to meet her at the gates to her school.
"One of her friends came out to meet her sister and he asked her if she knew who the victim was. Her sister said she knew the victim's family and she called them.
"The defendant told her he was family and from Birmingham but, because he was carrying a suitcase, both girls became suspicious."
Miss Davenport-Coles said Raja began to walk away from the school gates but the two girls followed him in a car and talked him into getting in the vehicle, saying they would drive him to Birmingham.
Instead, they took him straight to a police station.
Andrew Wesley, defending, said Raja "simply did not think through the consequences" of his actions.
Mr Wesley said: "He has not had a sexual relationship before and is a young man with few friends who lives away from his family and lives a fairly isolated existence."
Document EVEMAI0020140408ea480001k
