{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"783"}
____
  
News
Illegal staff found during market raid
Matt Lloyd   
323 words
25 February 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
8
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
TWO stallholders have been kicked off Birmingham's outdoor market after a police raid found seven suspected illegal workers.
A joint operation by West Midlands Police and UK Borders Agency led to the arrests of the Afghani men who were working on fruit and vegetable stalls.
Six of the men remain in detention centres while a seventh was bailed pending further investigations into his immigration status.
The owners of two stalls have appealed a decision taken last week to kick them off the site for bringing the historic markets into disrepute. They will meet with council bosses tomorrow in an attempt to overturn the decision.
Inspector Stuart Bill, from West Midlands Police, said: "Police carried out a joint operation with the UK Borders Agency into illegal workers at Birmingham Market.
"A total of seven people were arrested during the operation which took place on January 24.
"The UK Borders Agency are now dealing with this investigation."
A spokesman for Birmingham City Council confirmed two stallholders had been removed from the markets and had until this Friday to appeal.
A market trader, who asked not to be named, said the scale of the raid had sent ripples around the Edgbaston Street markets.
He said: "You sometimes see these raids on the television and they find one or two workers, but to find seven...? It makes you wonder if this is the tip of the iceberg."
Immigration rules state employers must check the documents of employees before they start work to ensure they are entitled to work in the UK.
Those found employing illegal workers could be hit with a £10,000 fine per worker they employ.
The market trader added: "This is an important matter, we have empty stalls on the market now. We're not against anybody of any nationality working on these markets - so long as they have the right to do so."
Document EVEMAI0020140225ea2p0001m
