{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"2958"}
____
  
News
Mohammed refused heart op because of visa mistake
Katy Hallam   
390 words
10 May 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
16
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
A YOUNG man in desperate need of a life-saving operation has been refused treatment because he came into the country on the wrong visa.
Mohammed Jagne, 25, travelled to Birmingham from his home country The Gambia almost eight years ago to have his heart valve replaced by surgeons at Queen Elizabeth Hospital.
But when his sponsor pulled out at the last moment the operation was cancelled. Without the treatment, Mohammed, known as MJ, faces a death sentence.
But the Home Office will not allow the NHS to operate after his medical visa ran out.
The newlywed, who is happily married to teenage sweetheart Karis Gouldbourne, from Birmingham, now faces being deported back to The Gambia, where surgeons lack the expertise to perform the vital operation.
The devastated couple have been told he may not make his thirtieth birthday without the simple triple-valve replacement surgery.
Now they are putting their lives on hold in a desperate bid to raise the £25,000 needed for the surgery, which must be completed in 12-18 months.
"Without that operation, my husband will die," 21-year-old Karis, a university communications officer, said. This should be a happy, carefree time. Instead, we are always looking over our shoulders.
"We are just living in limbo." MJ was diagnosed with rheumatic mitral and aortic valve disease, which causes his valves to leak, when he was 11 years old.
And despite being treated with medication for painful symptoms including palpatations, shortness of breath and joint pains, he cannot have the operation that would cure them completely.
Because of his immigration status as an overstayer, he also can't work to earn the money for his operation, claim benefits that support disabled people or study.
"I came here seven and a half years ago," MJ added.
"Then I only had one leaking valve, now I have three. Instead of them needing repair, they now need replacing. My health is deteriorating. I desperately want to be well and to work."
The Home Office said: "All applications are considered on their individual merits, including any compelling and compassionate circumstances, and in line with the immigration rules.
"Mr Jagne's application was refused because the treatment he had been receiving in the UK is also available in Gambia."
Document EVEMAI0020140510ea5a00026
