{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"18"}
____
News
Call to honour forgotten victims of Second World War sinking tragedy
By Mike Lockley   
811 words
24 March 2014
17:25
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Families of Birmingham's interned Italians who died when Arandora Star sank in 1940 remember U-boat horror
Birmingham chip shop owner Anthony Grecco’s wartime allegiance to the Union flag should never have been doubted.
He arrived in the city from impoverished Sora, near Naples, as a child and, over the decades, built a thriving business.
Many locals ended a night out with a fish and chip supper from one of his two Birmingham shops.
What’s more, all four of Anthony’s sons fought for King and country, three in the Army, one in the Navy.
Yet, in his late 40s, and in the infancy of the Second World War, the respected businessman was wrenched from wife Pascuala, his six children and the relative safety of Greets Green.
Along with 1,216 other detainees, more than half of them Italian, Anthony was herded onto the Arandora Star passenger ship, bound from Liverpool to internment camps in Canada.
Six of those aboard were Italian-Brummies.
Conflict had turned them from hardworking, model citizens into security risks, even potential spies.
And the British government had unwittingly signed Anthony’s death warrant.
In the early hours of July 2, 1940, he became a statistic in one of the conflict’s greatest maritime atrocities.
The ship was struck by a U-boat torpedo.
Only 586 survived the horror, and Anthony was not one of them. The Arandora Star tragedy 
Recalling the harrowing scene off Ireland’s northwest coast, Sgt Norman Price said: “I could see hundreds of men clinging to the ship.
“They were like ants and then the ship went up at one end and slid rapidly down, taking the men with her.”
The vessel slipped beneath the waves barely half an hour after it was holed.
One of its internees, captured German captain Otto Burfeind, stayed on board and organised an evacuation.
Among the first bodies washed up was that of 71-year-old Ernesto Moruzzi, found near Burtonport in Co.Donegal.
Ceazar Camozzi, 39, from Iseo, was discovered soon after on the Inishowen Peninsula.
The sea released many victims to the sands of Colonsay Island, where a memorial was unveiled in 2005.
In August, 1940, 213 bodies were washed-up on the Irish Coast.
But many, many more were never found – Anthony Grecco among them.
Now, family and friends of those Birmingham-based immigrants forced to make that fateful voyage have demanded the city follows Liverpool, Middlesbrough, Cardiff and Glasgow by erecting a statue to its victims.
Anthony’s two daughters, 99-year-old Catherine Rea and Marie Cerromi, aged 98, still live in Birmingham. His niece Eileena Kenney said she remembered him well.
The 87-year-old, from Sheldon Heath, said: “I can remember him standing in my home.
“He was a wonderful gentleman and well respected. His boys all fought for England.
“There should be some kind of tribute – his daughters would love that. They should be remembered.”
The victims’ native land has not allowed the memory of those who left Italy for a better place fade. Thirty-one locals killed in the attack are honoured by a statue in Lucca, Tuscany.
A memorial chapel was erected in Bardi, hometown of 48 of the dead.
Yet time has been allowed to erase the memory of Birmingham’s victims.
The others were: Bartolomeo Antoniazzi, aged 32, born in Bardi and moved to Newtown; Domenico Crisofoli, aged 35, from Sequals; Filippo Marsella, aged 43, born in Casa Lattico and moved to Wishaw; Giovanni Ottolini, aged 64, born in Lucca; Antonio Santuz, aged 46, born in Fanna.
Dorothy Bradbury, whose family, the Farinas, moved to Birmingham in the late 1800s, said a memorial clock would be a fitting tribute.
The Great Barr 78-year-old said she believed Birmingham had not done enough to repay its debt to Italian craftsmen who shaped the city.
“It is as if they’ve been airbrushed from our city’s history,” said Dorothy, whose uncle Albert Farina was wounded while fighting for the Allies at Monte Cassino.
“A lot of the civic buildings were created by Italian craftsmen. The debt this city and this country owes them has been forgotten.”
Birmingham historian and Mail columnist Prof Carl Chinn has joined the call for a monument.
But he said it should be a tribute to all Italians who moved to Birmingham, not just Arandora Star victims.
The vast majority who emigrated came from Sora and settled around Bartholomew Street.
Prof Chinn said: “I have spoken in private to various councillors, but there does not seem to be the political will.”
He said he would like to see a piece of public art close to Millennium Point and also called for the erection of tributes to other nationalities who helped craft Birmingham.
Document EVEMONL020140324ea3o000m9
