{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"298"}
____
News
Fugitive Midland drugs baron was smuggled out of UK in metal box
By Mike Lockley   
976 words
10 May 2014
17:32
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
John Anslow hid in cargo container on ship bound to Turkey after escaping from prison van and now plans sentence appeal, reveals dad
Black Country drugs baron John Anslow – Britain’s most wanted man – was smuggled out of the country in a metal freight box, the Sunday Mercury can reveal.
After being sprung from a prison van while en route from HMP Hewell, near Redditch, to Stafford Crown Court, the fugitive climbed inside a container which was loaded onto a ship in Dover as cargo.
The 33-year-old, the first Category A prisoner to escape jail in 17 years, spent three days in the box, briefly seeing daylight when the tanker docked in Italy. He only emerged when the cargo was finally unloaded in Turkey.
From there, Anslow – subject of an international hunt – travelled to Northern Cyprus, a country with that has no extradition treaty with our country.
Despite that, the Tipton mobster – known on the streets as Skitz – was prised from his sun-drenched bolt hole in March last year, 439 long days after making good his escape.
The father-of-three is currently serving a 22-year sentence for conspiracy to supply cocaine and cannabis in Belmarsh Prison.
On top of that stretch is a seven-year two-month term for the escape from custody in January 2012.
In March Anslow was cleared of organising the 2010 murder of skip hire boss Richard Deakin, who was blasted to death as he slept at his home in Chasetown, Staffordshire.
Gunman David Harrison – Anslow’s uncle – and getaway driver Darryl Dickens, both from Bilston, were jailed for life in December 2012.
Now Anslow’s father, John Anslow Snr, has told the Sunday Mercury that his son is to appeal his drug trafficking conviction.
And he alleges that Anslow was snatched at gunpoint by detectives while convalescing at his Cyprus villa following a gall bladder operation.
“He was bundled into a car by three armed officers and driven immediately to a waiting plane,” said Mr Anslow Snr, himself a convicted armed robber. “That’s diabolical.
“I know criminals who have been extradited from Spain and they all went through the proper procedure.
“With John, they just done it. They pointed a gun at his head, put him in a car, sat on him and drove to the airport.”
British police say that ‘Skitz’ was snared on suspicion of immigration offences in Cyprus and later deported by Turkish Cypriot authorities.
They had offered a £10,000 reward for his capture.
British officers arrested him at Heathrow Airport after he was flown back in March 2013.
Anslow Snr, who now lives in Wimbledon, revealed his son’s legal appeal after a visit to see the Triple Category A prisoner in jail.
“If there is any justice, he should get the sentence halved, at the very least,” the 59-year-old said.
“Yes, he’s dabbled in drugs, but not to the extent that’s been said. My son’s no angel – far from it – but he’s not what they’ve made him out to be.
“It’s been trial by media.”
Anslow Snr maintains the vast majority of his son’s wealth came from elaborate gambling scams, carried out at race tracks and casinos.
But Anslow did deal in drugs, his dad admitted, while holding down a full-time job at a plumbers’ firm.
Perks of his job included a company car, now one of a string of motors in Anslow’s possession – the fleet including a £55,000 Porsche.
But claims that Anslow was a mere minnow in the illicit drugs trade are not borne out by information and evidence gathered by the police.
A bug in his Bradley flat revealed a far-reaching narcotics network. A subsequent raid uncovered a Rolex watch and tell-tale signs of a luxury lifestyle funded by thousands of pounds of cocaine and cannabis.
From Anslow’s Tipton manor, large quantities of drugs were distributed nationally.
And it was Richard Deakin’s killer, David Harrison, who acted as partner in the illicit operation.
The Woolwich Crown Court trial took its toll on Anslow, his father said.
“This is the best I’ve seen him,” he told the Sunday Mercury.
“He was looking haggard before. It’s a weight off his shoulders.”
Breaking out of Hewell may have been a “good thing in a bad way” claimed Anslow Snr.
“It meant his trial was at Woolwich, not Stafford, which was fairer,” he explained.
Other members of the Anslow clan are less supportive of the breakout.
One said: “That was wrong. That was the start of everything. Then they had to make an example.”
A member of prison staff has been sacked following the escape and others disciplined for failing to detect a mobile phone Anslow had secreted in an intimate part of his anatomy.
In all, six people have been jailed for their part in the plot to spring Anslow.
After undergoing two security searches at Belmarsh, Anslow Snr said was only allowed to speak to his son through a glass wall, with guards and a dog close by.
“I think it’s barbaric,” he added. “You can’t have a conversation and, remember, he’s got three young kids who want to visit him.”
Last night a relative voiced concern over how Anslow will cope with a three-decade prison tern.
“John will miss his children the most,” the Sunday Mercury was told. “He has a lot of time for his children, I can’t take that away from him.
“When you have that many years hanging over you, I don’t know how that will affect him. How you cope with that is anyone’s guess.” John Anslow cleared of Richard Deakin murder 
Document EVEMONL020140510ea5a000jh
