{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"2879"}
____
  
News
Finally, it's our chance to celebrate
1,455 words
29 March 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
2,3
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
History will be made today as the first gay wedding is celebrated in Birmingham. MARY GRIFFIN asks the happy couple why marriage means so much
"WHENEVER you go for a new job or fill out forms you have to tick whether you're single, married or civilly partnered," says Stephen Trinder, "and I've always had to tick the single box.
"But after this weekend I'll be able to tick "married" without having to state whether that's to a man or a woman."
Stephen has spent the last 26 years with his partner David Henson and today, at 9.30am, they are making history as the first gay couple to marry in Birmingham.
When civil partnerships were introduced eight years ago it signalled a step change in equality.
On December 5, 2005, Matthew Roche and Christopher Cramp became the first couple to enter into a civil partnership in the UK, having been given special exemption from the normal 15-day waiting period after the law was passed.
The ceremony took place at a hospice in West Sussex and Matthew died the following day, having battled lung cancer.
Since then, more than 120,000 people have followed Matthew and Christopher's lead, including celebrities Elton John and John Barrowman.
But Stephen, 60, from Handsworth, and David, 53, from Leamington, were reluctant.
"I don't know why exactly, but it didn't appeal to either of us," says Stephen.
"It was right for lots of people but it wasn't right for us."
David adds: "I thought it was absolutely brilliant when civil partnerships came in but why give the intention to make things equal but then call it something else? "I'm not religious, as such, but I have my own faith.
"The Civil Partnership Act does not provide any form of religious service, whereas the same sex marriage act does contain a religious element which appeals to me.
"I feel I'm getting married to the approbation, not necessarily of the Church, but of God.
"But, actually," he adds, "it's much more than that.
"It's about acceptance and feeling validated as people without feeling that we are outstanding or 'other than'.
"We are always outside looking in and it's important to me to know that we can now marry."
BBC sports presenter Clare Balding, who formed a civil partnership with Radio 4 announcer Alice Arnold, has criticised the unwieldy phrase "civilly partnered", professing her hope to marry "for the verb".
"It's literally the word and how that makes you feel," says David.
"You can never say that in your own head you feel 'civilly partnered' but you can say 'I feel married.' .
"It's about not being singled out as being anything other than human - not gay, straight, bisexual or anywhere in the peripheries of those.
"It's just the fact we are people."
Like Clare and Alice, Bryn and James Tudor of Solihull, the first couple to have a civil partnership in Birmingham, will convert their civil partnership to a marriage after the option becomes available by the end of the year.
Meanwhile, Midlander and composer Benjamin Till is set to celebrate a landmark wedding, marrying performer Nathan Taylor (both pictured on the cover) in an all-singing all-dancing Our Gay Wedding: The Musical to be broadcast on Channel 4 on Monday, complete with narration from Stephen Fry.
But David and Stephen have chosen a subtle ceremony, followed by a sunset cruise along Birmingham's canals.
Their relationship has not been a flamboyant affair and, under normal circumstances, they wouldn't talk to the newspapers.
They lived in various parts of the Midlands before moving to Devon, but have always lived their lives under the radar. "Some people can just be out there, ambassadors, and they don't care if their life is public knowledge," says David, "but it's not like that for everybody."
David, a housing officer, spent six years working in legal services for the Royal Air Force.
He says: "I was one of the people preparing the documentation to court marshall people who had admitted to being gay."
Stephen, too, spent decades incognito. "I lived through the sixties, seventies and eighties," he says, "and it wasn't always a good thing to be different.
"Generations before me lived in real fear of being put in prison.
"Go back further and in previous generations you were simply outcast.
"Through those years you begin to live a double life - an outward life and a private life, and never the twain shall meet.
"At work I would inevitably be asked if I had a girlfriend or a wife and I invented these invisible girlfriends just to shut people up. I didn't want them to know."
He adds: "Now, things are different. "The biggest change for me personally is that when we go to Torquay we'll see two young men walk along the front in daylight holding hands.
"But that's something I still find very difficult to do.
"It's so instilled in me that it's just a very awkward thing for me now.
"That's how I've been socialised, living through the Thatcher years and Section 28 - it wasn't good to show who you really were."
In 1988 Section 28 made it unlawful to teach in a maintained school "the acceptability of homosexuality as a pretended family relationship".
The law was only repealed in 2003.
David says: "Stephen and I were living together for five years before I could pluck up the courage to say to my sister, 'This is the situation'.
"One of the things I find absolutely brilliant is that young people now have no problem with being able to be up front and say who they are early on.
"That doesn't mean to say I don't see a number of examples where they've been victimised because of that but that's prejudice and that's something you'll get whenever and wherever.
"But there are all these figures out there now, the latest of which is Tom Daley, who are quite up front.
"Gay people are able to express themselves and say 'This is me.'"."
So is the long road to equality finally nearing an end? "This is really only the beginning," says Stephen.
"It's been really hard work for the people who have campaigned to get this legislation through."
" The Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Act faced opposition from the Church of England, the Catholic Church, The Muslim Council of Great Britain, the Network ofOrganisations and the United Synagogue.
While most Labour and Lib Dems supported the move, more Tory MPs voted against the bill at second reading than voted for it.
"It's early days for this piece of legislation," warns Stephen, "and there could still be a backlash."
" But today, for one day only, this retiring couple will step boldly into the limelight to make history in Stephen's hometown and, nearly 30 years after they first met (and too late for Stephen's mum or David's dad to see the union), they'll leave Birmingham register office as Stephen and David Trinder, entitled to the sameas every other married couple in Britain.
They are the first of 49 couples who have far applied to the register office for a single sex marriage.
David says: "Over the years we've seen many friends and family get married.
"We've also seen some of them get WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MARRIAGE AND A CIVIL PARTNERSHIPS? ? From today, marriage is available to mixed sex and same sex couples, while civil partnerships are for same sex couples only.
Civil partnerships require only the signing of a document, while marriages require a prescribed form of words to be spoken.
Si? Marriages can be religious or civil, but civil partnership ceremonies are entirely civil.
Unlike a civil partnership, a marriage can be annulled on the grounds of adultery. ? Marriage certificates include the names of only the fathers of the parties, while civil partnerships include both parents' names.
A civil partnership offers the same legal status as marriage on inheritance, pensions, life assurance, immigration rights and child maintenance.
There remains a lack of parity among religious institutions, with the Church of England forbidding marriage ceremonies for gay couples.
rights divorced and some of them celebrate silver wedding anniversaries.
so "But for 26 years we've never had the congratulations or the cards or anything like that.
"This, our wedding day, is finally our opportunity to celebrate."
'"We are always outside looking in and it's important to me to know that we can now marry." STEPHEN TRINDER
Document EVEMAI0020140329ea3t0001a
