{"newspaper":"Birmingham Mail","id:"3698"}
____
  
Features
Prince compares Putin's Russia to 'Nazi Germany'
David Mercer   
467 words
22 May 2014
Birmingham Mail
EVEMAI
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Birmingham Post & Mail Ltd   
THE Prince of Wales has sparked controversy by reportedly comparing the actions of Russian president Vladimir Putin to Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler.
One MP said Charles should abdicate if he wanted to speak out on international issues, but Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg insisted that the heir to the throne should be "free to express himself ".
Charles apparently added his voice to international anger from the West at Russia's actions in Ukraine during his tour of Canada, when he spoke to a woman who fled the Nazis and lost family members during the Holocaust.
His remark came during a tour of the Museum of Immigration in Halifax, Nova Scotia, where the Prince and the Duchess of Cornwall paid tribute to Second World War veterans and their families.
Jewish museum volunteer Marienne Ferguson told the Prince that she fled to Canada with her family shortly before the Nazis annexed the Baltic coastal Free City of Gdansk in 1939.
After meeting Charles, Mrs Ferguson, 78, said: "The Prince said 'And now Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler.' .
"I must say that I agree with him and am sure a lot of people do.
"But I was very surprised that he made the comment as I know they [members of the Royal Family] aren't meant to say these things.
The comments came just over a fortnight before Charles is due to meet Mr Putin at the commemorations of the 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings in Normandy on June 6. He and the Duchess are currently on a four-day tour of Canada. Labour MP Mike Gapes, a current member and former chairman of the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, condemned the Prince's comments.
The Ilford South MP said on Twitter: "If Prince Charles wants to make controversial statements on national or international issues, he should abdicate and stand for election.
"In a constitutional monarchy, policy and diplomacy should be conducted by Parliament and government.
Monarchy should be seen and not heard."
But Mr Clegg said Charles was "free to express himself ".
"I have never been of this view that if you are a member of the Royal Family somehow you have to enter into some Trappist vow of silence," the Deputy Prime Minister told BBC1's Breakfast. "I think he is entitled to his views. But I don't know whether those were his views because I just don't think providing a running commentary on what were private conversations is useful to anybody.
"I don't know exactly what he did or didn't say in that conversation because he thought it was a private conversation."
A spokesman for Clarence House said: "We do not comment on private conversations."
Document EVEMAI0020140522ea5m00027
