{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"2067"}
____
News
Headlines for May 18, 2014 - Housing market 'risk to recovery', 1,000 richest even wealthier than before
By liverpoolecho Administrator   
910 words
18 May 2014
14:40
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
The latest news from around the world
HOME BOOM ’MAIN RISK TO RECOVERY’
Britain’s booming housing market represents the ”biggest risk” to the economic recovery, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney has warned.
With approvals for large mortgages on the increase, Mr Carney expressed concern about the dangers of another ”big debt overhang” building up.
In an interview with Sky News’s Murnaghan, to be shown today, he said the Bank was monitoring the situation closely.
IMMIGRANTS ’SHOULD LEARN ENGLISH’
Immigrants who come to live in Britain need to learn to speak English and to ”respect our way of life”, Culture Secretary Sajid Javid has said.
Mr Javid, the son of Pakistani immigrants and the first Asian Secretary of State, said that people were entitled to expect that immigrants made a contribution to society.
”People want Britain to have more control over its borders, and I think they are right,” he told The Sunday Telegraph.
1,000 RICHEST GET MUCH BETTER OFF
Britain’s richest people are wealthier than ever before with a combined fortune of £518.975 billion, according to this year’s Sunday Times Rich List.
Amid talk of the ”squeezed middle”, the 1,000 richest Britons now own the equivalent of a third of the nation’s gross domestic product (GDP), with their combined wealth rising 15.4% on last year’s total of £449.654 billion.
A minimum of £85 million is needed to even be considered for the list this year - compared to £80 million in 2008 at the height of the pre-crash boom and £75 million last year.
MILIBAND CRITICISED OVER CAMPAIGN
Ed Miliband is facing fresh criticism from within the Labour ranks over his ”suicidal” campaign tactics as the party heads into crucial European and local council elections.
With one poll last week showing the Tories ahead of Labour for the first time in two years, a series of party figures warned that Mr Miliband’s cautious tactics would not deliver victory in next year’s general election.
One prominent backbencher Simon Danczuk, the MP for Rochdale, said they had to stop relying on the unpopularity of the Government and come forward with a positive vision of their own.
UKIP ON COURSE TO TOP EURO POLL
The UK Independence Party remains on course to top the poll in the European elections while the Liberal Democrats face a humiliating fifth place finish behind the Greens, according to a new opinion poll.
The ComRes survey for The Independent on Sunday and the Sunday Mirror puts Ukip out in front with 35% - one point up on last week - among those ”absolutely certain” to vote on Thursday in the election to the Strasbourg Parliament.
Labour are unchanged in second place on 24% while support for the Conservatives in third is down two points to 20%. The Greens meanwhile are up two points on 7%, leapfrogging the Lib Dems who slumped to just 6% with another two point drop.
COLMAN FAVOURITE FOR BAFTA SUCCESS
Famous faces will take to the red carpet tonight for the star-studded Bafta TV awards.
Broadchurch star Olivia Colman is hot favourite to repeat her Bafta success of last year and walk away with another trophy.
The actress, who picked up two gongs last year, is in contention to win the leading actress award for her performance in the hit detective drama.
EVACUATION SHIPS SENT TO VIETNAM
China is sending five ships to Vietnam to speed up the evacuation of its citizens following deadly anti-Chinese riots over Beijing’s deployment of an oil rig in disputed waters.
The official Xinhua News Agency says that the first ship departed this morning from the southern island of Hainan.
China’s foreign ministry says more than 3,000 Chinese have already been evacuated from Vietnam following the riots this week that left two Chinese dead and injured about 100 others.
EASTERN UKRAINIANS CRITICISE KIEV
Politicians from eastern Ukraine criticised the fledging central government, accusing it of ignoring legitimate grievances of the regions which have been overrun by pro-Russia militia fighting for independence.
One eastern leader said last weekend’s unofficial referendum in favour of independence ”expressed the will of the people”.
The criticism came in the second round of European-brokered talks intended to resolve the country’s worst crisis since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991.
SUNNY UK ’TO BE HOTTER THAN GREECE’
Britons can look forward to another day of warm sunshine today, with temperatures set to soar higher than in Greece and Italy.
Forecasters said the mercury is expected to rise as high as 25C (77F) in south east England, while in Rome and Athens it is anticipated to be in the low 20s.
Yesterday was the warmest day of the year so far, with a top temperature of 23.9C (74.66F) recorded in Santon Downham in Suffolk, but that is expected to be beaten today.
CHARLES AND CAMILLA TOUR CANADA
The Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall will fly to Canada today for a whirlwind four-day tour.
Charles and Camilla will visit six communities across three provinces as they take part in events to mark a number of important historical anniversaries.
They include the First World War centenary and the 150th anniversary of the Charlottetown Conference which led to the Canadian Confederation.
Document EVEMONL020140518ea5i0005l
