{"newspaper":"birminghammail.co.uk","id:"2416"}
____
News
Immigration in chaos
By Jonathan Walker   
526 words
14 April 2014
15:39
birminghammail.co.uk
EVEMONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Our political editor Jonathan Walker on the big issues that are hitting the news.
If you’ve ever wondered whether Britain’s immigration policy is in a mess then consider this – officials have just admitted that they under-counted the number of immigrants coming into the UK between 2001 and 2011 by 346,000 people.
That’s more than the population of Wolverhampton or Coventry (250,000 and 317,000 people respectively).
And that’s not the number of immigrants. That’s the number of extra immigrants the Office for National Statistics didn’t even know about. The number of immigrants was 2.5 million.
This is the net figure, by the way. That means its the number coming in minus the number going out of the country (Brits heading off for retirement in Spain, for example).
How could the officials get it so wrong? The answer is partly that they focused on people coming in to the London airports, and didn’t realise until later that many migrants from new EU nations – Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovenia, Slovakia, Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia – were taking flights in to regional airports such as Birmingham.
Perhaps it’s no wonder that Labour’s Shadow Home Secretary, Yvette Cooper, has disowned the last Labour government’s policy on immigration.
She delivered a speech admitting: “The last Labour government got things wrong on immigration... the figures were wrong, and migration was far greater than we expected.”
And Ms Cooper said bluntly that Labour wants to cut immigration, or at least to cut it compared to the numbers that came in during the last decade.
She said: “The pace and scale of immigration – and particularly low skilled immigration – was too great and it is right to bring it down.”
Of course, Ms Cooper also highlighted the contribution immigrants make to the UK. But the overall tone of her comments marked a change from Labour’s traditional stance.
Indeed, Labour now claims that being too keen on immigration – talking about the benefits to the economy without mentioning the downsides – is actually a right-wing approach taken by free-market extremists. She said: “It is classic laissez-faire, with little regard for the impact on people’s lives.”
What has sparked this new approach? Partly, of course, it’s simply the fact that there’s an election coming up.
But more specifically, it’s the threat of UKIP that has got Labour worried.
One recent poll found that 12 per cent of voters said they intended to vote UKIP at the next election – and the figure for West Midlands specifically was the same, at 12 per cent (and 16 per cent of those who said they were likely actually to vote).
They’re not all defectors from the Conservative Party. One in 20 who say they plan to vote UKIP in 2015 was a Labour voter in 2010.
And what do UKIP voters care about? The same poll found they put “controlling immigration” as their top priority – with the economy second, and Europe in third place.
Immigration is back on the agenda – for every party.
Document EVEMONL020140414ea4e0018h
