{"newspaper":"City AM","id:"2818"}
____
Features
As net migration rose in the year to September, does the UK have a working immigration policy?
376 words
28 February 2014
City AM
CITYMO
1; National
19
English
Copyright 2014. CITY AM.   
YES Douglas McWilliams One of the reasons the UK economy is set to overtake Germany in the medium term is our demographic profile. In part, this can be put down to the fact that we are having more children, but migration will play a crucial role. Migration has three benefits: it provides skills where they are needed; the mix of cultures stimulates creativity; and finally, an argument which is anathema to my left-wing friends, boosting the labour supply helps keep wages close to the sweet spot - high enough to create spending power, and low enough for decent profits. Of course, not all immigration boosts the economy. So-called benefits tourism doesn't, although it is far less common than some of the tabloids would have us believe. And to get the best value from immigration, we need to invest in infrastructure to match the extra activity. But the higher GDP growth that immigration helps provide can easily pay for this.
Douglas McWilliams is executive chairman of the Centre for Economic and Business Research.
NO Sam Bowman Unfortunately, this rise seems like a small blip in the trend towards a more closed labour market. Non-EU immigration is way down compared to ten years ago, and student visa issuances have fallen by a third since 2010. One of the many problems with the net migration cap is that it counts both non-EU immigration, which we can restrict, and EU immigration, which we can't. That means that any rise in EU immigration will have to be offset by even more restrictions on non-EU visa issuances, making it even more difficult for British firms to attract high-skilled non-EU workers. It has created a zerosum game that puts firms looking to hire non-EU workers at a huge disadvantage. And restricting student visas is kneecapping the education sector. Foreign students were worth £10.2bn to the UK economy in 2011, but student visas are down by 32 per cent since 2010. It makes no sense to strangle the education industry, or the wider economy, like this.
Sam Bowman is research director at the Adam Smith Institute.
Document CITYMO0020140228ea2s0001x
