{"newspaper":"City AM","id:"1033"}
____
News
European election: stakes are high as polls tighten
Kate McCann   
1,519 words
19 May 2014
City AM
CITYMO
1; National
14,15
English
Copyright 2014. CITY AM.   
It's not just Ukip leader Nigel Farage's reputation at stake when the nation goes to the ballot box this week, writes Kate McCann
WHEN the nation goes to the polls this Thursday to vote in the European elections, it won't just be Nigel Farage nervously awaiting the result.
The Ukip leader is hoping his party can snatch victory from the hands of the Conservatives, having come second last time around. But the other party leaders have their own reasons to feel slightly uneasy.
Interestingly, it's not David Cameron who will be feeling the most pressure. Instead, Labour's Ed Miliband will be watching anxiously, hoping that his party has done well enough to come out of the election claiming some kind of victory.
If he can't, it will form the latest in a series of heavy blows to Miliband's credibility as leader ahead of the general election; adding fuel to claims that Labour has ignored Ukip for too long in the hope that the party will leech votes from the Conservatives.
Evidence that Ukip support in the north of the country is growing, an area where Labour traditionally picks up votes, has come at the same time as calls from within the party to focus more attention on Ukip, rather than the Lib Dems, reach fever-pitch.
The Lib Dems themselves have long known they are likely to suffer heavy losses, with leader Nick Clegg claiming his stance as the only pro-European in the pack was a calculated political gamble. Yet while Clegg might be content to sit back and wait for the bad news when the results roll in next Sunday night, his party may not be so keen.
Speaking to the BBC's Andrew Marr yesterday, Clegg said the Lib Dems would remain united no matter what the result.
"Most Liberal Democrats are immensely proud of our resilience and our unity, and that despite the endless breathless predictions that we are seeing again right now we have delivered." But the coalition spat between the Tories' Michael Gove and Lib Dem David Laws in the Department for Education and claims of hissy fits in the wake have served to undermine his steady-hand leadership style. Whispers abound about whether Clegg will lead the party into 2015. EU election annihilation could speed the process along. Questions are being asked of David Cameron too. Speculation about whether the Tory leader will have the nerve to stick to his message on immigration, rather than swerve off-course in a bid to win back factions of his core vote, is gathering pace. Though the Prime Minister may find it easier than most to brush off EU election defeat, with two recent general election polls putting the Conservatives out in front with months still to go.
And what of Ukip? Farage may be tying himself in knots over claims he is a racist, but the scandal doesn't seem to have hit his poll ratings much at all.
While pollsters by and large see a vote for Ukip as a protest vote against the main political parties, a wave of practice-run election euphoria could be just what Farage needs to build momentum for the real deal in May next year.
On the road with Grant Shapps: The Tory touring Britain in the fight against Ukip CHAIRMAN of the Conservative party Grant Shapps has the unenviable task of touring the country getting the party's election message out, and it's obvious when he steps off the train in Kingston that he's done this a million times before.
A quick picture outside the station leads us to a short walking tour of local small businesses."You build up a patchwork pattern of what's going on around the country," he says.
On polling he is tight lipped, but it's clear Shapps is up for the fight Ukip has brought to his door over Europe. "Where the hell were Ukip when David Cameron negotiated a cut in the UK's contribution to Europe?" he asks angrily. "They voted against the cut. They refuse to deliver even when they can." He is frustrated by Nigel Farage's oversimplification of the EU debate, warning the question is too complex for the answer to be immediate exit.
Shapps is confident that the government will stick it out in coalition for at least the next few months, though in the same breath he insists there is "no love lost" between the two parties.
City A.M. joins Chuka Umunna: a Brexit would be catastrophic for London firms WALKING around Labourstronghold Burnt Oak with shadow business secretary Chuka Umunna feels a bit like knowing a minor celebrity. Some people clasp his hand and snap selfies, others brush past uninterested.
"I don't want to be the shadow secretary, I want to be the real thing!" Umunna tells one couple who run a curtain shop on the high street. Then he would be able to do something about the high business rates that threaten to close their shop, he says.
The couple, historic Labour supporters, demand to know what exactly Umunna would do and seem reasonably satisfied after a five minute chat. "It's good that you come and ask what the problems are so you know how to solve them," the owner says.
Umunna is clear that while the EU elections are important, the locals matter far more to Labour. "Traditionally the EU elections have been used to make a point and protest vote, which is a shame," he says, adding that the biggest danger for the City is withdrawal from the EU. "Under Ed's leadership we've got to a point where it's a real prospect that we could be in government this time next year. The local elections are a good measure of how likely that is."
THE RISE OF UKIP The UK independence party has seen its popularity rise in the European elections steadily over a number of years. In 1999 the party came fourth overall in the UK; in 2004 it climbed to third and last time around, in 2009, the party improved its share of the vote to come out in second place. Joe Twyman, YouGov's head of political and social research, doesn't think it would be a big surprise if Ukip come out on top this time around. "People feel detached from the EU elections so they are more likely to use it as a protest vote, but turnout is the big unknown here and it will have a huge impact on the results," he said, adding that the last week in the run up to the election can make all the difference. Leader Nigel Farage may wish this wasn't the case, as his party appears to have run into trouble on an almost daily basis at the minute. Over the weekend Farage was forced to defend himself after being called racist for his comments about Romanian people living in the UK.
THE LIB DEM GAMBLE Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg has always acknowledged that taking a strong position on Europe is a political gamble. The party backs a close relationship with the EU in a climate of increasing dissatisfaction from voters, largely focused on immigration. Yesterday Clegg said Nigel Farage's mask is beginning to slip, telling the BBC's Andrew Marr: "Behind the beerswilling bonhomie is a really nasty view of the world". But the fact that most commentators believe Farage won the live TV debate against Clegg over Europe in April must surely sting. "I like to think that because I decided to take Nigel Farage on ... that's one of the reasons he's being subject to more scrutiny. That's why you''re seeing the mask slip and it's revealing an extremely nasty view of modern Britain," Clegg said yesterday. The Lib Dems are expected to lose a number of seats in the elections, with polls consistently awarding the party around six or seven per cent of the vote. The most recent poll put Clegg's party in a tight race with the Greens for fourth place.
WILL UK BUSINESSES VOTE? ? In an FTI Consulting poll, 68 per cent of over 6,000 UK businesses said they think EU membership is beneficial to them. ? 62 per cent of those asked said they felt most of the campaigning about the EU election has been negative, not positive.
? According to the survey, 77 per cent of business owners will vote, while six per cent definitely won't.
Labour's Ed Miliband will be watching anxiously, hoping that his party has done well enough to claim some kind of victory '
HOW LIKELY ARE UK BUSINESSES TO VOTE IN THE EU ELECTIONS? % Likely to vote Unlikely to vote Definitely not voting SOURCE: FIT CONSULTING (OVER 6,000 BUSINESSES WERE POLLED)
THE EUROPEAN ELECTIONS IN NUMBERS: WHO IS LIKELY TO WIN IN THE EU ELECTIONS? ICM Yougov ComRes Opinium 35 15 5 Labour Lib Dem UKIP Conservative
Document CITYMO0020140519ea5j0000v
