{"newspaper":"City AM","id:"259"}
____
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Is Nick Clegg right that the UK will only claw back minor powers in an EU renegotiation?
381 words
12 May 2014
City AM
CITYMO
1; National
21
English
Copyright 2014. CITY AM.   
YES Ruth Lea The Prime Minister has outlined a list of seven changes to stop Britain being "sucked into a United States of Europe". They include demands for reforming the EU's immigration and trade policies, freeing business from "red tape", and an end to "ever closer union". These are laudable and quite radical aims which, if delivered, would be worthwhile. But sadly there seems little prospect they will be delivered (setting aside the issue of the outcome of the 2015 election). Any negotiated changes are likely to be minor. Bluntly, there is little appetite for any major concessions to Britain by the EU's political elite, which is all but consumed by the Eurozone - the project from which Britain resolutely stands apart. Even Germany's Angela Merkel, who is well-disposed towards Britain, has said those who expected "fundamental reform" were in "for a disappointment". Commission president Jose Manuel Barroso was even blunter, saying that Cameron's ambitions were "doomed to failure".
Ruth Lea is economic adviser to the Arbuthnot Banking Group.
NO Christopher Howarth Nick Clegg has set himself up against Ukip's Nigel Farage as the "In" candidate come what may. But both are in total agreement that David Cameron's renegotiation policy will fail, with Clegg saying it will only be "mild" and "minor". This is unsurprising, as both have a vested interest in renegotiation failing. For Clegg, powers flowing back to the national level is anathema. And for Farage, reform gets in the way of his rush for the exit. Confusing the issue is the fact Cameron has not said what he wants to reform. He has outlined some areas, including powers flowing back to member states, less regulation, more free trade, and reform of benefits for EU migrants. But success in these areas will be difficult to discern. That leaves Cameron with a dilemma. Ask for too much, and Clegg will either object or say he has failed if he does not achieve it. Ask for too little, and he will not be able to persuade the British people things have changed before his 2017 referendum. Christopher Howarth is senior policy analyst at Open Europe.
Document CITYMO0020140512ea5c0000z
