{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2912"}
____
News
Pictured: Brazilian rent boy, 19, whose sex and drugs claims forced Tory MP to resign as Minister's aide
BRENDAN CARLIN and KIERAN CORCORAN   
985 words
30 March 2014
17:11
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Rogerio Santos said Mark Menzies paid for sex and asked him for drugs
* Santos told a Sunday newspaper he met Menzies on a gay escort site
* Says he was later asked to get hold of class-B drug methedrone
* He quit after claims put to him but said many of the allegations were untrue
* Tory source said Menzies would be 'getting help with personal issues'
* Menzies entered Commons in 2010 and worked for minister Alan Duncan
* Tory colleagues today downplayed the impact of his 'very sad' resignation
This is the Brazilian rent boy whose allegations about being paid for sex and drugs forced Tory MP Mark Menzies to resign as a ministerial aid last night.
Rogerio Santos, a teenage rent boy from Sao Paulo, made claims to a Sunday newspaper that Mr Meznies paid for his services and later asked him to get hold of class-B drugs methedrone, reports said.
Mr Menzies, 42, is said to have met Mr Santos on a gay escort website. It is also claimed that he showed him around Parliament.
Last night, Mr Menzies, a parliamentary aide (PPS) to International Development Minister Alan Duncan, said he was standing down from his post to fight ‘untrue’ allegations.
He said: ‘I have decided to resign as a PPS after a series of allegations were made against me in a Sunday newspaper. A number of these allegations are not true and I look forward to setting the record straight in due course.’
In reports last night, Mr Santos, said to be 19, claimed the Tory MP had paid him to have sex and asked him to obtain methedrone.
Texts on the Brazilian’s mobile phone apparently revealed messages asking him for full details about the quality of the drug and how much it cost.
Mr Santos, who lives in the Brazilian city Sao Paulo, said: ‘I have been having sex with a Conservative MP for money. Mark asked me to buy methedrone. I have personal messages of him talking to me about drugs.’
Mr Santos also reportedly claimed he had overstayed on his student visa and was in the UK illegally, although it is understood Mr Menzies was unaware of his immigration status.
The Brazilian maintained he was taken around Parliament by the MP and still has a ‘visitor’s permit’ but there was no suggestion Mr Menzies had broken any Commons rules.
Last night, a Tory source said the MP would be ‘getting help with personal issues’ in the wake of the claims.
And today fellow Conservative MPs downplayed the importance of Mr Menzies's resignation, saying that although it was 'very sad' it was a personal matter and would not affect the rest of the Government.
Speaking to Sky News this morning, David Ruffley MP said: 'It's always sad when a career like this gets on to the front page of a tabloid. But Government rocked? I don't think so.'
And Defence Secretary Philip Hammond told the BBC: 'It's always very sad when people are involved in personal issues that impact on their careers but that's a matter for the person concerned.'
The former chair of Mr Menzies's local association yesterday said that he was 'very shocked' by the allegations and 'needs time' to work out his response.
Councillor Brenda Ackers, who recently stepped down as the chair of Fylde Conservatives said: 'He's obviously very shocked and needs time to consider his answer to these allegations.
'He has the total support of myself and two other members of the management team, they both support Mark also.
'The wider membership has not been spoken to, I think probably a lot of them don't know anything yet.'
Roman Catholic Mr Menzies, who is single, entered the Commons at the last General Election as the MP for Fylde in Lancashire. He was brought up by his mother on the west coast of Scotland. His father, who was in the Merchant Navy, died before he was born.
Councillor Brenda Ackers, the chair of Fylde Conservatives until Friday evening when, in an unrelated event, she stepped down from the position, said: "He's obviously very shocked and needs time to consider his answer to these allegations.
"He has the total support of myself and two other members of the management team, they both support Mark also.
"The wider membership has not been spoken to, I think probably a lot of them don't know anything yet."
Asked how members will react, Cllr Ackers said: "Very upset I imagine, both on Mark's behalf and the fact that we like things to run smoothly in Fylde."
Cllr Ackers said she, "can't possibly predict" how local voters would view the allegations.
Mr Menzies won an assisted place at an independent school before studying at Glasgow University, and he joined Marks & Spencer as a trainee in 1994.
According to his website, he has been a Conservative Party member since he was 16 and in 2008 was selected to fight Fylde, a rock-solid Tory seat.
He won with a comfortable majority at the 2010 Election and quickly became an aide to Energy Minister Charles Hendry.
In the 2012 reshuffle, he became PPS to Housing Minister Mark Prisk, and last autumn he was moved again to become PPS to International Development Minister Alan Duncan.
Mr Duncan is the first openly gay Conservative MP.
Mr Menzies told the Commons last year that he had intended to abstain on the historic vote to legalise same-sex marriages but then voted in favour.
‘I came here to abstain, but I have listened to the debate like I have listened to no other, and it is now my intention not to abstain, but to support the Bill,’ he said.
Document DAMONL0020140329ea3t0063j
