{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1100"}
____
  
Features
365 DAYS TO SAVE THE COUNTRY FROM RED ED
BY DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
643 words
7 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A YEAR from today, the country will go to the polls in a General Election about which the only thing that can be confidently predicted is the date, fixed by law for the first time in our history.
That apart, this paper finds it hard to recall a time when there were so many confusing factors to obscure the likely outcome of the contest.
If the normal rules of politics applied, the Tories would by now be clear favourites for a second term in office.
After all, the Chancellor's strategy has been vindicated - as the OECD confirmed yesterday, when it upgraded its growth forecasts yet again, predicting that Britain will be the developed world's fastest growing economy in 2014.
True, the fast-inflating housing bubble poses a threat to the recovery. But with 100,000 jobs a month being created, the economy has performed far more robustly than most dared hope four years ago.
Despite all this, however, the Tories remain stuck below 35 per cent in the polls - trailing the party that caused much of the trouble in the first place.
Not that Labour's modest lead gives Ed Miliband much to celebrate. Indeed, on the crucial questions of leadership and economic stewardship, he remains consistently (and, as most would agree, deservedly) behind the Tories.
Can he maintain Labour's overall lead until polling day? Or, as the moment of truth approaches, will voters recoil from trusting his party again?
As for the Lib Dems, it seems safe to predict that they will suffer a hammering at the polls, after trading their principles for office. The only questions are how many votes they will lose - and to whom.
Which brings us to the two greatest imponderables of the 12 months ahead. One is the Scottish referendum - and if that goes the nationalists' way (God forbid!), the landscape will change so dramatically that all bets will be off.
The other is the Ukip phenomenon. Without doubt, Nigel Farage's raggle-taggle crew will perform strongly in this month's council elections, while they are favourites to top the poll for the European Parliament on the same day.
But can they maintain their momentum until May 2015? Or will their support melt away, as it did after the Euro-elections of 2004 and 2009?
What is clear is that David Cameron cannot rely on good economic news alone to bring electoral success, as in the past.
Over the coming year, he must persuade voters his party is not merely economically reliable but actually capable of delivering a better life for them and their families.
Similarly he should trumpet Tory successes - from Iain Duncan Smith's groundwork for welfare reform to Michael Gove's progress on school standards.
He must also focus mercilessly on the dangers of Mr Miliband's plan to drag Britain back into a 1970s nightmare of price controls, nationalisation, class warfare and industrial strife.
But the Prime Minister needs to convince Conservatives who have defected to Ukip that he is on their side - ramming home the messages that he is truly determined to control immigration and that only the Tories will deliver a euro-referendum.
There remains a substantial small-c conservative majority in Britain, believing in patriotism, self-reliance, hard work and the family. Mr Cameron has 365 days to unite it behind him.
An insult to justice
NOBODY should criticise the police for taking allegations of historic sex abuse seriously. But it was indefensible to keep Freddie Starr on bail for 18 months before the case against him was dropped.
Indeed, yesterday's photographs of him graphically illustrate the heavy toll on his health inflicted by his wait for a decision.
This was punishment without trial - and an insult to justice.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140506ea570000k
