{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1286"}
____
News
'We can get our country back': Farage launches patriotic push for Euro election victory but Ukip's new Love Britain slogan was last used by the BNP
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
675 words
28 February 2014
12:51
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage today claimed he was leading a ‘patriotic fightback’ to take Britain out of the European Union.
The Ukip leader told voters ‘don’t get mad, get even’ as he boasted his party would win Brussels elections in May this year.
But his vow that ‘together we can get our country back’ was undermined as the party unveiled a new slogan ‘Love Britain’ which has previously been used by the far-right BNP.
Speaking at Ukip’s spring conference in Torquay, Mr Farage claimed his party poses the biggest threat to the political establishment in modern times.
He said: ‘We have got 84 days until these European elections. I want us to be the patriotic fightback. I want us to be the people who say we are proud of our country.’
Attacking the political establishment which he says dominates the other parties, he added: ‘Don’t get mad, get even. Vote Ukip on May 22.
‘We carry the hopes now of countless millions on our shoulders. We are in politics because we believe in our country and we believe in our people. Together we can get our country back.’
He said that immigration has now become the ‘number one issue in British politics’ and Britain cannot have its own immigration policy while it is a member of the European Union.
’80 per cent of the British people did not want borders to come down with Romania and Bulgaria, but they did, we have lost control and we want to take it back,’ he said.
LOVE BRITAIN, VOTE UKIP... OR BNP FARAGE RED-FACED OVER SLOGAN
Ukip today launched its new election slogan 'Love Britain' - and quickly learned it was last used by the British National Party.
Nigel Farage has repeatedly tried to distance his party from the far right BNP.
In the past, the BNP used the slogan 'Love Britain Vote BNP' in 2010, together with an image of Marmite.
Now Ukip has plastered it across large banners on the stage at its conference
It is also on the cover of a conference brochure
A Ukip spokeswoman said Ukip was 'reclaiming' the line by using it.
He went on: ‘In fact, we've sunk so low as a nation that we now cannot even deport foreign criminals without the say-so of a foreign court.
‘Our ruling classes have lost confidence in this country and its people.
‘That lack of confidence is reflected in the way our own country is governed too, and no better example of that can be the recent crisis that we've had over the floods.’
Ukip are expected to beat the Tories in May's European Parliament elections, and could push Labour into second.
But the party has been left embarassed by the views of some of its members, including a councillor who suggested flooding had been caused by gay marriage.
But Mr Farage insisted his candidates could 'say what they like' because they represent a broad base of public opinion.
He said: 'These elections, in many ways, will be an opportunity for us to tell the political class where to go.'
The Ukip leader said that since the 2010 elections, candidates were now of a 'quality and calibre' the party could be proud of.
He said: 'Despite repeated attempts to ridicule us, our people come from the real world, they've got real-life experiences, unlike the political classes.
'And they're people who have already had jobs - how about that.'
He has faced criticism for claiming that women who take time off to have children are 'worth less' to employers.
To counter claims that the party is sexist, Mr Farage highlighted increased numbers of women in the party and the prominent place on candidate lists of many women.
And he predicted that the next party leader to be a woman would be in Ukip.
Document DAMONL0020140228ea2s005hw
