{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1103"}
____
TV&Showbiz
The morning after Met Gala: Marion Cotillard emerges from her Manhattan hotel in orange Ray-Bans and dotted denim
CASSIE CARPENTER   
319 words
7 May 2014
02:37
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
She was up late partying with Johnny Depp, Stella McCartney, and numerous A-listers at the Met Gala.
And Marion Cotillard emerged from her Manhattan hotel Tuesday wearing sun-blotting Ray-Bans with garish orange iridium lenses.
Otherwise, the 38-year-old Oscar winner was the picture of Parisian chic in her navy coat, dotted denim, and black stilettos.
SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO
The Midnight in Paris star appeared fresh-faced and pulled her fringed bob into a fuss-free updo.
Marion - who never had her ears pierced - rocked a single Chopard clip-on earring for the glamorous fashion celebration.
Cotillard looked sophisticated with her sideswept updo, plunging navy Dior cocktail dress, and quirky chrome wedges.
Not seen Tuesday was her partner of seven years Guillaume Canet, who will next appear in Stephen Frears' upcoming Lance Armstrong biopic.
The French live-in couple - who never married - share a son Marcel, who turns three this month.
The La Vie en Rose actress will next star in the 1920s-set romantic drama The Immigrant - hitting US theatres May 16 - alongside Joaquin Phoenix and Jeremy Renner.
Marion will also head up the French drama Two Days, One Night, which premieres at the Cannes Film Festival on May 21.
She is also in the midst of shooting her role as Lady Macbeth opposite Michael Fassbender's Macbeth for The Weinstein Company's 2015 remake.
'He'd been away fighting and when he returns, we see it's a relationship that's broken down,' Fassbender told MailOnline.
'They lost a child, and there wasn’t time for them to grieve because he’s been away campaigning...Lady M is desperate for that reconnection, and briefly they do. And, of course, the doorway has been opened to darkness and to violence.'
Document DAMONL0020140507ea57000e1
