{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"64"}
____
News
Somali-born Captain Phillips actor stopped from re-entering US over his criminal history after flying to Britain to accept BAFTA award
SARA NATHAN and ASHLEY COLLMAN   
1,018 words
25 March 2014
19:50
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Acting newcomer Barkhad Abdi traveled to London last month to accept the BAFTA award for best supporting actor for his role in Captain Phillips
* On returning to the U.S., the Somali-born Abdi was briefly stopped by customs officials for his lengthy criminal record
* Abdi faces a possible hearing this week with customs officials
* He was arrested and charged with drugs possession in August 2012
* The former limo driver from Minneapolis was jailed twice previously with offenses ranging from card fraud to giving cops a fraudulent name
* Abdi plans to move to LA to continue his acting career, though he hasn't been able to secure steady work yet
* In addition to winning the BAFTA award, he was nominated for a Golden Globe and an Oscar 
Captain Phillips actor Barkhad Abdi was stopped by immigration officials returning to the U.S. last month after traveling to London to receive the BAFTA award for best supporting actor.
The Somali-born actor who made his first film appearance as a pirate involved in the 2009 hijacking of the Mearsk Alabama, was flagged for his criminal history including arrests for drug possession and credit card fraud.
Abdi, a permanent resident of the U.S., now faces a hearing with Customs and Border protection this week that carries the possibility of deportation, a source told the Star Tribune.
However, that same source said it was unlikely 28-year-old Abdi would actually be deported since customs officials usually only do that in the most serious cases.
Scroll down for video
But, as MailOnline has learned, Barkhad has also been charged with a number of offenses ranging from card fraud to giving a police officer a fraudulent name.
On August 18, 2012, Barkhad was arrested by Black Hawk County Sheriff's County Office in Iowa, along with four others after cops were called to a disturbance on MM 60 near Gilberstville.
A police report from the time states: 'On arrival, two subjects were holding another subject down on the ground after he had allegedly ingested a plant leave material called 'Khat' and drank a partial bottle of liquid Tylenol.
'The combination of the two caused the subject to lose control of his faculties and attempt to jump out of a moving vehicle.
'Deputies during their investigation found suspected Marijuana in the vehicle as well as a plastic baggie containing the suspected 'Khat'.
Under his full name Barkhad Abdinasir Abdi, the actor and his friends were all charged with Possession of Marijuana and Possession of Khat and transported to the Black Hawk County Jail. Cops were assisted at the scene by fire departments, Waterloo Police K-9 Unit and the Tri-County Drug Task Force.
The charge was later dismissed by Iowa Court.
It was not the first time Barkhad had been in trouble with the law. On February 2, 2004, he was sentenced to 90 days in jail and given one year of probation for giving a police officer a false name of another person, and buying liquor aged under 21. He was also fined $1000.
The following year, on June 1, 2005, Barkhad was charged with financial transaction card fraud and sentenced to 200 days in jail and two years probation, alongside being given a $500 fine.
It is all a far cry to where Barkhad now finds himself: hobnobbing with Hollywood's A list at parties and award ceremonies.
He beat off stiff competition to win the role of real-life Somali pirate Abduwali Muse, who led the 2009 Maersk Alabama hijacking, an incident during which merchant mariner Captain Richard Phillips was taken hostage by pirates in the Indian Ocean.
Having won his role at an open casting call and barely realizing his performance would be a hit, Barkhad even went back to working at his brother Guled Abdi's T-Mobile shop in the 24 Mall in Minneapolis before the movie came out.
He now plans to move to Los Angeles to further his career next month and has taken on an acting agent.
Captain Phillips has gone on to make more than $217million at the box office, far exceeding its budget of $55million.
Abdi made $65,000 for his starring role but has so far not seen any bonuses or extra paychecks despite the film's success.
During awards season, he was even forced to stay at a low-brow hotel by the airport so he could be near a friend who would drive him around for free.
However, he is in talks to star as marathon runner Willie Mtolo who develops an unlikely friendship with a bar owner, once sanctions against South African athletes competing internationally were lifted. 
Speaking about a future in acting, he told the New Yorker: 'Yeah, I want to keep on doing it... any role, as long as it’s a good story, it doesn’t matter... I'm moving to L.A. and I’m reading some scripts now, specifically there’s a TV show that I’m reading for.'
In addition to winning the best supporting actor BAFTA, Abdi was nominated for a Golden Globe and Oscar but lost out to Jared Leto at both award ceremonies.
After receiving the Oscar nomination,a stunned Barkhad told the  Wall Street Journal : 'It was shocking, honestly - I was jumping up and down.'
And he said: 'My life’s been changing since this movie came out, and it’s just for the better. And it’s getting better day by day. Today’s the best you got.'
He told Entertainment Weekly: 'I wasn’t sure of myself. I wasn’t a complete actor. I was just auditioning with no previous experience. Paul Greengrass gets all the credit, honestly. He’s the one that believed in me and pushed me and, any time that I messed up, he was the one that would find a way to make me understand it so I could be that character.
Document DAMONL0020140325ea3p0066g
