{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2531"}
____
  
News
WORKING CLASS HIT HARDEST BY INFLUX, SAYS TORY MINISTER
BY    
742 words
6 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
6
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
MASS immigration has delivered cheap labour for a 'wealthy metropolitan elite' while making life harder for 'ordinary, hard-working people', a Tory minister will warn today.
Better-off families have benefited from cheap builders, tradesmen and nannies from overseas, James Brokenshire will say. But he will add that cheerleaders of uncontrolled immigration who view 'foreign labour as a cheap commodity' need reminding that it also 'forces wages down and house prices up and puts pressure on social cohesion and public services'.
In his first speech as immigration minister, Mr Brokenshire will also attack the Lib Dem Business Secretary Vince Cable for saying a sharp increase in net immigration was 'good news'. In a sign of rapidly escalating Coalition tensions, Mr Cable will deliver a speech of his own on immigration in London tonight.
The Lib Dem is planning to accuse critics of large-scale immigration of wanting to drag Britain back to 'medieval' days.
He will say he is 'intensely relaxed' about people bringing skills to Britain - and suggests the public would think the same if it was better informed.
Mr Brokenshire's speech is part of a concerted Tory effort to establish themselves as the party of hard-working Britons. He will tell the Demos think-tank: 'Some have tried to claim that this rapid increase is somehow "good" for the country. Well, just like the Home Secretary, I disagree.
'For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour; or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services - but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country. We are changing that and building a system that benefits all.'
The Tory minister will say the Government's drive to reduce immigration has never been simply an economic one.
His speech echoes that of former Labour welfare minister Frank Field, who last month called for curbs on benefits for young people to encourage them to fight immigrants for jobs. He said the influx of migrants has led to a Downton Abbey-style culture where rich foreigners hire fellow countrymen for roles once done by young working-class Britons.
Mr Field - a former poverty adviser to David Cameron - wrote in the London Evening Standard that the 'unemployment figures contain one particularly disturbing element - the stubbornly high number of young people who are still out of work, 917,000 of them.
'The awful truth is that huge numbers of unemployed young people either don't try, or lose out to new arrivals eager to work,' he claimed. 'A new servant class, equal to that of Downton Abbey times, has been recreated. It's not upstairs and downstairs any more, though. The elite bring the servant class in when they want cleaning done, ironing, gardening, decorating and so on.'
Mr Cable, by contrast, will tell business leaders that it would do great harm if the Government gave the impression that Britain was 'closed for business'. He will say: 'Bearing down on economic migration is a clear example of a restriction on trade. In medieval times, guilds used to prevent travelling artisans from plying their trade outside their native area, with a deadening effect on competition and innovation.
'What was true then is true now. Bear down on immigrants, and you lose some of the most dynamic, innovative and imaginative workers in your economy. The costs are huge.' Mr Cable has clashed repeatedly with Home Secretary Theresa May over border controls. He has also found himself out of step with public opinion - with eight of ten voters wanting further restrictions on immigration. 'Uncontrolled mass immigration can force wages down and house prices up and put pressure on social cohesion and public services.
'And let me be clear - it can also cause displacement in the labour market.'
But, controversially, he will blame 'scare stories' about migrants shopping for benefits and claim the public are not being asked the right questions by opinion pollsters.
Mr Cable will say the issue is 'politically toxic' and those who put their heads above the parapet need a 'reinforced tin hat'.
He will then add: 'I don't think anyone is arguing for unrestricted immigration - in particular of unskilled labour.
'But we just have to stop treating people coming to work here as if they are a problem. We need to kill all the scare stories.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140305ea360001k
