{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1980"}
____
  
Features
I'M NO FARAGE FAN. BUT CALLING THOSE THINKING OF VOTING UKIP RACIST IS DANGEROUS FOLLY
BY STEPHEN GLOVER   
1,313 words
30 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Are the three main parties being driven mad by panic? I ask this because an organisation that draws its support from the Tories, Labour and the Lib Dems will tomorrow condemn Ukip as racist.
The all-party Migration Matters Trust is launching a campaign backed by posters and social media. Its intervention comes days after the Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt unwisely condemned Ukip as an unpatriotic and divisive party that attracts racists.
There is no mystery about what is happening. The major parties are rattled by Ukip's strong performance in opinion polls — which show it either ahead of the field, or neck-and-neck with Labour for the European elections, which are only three weeks away.
Understandable though it may be, I can think of no strategy more likely to backfire against the mainstream parties, and to boost Ukip's prospects. It suggests they have learnt nothing from the Ukip phenomenon.
Offensive
I accept, of course, that the party harbours a few racists. In the past week, a Ukip functionary has been suspended after tweeting criticisms of Nigerians and Islam, and a candidate has suggested that the black comedian Lenny Henry 'should emigrate to a black country'. This came after Mr Henry said there should be more people from ethnic minorities on television.
But the offensive comments of a handful of Ukip members do not prove that the party as a whole is racist, or that the policies it is putting before the British people could be reasonably so described.
And, much as I admire him, I doubt the contention of the Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith that such embarrassing stories will damage Ukip's credibility before next month's elections.
The party's hand-out, which came through my door yesterday morning (I have so far received nothing similar from any of the major parties), says Ukip wants Britain to 'take back control' of its borders. The party's leader, Nigel Farage, has recently suggested that net immigration should be less than 50,000 a year.
Is that a racist aspiration? I hardly think so. At the 2010 general election, David Cameron made a remarkably similar pledge — that he would bring down net annual immigration to 'the tens of thousands'. In the year to September 2013, the figure was 212,000, an increase of 60,000 over the previous 12 months.
It is Ukip's unanswerable argument that the Government has failed to fulfil its promise largely because it is unable to curb immigration from other EU countries, the more so now that quotas for Bulgarians and Romanians have been lifted by Brussels.
And that leads Mr Farage to the perfectly reasonable conclusion that Britain will never be able to limit immigration in the way most of its inhabitants wish so long as we remain a member of the EU. Needless to say, Ukip has lots of other reasons for wanting to leave the organisation.
There are some people such as the Business Secretary Vince Cable who seemingly yearn for even more immigration than we currently have. They're entitled to their opinion, but it is almost certainly not shared by the great majority of British people.
Wanting to control immigration is not racist. Labour now generally concedes this point, though I'm not sure the Lib Dems do. The Tories have long agreed with it. Why, then, should Ukip be branded racist for arguing in favour of what is supposed to be a mainstream view?
It suggests to me that the three main parties have still not fully grasped how many people feel about the mass immigration that has taken place in this country since New Labour came to power in 1997.
For all their apparent concern, they still do not properly understand how ordinary people — including descendants of recent immigrants — feel when immigration leads to their schools being filled beyond bursting point, and their hospital services being stretched almost to the point of collapse.
Nor do they truly comprehend how British-born people eager to work respond when they are undercut by incomers. Many low-paid jobs done by immigrants would admittedly not have attracted native workers, but this is by no means true of all of them.
Mr Farage argues that the main parties are metropolitan in their thinking, and out-of-touch with the concerns of ordinary people. Could there be better evidence of this than their readiness to accuse Ukip of 'racism' when its views about immigration are shared by many millions of voters who are not racist?
Indeed, in levelling this charge, the all-party Migration Matters Trust is not just traducing Ukip but the nearly one-third of voters who are telling pollsters they intend to vote for it next month.
In other words, the main parties are not only condemning Ukip as racist. They are also smearing a great swathe of the British people. This is not merely condescending. It is the very summit of political stupidity.
Unwise
We probably shouldn't be surprised that the anti-Ukip campaign is led by Barbara Roche, an immigration minister from 1999 to 2001, condemned by Labour colleagues for suggesting it was 'vile' of Romanian beggars on the London Underground to use their children to attract sympathy. She also offended the Left by using the word 'flood' to describe the arrival of large numbers of asylum seekers.
But Mrs Roche was, in fact, a proponent of mass immigration. Probably to restore her credentials on the Labour Left, she was as responsible as almost anyone for pioneering the 'open-door' policy, which led to a net influx of more than three million in a decade.
If the PR wallahs at Migration Matters Trust are so unwise as to let her off the leash, and allow her to speak on television or radio in support of a cause so dear to her heart, each excursion will probably be worth several tens of thousands of votes to Ukip.
I don't doubt there are plenty of good reasons for not voting for the party. Despite attempts to persuade us it is not a one-man band, Mr Farage looms very large. It wouldn't be surprising if success and power had gone to his head.
There is also undeniably a dearth of other sophisticated and competent politicians in the party. And whatever it may plead in its defence, its policies outside immigration and the EU are not convincing. Moreover, one would have to be deluded to believe that Farage & Co are capable of exercising real power.
Childish
Some people may be justifiably put off voting for Ukip simply because it evidently provides a home to at least a few nutters, though in that respect it is not necessarily unique among British political parties.
But its stated views are not racist, and it is childish for the Westminster parties to pretend that they are. No, it is worse than that. It is counterproductive. The more mainstream politicians castigate Ukip for having views that are widespread, the more they act as its recruiting sergeant.
Former Labour Home Secretary, Jacqui Smith, puts it very well in expressing her apprehensions about calling Ukip racist. She recalls Gordon Brown's infamously ham-fisted attack on the Rochdale pensioner Gillian Duffy in the 2010 general election campaign when he described her reservations about immigration as 'bigoted'. As Miss Smith observes, this did not go down well with Labour supporters.
Ukip is on the same wavelength as many decent voters who might normally back the Tories or Labour or even the Lib Dems. My strong advice to the main parties, and their cheerleaders in the media, is not to act and talk as though they think the British people are racist.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140429ea4u0000i
