{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3018"}
____
News
Federal government reminds educators they can't turn illegal immigrants away from public schools
FRANCESCA CHAMBERS   
513 words
9 May 2014
00:52
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* In 2011 the federal government told schools it could not deny children of suspected illegal immigrants a primary or secondary education
* The Departments of Justice and Education re-issued that guidance today after receiving complaints that schools were violating federal discrimination laws
* 'Public school districts have an obligation to enroll students regardless of immigration status and without discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin,' Attorney General Eric Holder reiterated in a statement
It's unacceptable to turn children of suspected illegal immigrants away from public schools, period, the Departments of Justice and Education said today.
The federal government have been telling schools this since 2011, but the Obama administration was forced to revisit the issue this week after they received more than a dozen complaints from across the country that public schools were acting unlawfully.
'Public school districts have an obligation to enroll students regardless of immigration status and without discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin,' Attorney General Eric Holder reiterated in a statement on Thursday.
Schools can require parents to provide proof of residency within a specific school district. They cannot require them to provide Social Security Numbers or Birth Certificates, the departments told school districts in a joint letter.
Furthermore, if a student's parent provides a foreign birth certificate, it cannot be used against the student. And if a school does ask for Social Security Numbers for other reasons, it must tell guardians that the information is voluntary.
Not only are such enrollment practices a violation of federal law, they could 'chill or discourage the participation, or lead to the exclusion, of students based on their or their parents’ or guardians’ actual or perceived citizenship or immigration status,' it says.
Besides, homeless children often do not have federal documentation proving their citizenry, either, the letter points out.
The letter goes on to remind education employees of the restrictions on discrimination laid out in the Civil Rights Act and Phyler v. Doe, a 1982 Supreme Court case that found it was unconstitutional that found that it was unfair to 'innocent children' to deny them the right to a primary and secondary education.
Education Secretary Arne Duncan told reporters that the departments decided to remind educators of enrollment procedures after 17 instances of abuse of the law were reported to the Office of Civil Rights.
'We want to be sure every school leader understands the legal requirements under the Constitution and federal laws, and it is our hope that this update will address some of the misperceptions out there,' Duncan said in a statement.
Immigrant reduction organization NumbersUSA criticized the Obama administration for encouraging people to violate federal immigration laws and protecting people living in the country illegally.
'It just seems to send a message to the world,''We are here to protect those who break immigration laws and we're going to do almost nothing to enforce it," ' the group's president, Roy Beck, told USA Today.
Document DAMONL0020140508ea5800a17
