{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"620"}
____
News
'Flip flops, the BBC, the shipping forecast, Prince George, cups of tea, gay marriage and queueing': Nick Clegg reveals why he loves modern Britain in attack on rivals who want to turn the clock back
MATT CHORLEY   
1,749 words
9 March 2014
12:25
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Lib Dem leader lists his favourite aspects of life in the UK
* Warns the fight is on for future of the country ahead of Euro elections
* Accuses Ukip's Nigel Farage of being acceptable face of backward-looking politics
The 'fight is on' for the future of the country, Nick Clegg warned today as he told voters why he loves modern Britain.
The Lib Dem leader named flip flops, cups of tea, Prince George, the BBC, football, the shipping forcast, the NHS and queueing as things which he loves about the country 'for all its contradictions'.
In a speech to his party conference in York, Mr Clegg took aim at rivals, including Ukip leader Nigel Farage as the pint-drinking, smiling face of an 'ungenerous, backwards-looking politics' sweeping across Britain which fuels 'bile and anger'.
The Lib Dems have used their spring conference to take the fight to Ukip, launching a campaign for May's elections to the European Parliament to present themselves as the only pro-EU party in the UK.
But in his speech closing the three-day gathering Mr Clegg sought to present a more optimistic vision for the future, pitching his party into a battle of 'hope not fear, the future not the past'.
He insisted the Lib Dems are the 'guardians of a modern, open and tolerant Britain', in contrast to political rivals who want to turn the clock back.
A week after Mr Farage used his speech to warn immigration means parts of the UK are now 'unrecognisable' and rail against people not speaking English on trains, Mr Clegg singled out gay marriage, Britain's role in founding the EU and multi-racial cities among the things to celebrate about the nation.
He told delegates: 'I love Britain. I love it for all its contradictions. I love that we are as modest as we are proud.
'I love the way we can cherish our traditions yet innovate relentlessly, churning out one ingenious invention after the next.'
He contrasted the nation's 'extraordinary pomp and ceremony' with an ability to 'retain a spiky irreverence towards its establishment'.
'A country where we line the streets waving our Union Jacks wildly to welcome the arrival of Prince George, and the next moment we're chuckling at Private Eye's front page: 'Woman Has Baby'.
He went on: 'I love that we insist on queuing when we go abroad, even when the locals don't. I love that the BBC and NHS are known and respected across the planet.
'I love that our cities are home to every race, religion, colour and language in existence.'
He said his Spanish wife Miriam, who was not at the conference, loves the 'the feeling of freedom you get in Britain simply doesn't exist anywhere else'.
'I love that the shipping forecast is listened to by insomniacs of all ages, right across the country, miles from the sea.
'I love how excited we get at the glimpse of any sun, insisting on staying out in our t-shirts and flip-flops – even when it's obviously still cold.
'I love living in a country synonymous with human rights and the rule of law.'
Burnishing his pro-EU credentials, he noted that it was British lawyers who drafted the European Convention on Human Rights and a British Prime Minister who helped launch the Single Market.
'I enjoy reminding my Coalition partners that it was a Prime Minister from their party at that,' he added in a dig at the Conservatives.
'I love that we do respond – the cliché is true – to every problem no matter how big or small with the same thing: a cup of tea. I love that, wherever you go in the world, you'll find football fans obsessed with the Premier League. 
NICK CLEGG'S LIST WHAT LIB DEM LEADER LIKES ABOUT BRITAIN
Nick Clegg used his speech to list the aspects of modern Britain which he loves. They included:
- The telephone
- The steam engine
- The jet engine
- The world wide web
- Oscar winning visual effects
- Theatre, fashion, music, film
- Pomp and ceremony
- Irreverence towards its establishment
- Prince George
- Private Eye
- Queuing
- The BBC
- The NHS
- Multicultural cities
- The feeling of freedom
- The shipping forecast
- T-shirts and flip-flops at the first glimpse of sun
- Human rights and the rule of law
- The European Convention on Human Rights and the Single Market
- A cup of tea
- The Premier League
- Gay marriage
'I love that we are a family of four different countries, each with their own characters, traditions and good-natured rivalries. And that's why I want to see – we all want to see – Scotland stay in our family of nations later this year.
'I look at what's happening in places like Russia, where the government is effectively criminalising homosexuality, and I love that Britain is a place where you can be gay and proud – and now you can get married too.'
Mr Clegg claimed the the biggest question of the time is 'how we protect the liberal values of this nation'.
In a direct appeal to the millions who have deserted the Lib Dems, Mr Clegg said: 'It doesn't matter, that's the past. What matters now is the kind of country you want to live in. The kind of nation you want us to be.
'Open not closed. In not out. Great Britain not little England. Forward not back. Hope not fear.
'The future not the past. If you have faith in this country, if you believe in Britain's values, if you still want this incredible island of ours to keep punching above our weight and shaping the world so that it is a better place, put the Liberal Democrats back in government again – let us protect the Britain you love.'
He did not name his opponent directly in the speech, but will leave delegates in no doubt about the risks of Mr Farage's populist appeal.
Mr Clegg warned: 'An ungenerous, backwards-looking politics has emerged in Britain. The politics of blame has found an acceptable face: it wears a big smile and looks like someone you could have a pint with down the pub.
'So I'm drawing a line in the sand. I am going to defend the tolerant and modern Britain we love, and I am going to start by showing people what's at stake at the upcoming European elections: do you want Britain in Europe, or out?
'That's the real question in May. One party wants out. Another is flirting with exit. The other lot don't have the courage of their convictions on this - they're saying nothing at all.
'The Liberal Democrats are now Britain's only party of in. The only party out there explaining the clear benefits of Britain's place in Europe. The only party giving people the facts.'
He will insisted not all voters like Mr Farage's anti-EU, anti-immigration message. 'There are plenty of people out there who don't want anger. They don't want bile. They want jobs. They want our country to have influence. They want opportunities. Ultimately they want hope.   
'And that, Liberal Democrats, is what it all comes down to. Hope. It's the oldest dividing line in politics – hope versus fear – and it's back.'
Mr Clegg will take on Mr Farage in two debates ahead of the contest, and in his speech to the Lib Dem spring conference in York, Mr Clegg will acknowledge the reasons behind the rise in Ukip's fortunes, which have seen them push his party into fourth place in opinion polls.
The Lib Dem leader said that 'shattering collapse of the basic assumptions by which successive governments have run our economy' on top of a 'crisis of confidence' about the West's future caused by the rise of China and other emerging nations had led to an 'entirely understandable but dangerous urge to turn inwards'.
He will say: 'If anyone doesn't believe it, just glance across the Channel at our European neighbours, where a number of extremist parties are on the rise.
'We are lucky. Thankfully we do not have the same extremism here in the UK. But that's not to say the fight isn't on for the future of our country too.'
Setting out why the Lib Dems are for remaining in the EU, he said: 'In, because Europe is our biggest export market and vital to British jobs. Because pulling up the drawbridge is the surest way to wreck our economic recovery.
'In because in the fight against climate change, and in a world where some of the biggest players are also the biggest polluters, Europe's nations can only make a difference if we work together.
'In because cooperation between our police forces is essential for catching the criminals who cross our borders. Crime crosses borders, so must we.
'In because Britain stands tallest in the world when we stand tall in Brussels, Paris and Berlin.'
David Cameron has set out plans to renegotiate the UK's links with Brussels and hold an in/out referendum on EU membership by the end of 2017 if he is returned to No 10 after the general election.
Mr Clegg acknowledged the case for change 'this isn't about some starry eyed affection for the EU - of course it needs reform'.
'But you can't change it with one foot out the door. You change it by taking your place at the table - which is where you protect Britain's national interest too.'
Mr Clegg also repeated his attacks on Labour for 'economic incompetence' and the Tories for 'widening inequality'.
'Two parties encumbered by the same old prejudices; straitjacketed by the same old ideologies,' he said.
'And whichever way you look at it, left or right, if either of them get into government on their own, they will drag Britain in the same direction: backwards.
'No. That's not my Britain. That's not the Britain I love. And I am not going to sit back while either of them sweep in and leave this nation diminished and divided because they still don't understand what makes our country great.'
Document DAMONL0020140309ea390050t
