{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"198"}
____
  
Features
CALAMITOUS LIFE OF A VERY UNDIPLOMATIC WIFE; PACKING UP: FURTHER ADVENTURES OF A TRAILING SPOUSE BY BRIGID KEENAN (BLOOMSBURY £16.99 % £14.99)
BY ROGER LEWIS   
1,131 words
4 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
56
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Suspicions aroused by Diplomatic Baggage, the memoirs of the 'trailing spouse' of an EU ambassador, are confirmed by its sequel, Packing Up.
Former fashion journalist Brigid Keenan is the reincarnation of Norman Wisdom, Inspector Clouseau and Frank Spencer rolled into one.
Everything she touches turns into farce. Flower arrangements are knocked over, 'so there was water all over the place'. Champagne corks are lethal weapons, shattering neon ceiling lights and 'showering the guests with splinters of glass'. When she bought a statue of Buddha and put it on the back seat of her Audi covered with a cloth, the police assumed she was 'smuggling an immigrant in a rather inept way'.
If she goes to a health farm, she comes home in traction or in a wheelchair, having fallen over 'with the most stupendous noise'.
Not feeling well on one occasion, and trying to be discreet, she crept out of a restaurant only for her body to trigger the security floodlights, so everyone was treated to the sight of 'my spotlit figure, throwing up'. The diners gave her an ironic round of applause.
Every day that dawns, Brigid loses her keys. She is always being locked out of hotel rooms, flats and cars. As for her car, it is usually clamped or has been towed away, because the licence or insurance has expired. If it is a diesel engine, she'll put petrol in the tank, so it'll seize up in the middle of rush hour in Montpellier. If she goes on a bus, she'll sit on a discarded artificial limb — she's a frequent visitor to London Transport Lost Property.
Mobiles phones are always disappearing. Wallets end up in the washing machine. Computers predictably crash and burn.
'We had to have the computer man round for five hours to save all the stuff on it. Then we had to go to Currys and buy another one for £590.' One gets the impression she can afford it — the EU stumps up for most things.
Perhaps Brigid is so frantic and frenetic because she never quite knows where she is? 'I have not unpacked properly or slept in my own bed for weeks and it's really destabilising,' she says at one point.
Brigid whirls around at least five properties — in Brussels, Pimlico, Somerset, France (where there is 'a little house bought in 1968 with the proceeds of a TV washing powder commercial I appeared in') and 'a nice embassy-provided home' in whatever exotic country her husband (known only as 'AW') has been posted to. Kazakhstan, Baku and Syria are mentioned, places characterised by 'oil and gas and corruption', where it is plus 40 in summer, minus 40 in winter.
Brigid has a good eye for the local architecture abroad, lamenting how lovely old buildings, villas and municipal halls are always being demolished to make way for flashy and hideous high-rise apartment blocks.
Gracious stucco, ornate plasterwork, craftsmanship and avenues of trees — it always goes. 'Tragic', she says. So why can't the EU Commission do something useful and compel these people to look after their cultural heritage sites?
In these remote spots, Brigid and AW dine on horsemeat sausage or chopped cow's udder with dill. Menus boast of 'beef language with fungus sauce' and 'pizza with complications'.
On one occasion, they have to eat out because there's no furniture at the embassy. Their furniture has been in storage, but 'they seem to have lost most of it'. Needless to say, on the day replacements arrive from IKEA, the storage people find their furniture — so Brigid and AW suddenly have a dozen beds. 'Then the wheels came off our shopping trolley and AW had to carry it home, full of stuff, in his arms as if it was a person.' The woman is jinxed.
Brigid even makes her breast cancer funny. Her boob goes blue with the treatment. 'I have the urge to show my blue one to everyone because it is so peculiar, but so far have managed to restrain myself,' she confides. Her radiographer at the Royal Marsden hospital is Stephanie, she believes. 'I call her that all the way through. Stephanie this and Stephanie that.' It turns out she's an Angela.
Typically, Brigid takes the operation in her stride. Given news of the malignancy: 'I smoked 50 cigarettes and then I drank a few glasses of wine.' She asks her friend whether it is masectomy or mastectomy. 'Don't ask me,' comes the reply. 'I've had two and I'm dyslexic.'
Soon Brigid is back to her own self, organising her daughter's wedding. Nearly 200 guests, flowers, food, fireworks, a Welsh choir, 'all of it'.
She gets the day wrong. The Archbishop of Canterbury gets involved, granting an emergency marriage licence. Then there is a downpour and by midnight the marquee and the cars are marooned in a mud bath to rival the Somme. Grandchildren arrive in due course. Brigid helps sterilise the bottles and teats, gets distracted, everything melts and congeals, and what's left at the bottom of the pan is 'a modern sculpture with nipples sticking out in every direction'. She's seldom left alone with the baby as 'no one is allowed to pick him up if they have smoked in the last five years' — a sharp comment about over-protective new mums.
These days, Brigid and AW are faced with 'the black hole of retirement', which means in actuality 'back replacements, hip replacements, knee replacements, and a neck replacement'. Old age is summed up by a letter she received from the NHS 'asking if I would like a bowel cancer testing kit. I said yes.'
Brigid has terrible trouble with her snoring. She snored on a train and made lion noises. 'The next thing I knew was that I woke up snarling, my lips drawn back and my teeth bared.' People in the carriage were terrified — as were the proprietors of a hotel in the Dordogne, when Brigid accidently left her Nozovent there. This is a device that is clamped on the nose at night, to keep the nostrils open. The hoteliers, 'being French, thought it was a sex toy'.
Here's an idea, which, in exchange for an Executive Producer's credit, I shall divulge — that, without delay, lovably eccentric Brigid gets to be portrayed by Emma Thompson in a classic TV sitcom.
* Brigid IS speaking at our Literary Lunch (see details in left-hand column)
memoir
PACKING UP: Further Adventures Of A Trailing Spouse
by Brigid Keenan (Bloomsbury £16.99 % £14.99)
ROGER LEWIS
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140403ea440000t
