{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2464"}
____
News
Girl, 6, found living a filthy home with more than a dozen cats, no running water and a bucket used as makeshift toilet 
SNEJANA FARBEROV   
526 words
4 March 2014
14:31
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Sarah Veazey, 36, and her father, Robert Veazey, 62, charged with felony child cruelty
* Police found Veazey's daughter sleeping on mattress in feces-covered room
* Miss Veazey complained in a Facebook post in January that her father let their home fall into disrepair 
A Georgia woman and her father were arrested after police say they found a 6-year-old girl living in a filthy home teeming with cats and dogs but without running water.
Sarah Veazey, 36, and Robert Veazey, 62, were taken into custody Sunday and charged with first-degree child cruelty.
Miss Veazey's 6-year-old daughter was seized by state officials and placed into protective custody.
According to the Veazeys' arrest warrant cited by Atlanta Journal constitution, the disorderly home they shared on Favor Road in Marietta was overrun with rats, and smeared with feces from a dozen cats and dogs living on the premises.
The residence had no running water or a working bathroom for the family to use or at least a month.
'There was a bucket being used and then emptied into the toilet so that the toilet is overflowing with feces,' the charging documents stated.
Sarah and Robert Veazey were booked into a jail on $10,000 bond.
Police became aware of the deplorable living conditions after getting a call about a dispute between neighbors Sunday.
When they entered Sarah and Robert Veazey's house on Favor Road, they found animal waste covering sagging floorboards.
According to police, the house was crammed with possessions to the point of being unstable and on the verge of collapse.
Throughout the home, officers saw at least a dozen cats and several dogs running around in their own filth.
The station WSB-TV reported that Sarah Veazey's daughter was sleeping on a mattress in the feces-covered living room, police said.
Neighbor Nancy Solis, who has lived near the Veazey family for the past four years, told the station that on the outside, the little girl did not appear neglected.
Judging by her Facebook posts, Sarah Veazey has been well aware of the deplorable state of the e home where she and her family were living.
'Im angry at my dad right now i hate living the way im living he is just letting this house go to hell,' the woman wrote. 'it's falling apart & he wont do anything to fix it hopefully i will be able to get out of this CRAP soon.'
Miss Veazey, who proudly declared that she was unemployed and had 'studied nothing,' also used her social media account to rail against government intervention and immigrants.
In her most recent post February 21, the 36-year-old mother wrote: 'I heared [sic] on the news that the government wants to start telling people how the hell to reise there [sic] kids. What do u think about this?'
Commenting on her status update, the woman added: 'I also say that we should get rid of the mexicans first.'
Document DAMONL0020140304ea3400615
