{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"619"}
____
RightMinds
Dave's answer to the immigration row? Find a new planet
JAMES FORSYTH   
1,121 words
9 March 2014
02:52
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
The Tory Party is in a mess over immigration. But the car crash that was Immigration Minister James Brokenshire’s speech last week – which landed the Camerons’ Nepalese nanny on the front pages – revealed far more than that.
No 10 has been fretting that net migration will be higher by the Election than it was in 2010. This is a major liability for the Tories, with UKIP poised to exploit  voters’ concerns.
It is migration from other EU countries that is pushing up the figures, and UKIP’s answer is simple: leave the EU. It is, as one Tory Cabinet Minister says, ‘their USP’. The Tories, under their present leadership, are never going to be able to match that.
David Cameron, though, has not helped his cause with his poor choice for the Immigration job. When Mark Harper resigned from the post last month because his cleaner was working in the UK illegally, Cameron – who tries to avoid reshuffles wherever possible – bumped up underwhelming Home Office Minister  Brokenshire. This approach may have saved time but it has come at a high political cost.
It has infuriated Ministers who are normally loyal allies. One complains: ‘Immigration is one of the four big subjects for the next year. You need to put a grown-up there.’
But instead, Cameron promoted Brokenshire, a Minister with a tin ear for politics, who has embarrassed himself and his party by pinning the blame for rising immigration on well-off families who hire foreign nannies or cleaners.
One Minister fumes: ‘To lay into the middle classes is just bonkers’. And a No 10 source remarks: ‘There should be a function in Microsoft Word that deletes your speech when you start writing about a metropolitan elite.’
No 10 itself, though, can’t escape some of the blame for the fall-out from the speech. Someone in No 10 should have realised that questions were bound to follow about whether Cameron and the rest of the Tory Cabinet had ever employed a foreign nanny, cleaning lady or builders.
But there was little chance of that realisation being made when relations between No 10 and the Home Office remain dire. There is a lack of trust between Cameron’s people and the Theresa May camp, whom they suspect of being keener to advance the Home Secretary’s interests than the Government’s.
The Tories need to get the focus back on to the economy. This week, they will emphasise how Britain’s excellence in science and technology will create the high-paying jobs of the future. As part of this, the Government is to boldly go where no British Government has gone before – by announcing support for a mission to find undiscovered planets.
David Willetts, the Science  Minister, will praise the building of a satellite and telescope designed to detect them. The mission might seem a bit out of this world, but it will boost British engineering and our rapidly growing space industry.
Back on Earth, the PM needs to turn his telescope to the flaws that the past few days have laid bare in his operation. If he is to win the Election, he needs everything to go right. He can’t afford more weeks like this past one.
Stars kept waiting - thanks to the PM's 'other woman'
There was an array of impressive women in Downing Street on Thursday night for a reception linked to International Women’s Day.
There was Winter Olympics gold medallist Lizzy Yarnold, chef Lorraine Pascale, a host of businesswomen and actress Helena Bonham Carter.
But as time ticked on, there was no Prime Minister. He was stuck in Brussels at a summit.
Home Secretary Theresa May had to step in, thanking guests for coming and telling them that David Cameron would be along as soon as he could.
When Cameron did finally make it, he tried to explain his lateness in reference to two powerful females. He quipped that he didn’t want to miss the reception as the most important woman in his life, wife Samantha, was there.
But he was running late because of ‘another quite powerful force in my life’ – German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who had been holding forth at the summit.
Indeed, Cameron is off to see Merkel again today – he will have supper with her after they open a technology fair in Hanover.
The meeting comes just ten days after her visit to London. There’s little doubt that Merkel is the most important foreign leader in Cameron’s life.
Next year, David Cameron is set to become the first Tory Prime Minister in the modern era to send his child to a state secondary school.
No 10 won’t be drawn on Cameron’s plans for the education of his children, but those close to the family are clear that he will follow the lead of Michael Gove and keep his daughter Nancy in the state sector.
At the moment, Nancy is at the same Church of England state primary school as Gove’s daughter, but she is a year younger.
That means that in 12 months’ time, it will be the Camerons waiting to see where their daughter has been offered a place.
Cameron has always said that while he would prefer state schools, he would decide as a ‘parent not a politician’.
There is, however, no getting away from the political resonance of his decision. It will be a reminder of his personal commitment to public services and that he’s a different kind of Tory.
Gove pushes the benefits of truancy plan
The next Tory manifesto will, I understand, propose docking child benefit from parents whose children play truant. The proposal is being pushed by Education Secretary Michael Gove.
David Cameron likes to joke that he has a book of things the Lib Dems have stopped him doing which will form the basis of his next manifesto.
This plan is a classic example. It was proposed two years ago with support from No 10 and Gove – but was vetoed by Nick Clegg.
It appeals to the Tories because of the sense that if you receive something from the State you have obligations in return – in this case, to get your child to school.
At the top of the party, some favour making a detailed policy manifesto, while others, including Policy Minister Oliver Letwin, want a broader brush approach to maximise room for manoeuvre.
Either way, they’ll need big-ticket items to show what a Tory-only Government would be like. Expect the truancy idea to be one of them.
* James Forsyth is the political editor of The Spectator
Document DAMONL0020140309ea390026r
