{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2508"}
____
News
Effect of immigration on unemployment could be much smaller than previously claimed by Theresa May
DANIEL MARTIN   
563 words
5 March 2014
06:35
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* David Cameron has prevented publication of internal report
* It looks at the effect immigration has on British jobs
* Critics say the Home Secretary’s claims are hollow
Theresa May’s claims about the effects of immigration have been called into question by secret government research, it was reported last night.
David Cameron has prevented the publication of an internal report, completed in November, into the effect that migration has on British jobs.
The BBC’s Newsnight programme claimed it had not been published because the effect of immigration on unemployment was much smaller than Mrs May has previously claimed.
The Home Secretary has in the past cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee, a group of independent academics, as a basis for saying that ‘for every additional 100 immigrants... 23 British workers would not be employed’.
But the new analysis by civil servants is understood to show that the impact of so-called ‘displacement’ is much less stark.
Internal emails seen by Newsnight showed that one civil servant described the MAC research used by Mrs May was ‘not robust enough given the wider evidence’.
One civil servant said in an email that the study should be published - something Mr Cameron has so far refused to do.
‘It would be difficult to keep the report solely for internal use,’ he wrote.
Critics say Mr Cameron has blocked the report’s publication because it shows the Home Secretary’s claims to be hollow.
But others say it is unsurprising that the displacement rate is now lower than it was in 2012, because last year 87 per cent of new jobs went to British people.
The Conservatives were embarrassed last week when figures showed that its pledge to reduce net migration to below 100,000 people a year by 2015 was unlikely to be met.
Last night Liberal Democrat MP Julian Huppert said: ‘It’s obvious that this report should be published as quickly as possible.
‘The best available data shows we benefit very substantially from immigration. The real question is why David Cameron is trying to block this.
‘We have to have the right figures to make the right decisions.’
Tory MP Stephen Barclay said: ‘The data is evolving. It’s basically not true that the impact is minimal.
‘There has been a very heavy localised impact.’
A government spokesman said: ‘Reducing immigration so our economy delivers for people who want to work hard and play by the rules is part of our long-term economic plan. We don’t comment on internal government documents.’
Last night Labour’s immigration spokesman David Hanson said: ‘David Cameron and Theresa May now need to publish this report today.
‘The British people should have information made available to them so they can make a judgement about the impact of immigration on jobs. This should be done on the basis of fact not more empty rhetoric or spin from the Government.
‘The Government’s record on immigration is one of failing to meet their own net migration target and ramping up the rhetoric. Now they want to keep their own research hidden rather than scrutinised.
‘We need an open, calm and fact based debate on the impact of immigration and this should be facilitated by the Government and not made harder.’
Document DAMONL0020140305ea35003jx
