{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1843"}
____
News
Polish workers now becoming highly-skilled and getting better jobs - and some are even getting involved in British politics and joining Ukip
JAMES SLACK, HOME AFFAIRS EDITOR   
827 words
22 April 2014
17:06
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Witold Sobkow said Polish workers in UK have graduated to better jobs 
* Claimed they now feel 'at home' here - and some have even joined Ukip
* Added that the 'huge wave' of migration from his home land is now over
Polish workers who arrived in Britain to pick fruit have graduated to better jobs and now feel fully ‘at home’ here – with some even joining UKIP, the country’s ambassador has revealed.
Witold Sobkow said it was a sign of Britain’s ‘success’ that so many Poles had moved to Britain and integrated since the ex-Eastern Bloc country joined the EU in 2004.
The ambassador to London said that, initially, his countrymen and women were doing low-skilled jobs.
But they have now learned English, obtained qualifications in UK schools and colleges and ‘things have changed’, leading to ‘promotion’ to better jobs.
He revealed some Poles had become involved in British politics and joined Ukip, which wants Britain to leave the EU and restrict access to low-skilled workers.
The Ambassador said: ‘There are some relatively young people from Poland who are members of Ukip and they have this group, Friends of Poland in Ukip.’
Ahead of Poland getting unrestricted access to the UK jobs market a decade ago, Labour predicted only 13,000 new arrivals from Eastern Europe every year.
This proved a huge underestimate with around one million people moving here in the first six years alone.
Mr Sobkow said: ‘I often say you are a victim of your success. People concentrate on [immigration] and numbers but they don’t ask why people come here. Why don’t they go to other countries? Because they feel at home here. The measure of success is the numbers.
‘I know a lot of people who came just after 2004. Those that didn’t speak good English started off with simple jobs like washing up dishes, working as security guards or picking fruit, because they wanted to learn English.
‘They started going to English schools to learn the language and they got promoted and they took other courses… and now they have much better jobs.’
He continued: ‘Before, when people from Poland came here they used to work in restaurants and they picked fruits.
‘They are not there now. I have just seen a show on TV where people were picking strawberries and the farmer was asked, ‘Do you have any people from Poland?’ The answer was clear: none. They want to have better jobs, they want to be promoted; they want to work hard and save money.’
In an interview with the Independent, Mr Sobkow predicted the ‘wave’ of migration from Poland to Britain and other European countries is over.
He claimed that increasing numbers of his countrymen and women were shunning a life in Britain in favour of Poland’s own burgeoning economy.
The Ambassador said: ‘This huge wave of people who came to EU countries trying to get well-paid jobs is over now,” he said.
“There are more opportunities in Poland, we have had huge economic success, wages are higher in Poland now and there are more jobs in many parts of Poland, so I think this is over.
‘We are getting out of the crisis and there are more and more opportunities in Poland. Of course people would like to stay in Poland and not live abroad. They love the UK but if you are at home there is no place like home.
‘People speak the same language, it is the same culture, the same system of education, health service, they would rather stay at home if there is a well-paid job. The situation is getting better in Poland so more and more stay in Poland or want to get back to Poland.’
'People concentrate on [immigration] and numbers but they don’t ask why people come here. Why don’t they go to other countries? Because they feel at home here'
Witold Sobkow
Despite Mr Sobkow’s remarks, official figures show little evidence of a reduction in the number of Polish workers.
In the year to December 2013, Poland topped the list for National Insurance Number registrations handed to foreigners.
The figure of 111,450 was an increase of 39 per cent.
Earlier this month a study by Migrationwatch predicted that net migration from Poland and the other seven ex-Eastern Bloc countries who joined the EU in 2004 would continue at a rate of around 40,000 a year.
The campaign group predicted that, overall, migration from the EU will add 130,000 to the population annually – equivalent of a new city the size of Manchester every four years.
Experts say that, within years, EU immigration could overtake that from the rest of the world as the main source of new arrivals.
Document DAMONL0020140422ea4m0020a
