{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1846"}
____
News
Ukip causes a stir with biggest ever poster campaign costing £1.5 million but they're immediately attacked as 'racist'
TAMARA COHEN   
707 words
22 April 2014
10:38
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Millionaire ex-Tory donor Paul Sykes is funding new controversial adverts
* They claim 'British workers are hit hard by unlimited foreign labour'
* Critics compared language those by the far-right British National Party
* Labour MP Mike Gapes said they were 'racist' and appealed to 'all decent British Commonwealth and EU citizens' to register to vote in May's polls
Ukip was plunged into a race storm yesterday after unveiling a series of posters campaigning against EU immigration.
The party has paid for billboards across the country to be emblazoned with messages such as: ‘26million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?’
Another has a picture of a construction worker begging on the street, with the slogan: ‘EU policy at work. British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour.’
Scroll down for video
The £1.5million campaign is funded by the Yorkshire businessman Paul Sykes, who is a former Tory donor.
All the posters call on voters to ‘Take Back Control of Our Country’ by backing Ukip in European elections on May 22.
But they were immediately condemned by rival politicians.
Labour MP Mike Gapes said he hoped the ‘racist posters encourage all decent British Commonwealth and EU citizens’ to vote for another party next month.
He added: ‘It is time for all democrats to expose lies and hatred being peddled by Ukip and defend British values of tolerance and respect for others.’
Stella Creasy, Labour MP for Walthamstow, said: ‘Don’t tolerate those who talk down Britain’s chances of competing in the global economy. I’m not with Ukip because I don’t want to stop the world and get off to sulk.’
But Ukip leader Nigel Farage said the posters were ‘a hard-hitting reflection of reality’ and only the ‘chattering classes’ would object.
One contained a dramatic image of a burning Union Jack with the European Union flag emerging from the flames. It carried the words: ‘Who really runs this country?’ Another contains a picture of Britons commuting to work on a bus next to an image of a EU official being chauffeur driven.
Mr Farage and some colleagues draw MEP salaries however and the party has been criticised by party members over alleged misuse of funds.
The posters are more polished and professional than any the party has produced before as a result of Mr Sykes offering Ukip ‘whatever it takes’ to try to top the European poll next month.
The tycoon, worth around £400million, has said the EU elections are the ‘most important for many years’, adding: ‘We have the chance to support a party that represents a complete break with the past.
‘The other parties, whatever their merits, are content to work within the existing Brussels straitjacket.’
Mr Farage said yesterday: ‘These posters are a hard-hitting reflection of reality as it is experienced by millions of British people struggling to earn a living outside the Westminster bubble.
'Are we going to ruffle a few feathers among the chattering classes? Yes. Are we bothered about that? Not in the slightest.’
Critics compared the immigration posters to those used in the past by the far-right British National Party.
The Ukip message is likely to have been targeted at voters in Labour’s northern heartland where unemployment is higher.
An ICM poll published yesterday suggested that Labour will win the European elections with 30 per cent of the vote, Ukip second on 27 per cent and the Tories a distant third on 22 per cent.
Senior Liberal Democrat peer Lord Oakeshott said the posters were ‘extreme even by the standards of the Front Nationale’, the French far right party Mr Farage has tried to distance Ukip from.
The peer said: ‘This is divisive politics. The mask is off now, this has never been about Europe with them, but playing on fears of foreigners, when there are many British people working in the rest of the EU.
‘It really is in the gutter with the extremist parties of Britain’s past, when I thought we had got rid of those 50 years ago.’
Document DAMONL0020140421ea4l006hf
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:29
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
