{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3561"}
____
  
Features
JUSTICE THREATENED BY POLITICAL CORRECTNESS
BY DAILY MAIL REPORTER   
569 words
22 February 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
18
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Justice threatened by political correctness
YESTERDAY, solicitor Asha Khan was given a suspended prison sentence after being found guilty of perverting the course of justice.
The public interest in knowing that a member of the legal profession had herself tried to undermine the very integrity of the justice system is overwhelming.
Yet, disgracefully, the case was almost heard under a shroud of secrecy in the latest example of a court obsessing over political correctness.
Khan, a Muslim who was accused of helping her father dodge a speeding fine, had claimed that for 'cultural reasons' she could not speak freely in front of the Press - and, incredibly, Judge Peter Hughes agreed.
It was only after the intervention of this newspaper that the judge accepted he had made a mistake and reversed what risked setting a terrible precedent.
The Mail is glad that - belatedly - the sacred principle of open and transparent justice was upheld.
But doesn't it speak volumes about how the insidious culture of political correctness has infected every limb of the justice system - from the police and Crown Prosecution Service to the judiciary - that a ban was ever considered acceptable in the first place?
Language barrier
FIGURES obtained from the Education Department reveal that, in one in every nine schools in England, most pupils now speak English as a second language.
The number of children from Eastern Europe has increased from 44,000 to 123,000 in just five years, after Labour deliberately encouraged mass immigration from the ex-Eastern Bloc.
And, now restrictions have been lifted on families from Romania and Bulgaria, the total is expected to climb further.
We applaud the teachers who are making heroic efforts to educate often hard-working children from overseas who, between them, speak an astonishing 300 languages.
But aren't the politicians increasingly expecting our polyglot schools to do an impossible job?
What is certain is that the current squabbles at Westminster over how to try to control EU migration, without upsetting Brussels, are comparable to arguing over who should shut the stable door long after the horse bolted.
Betrayed to the end
THE tragic farce of the Mid-Staffs hospital scandal continues.
A year has passed since the Francis report revealed horrific details of inhuman treatment and the needless deaths of up to 1,200 patients.
Yet still no senior figure has been held to account.
NHS head Sir David Nicholson - the Man With No Shame - was allowed to retire at his own leisure on a vast pension. The doctors involved were cleared by the GMC. The one manager who was sacked got £100,000 for unfair dismissal and, most offensively, not a single person has faced a criminal charge.
Yesterday, a judge was due to sentence the NHS Trust for breaching health and safety laws over the death of Gillian Astbury, a diabetic who lapsed into a coma after over-worked nurses failed to give her insulin.
But Mr Justice Haddon-Cave, who says no individual criminal charges are possible, decided to adjourn the case.
His dilemma is whether to hit the trust with a fine - the only sanction at his disposal - even though taxpayers will foot the bill and patients suffer.
Whatever he decides, the victims' families will have been failed by a heartless bureaucratic system that allowed hundreds of patients to die terrible deaths.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140221ea2m00065
