{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2205"}
____
News
What would America look like if George Washington was killed and the war was lost? Statue or Liberty and Mount Rushmore disappear in new movie by embattled  conservative filmmaker
SNEJANA FARBEROV   
723 words
8 March 2014
14:54
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
What would have happened to America if George Washington was killed during the Revolutionary War?
That is the question that right-wing filmmaker and commentator Dinesh D'Souza tries to answer in his latest offering, pithily titled 'America,' which he presented at the Conservative Political Action Conference Friday.
D’Souza made headlines in 2012 with his first movie, ‘2016: Obama's America,’ which envisioned the adverse effects on the country if President Obama is re-elected.
Scroll down for trailer
The partisan political documentary released right before the presidential election in a bid to drum up support for Mitt Romney emerged as a surprise hit in the box office, grossing $33million and becoming the second most successful of this genre, right after Michael Moore’s Fahrenheit 9/11.
D'Souza's latest project is based on the premise that the Patriots lost the War of Independence after General Washington's death, and the United States never came into existence.
The trailer for 'America' begins with a highlights reel showing arguably some of the most iconic moments in U.S. history, among them Ronald Regan's 'tear down this wall' speech, Martin Luther King Jr's 'I have a dream' address, Neil Armstrong walking on the moon, and Steve Jobs unveiling the first iPhone.
The patriotic montage lumping together events from various decades takes an unexpected turn when the action switches to a battle between the Continental Army and a British regiment.
A moment later, one of the Redcoats fires his musket, striking General Washington in the chest and knocking him off his horse.
In the next scene, America's future first president is seen bleeding on the grass, setting the stage for the disastrous consequences that D'Souza’s film explores.
The video concludes with some of America's greatest landmarks, from the Washington Monument to Mount Rushmore and the Statue of Liberty, dissolving into dust one by one.
D'Souza presented the trailer to a friendly crowd of about 3,500 Republicans during his keynote address at CPAC in Washington DC.
The director also debuted his anti-Obama documentary at CPAC two years ago.
‘Even though we made a mainstream movie that is for all Americans, we know that it will especially resonate with our conservative friends,’ D'Souza told The Hollywood Reporter. ‘We are proud to debut our trailer at what is effectively their Super Bowl.’
Not surprisingly, 'America' will open in threaters July 4. The film is produced by Academy Award winners Gray Frederickson, who took home an Oscar for ‘The Godfather Part II,’ and Gerald Molen, who was behind ‘Schindler's List.’
Speaking of D'Souza's latest film, Molen described it as a 'love story about America.'
D'Souza made headlines in January when he was arrested for allegedly violating campaign finance laws by using 'straw donors' to give more money to Republican Senate candidate Wendy Long than is permitted.
The director is currently out on $500,000 bond. His trial is set for May 16, and if convicted, he could face up to seven years in prison.
D'Souza has vehemently denied any wrongdoing, suggesting that he was the victim of a political witch hunt devised by Democrats angry over '2016.'
Republican Sens. Charles Grassley, Jeff Sessions, Ted Cruz and Mike Lee came out in support of the beleaguered conservative thinker, calling on the FBI to release details of the D’Souza investigation
Around the time of the release of '2016,' D'Souza was forced to resign from his post as president of a Christian college in New York amid allegations that he cheated on his wife of 20 years and got engaged to a much younger woman.
During his speech Friday, D'Souza said his dire predictions about Obama’s second term were coming true. 
‘Obama is an actor playing out our script,’ D'Souza said. ‘He's like a toy soldier who walks into the wall and keeps on going.’
Describing his latest documentary, the Indian immigrant who at one time served as President Reagan’s adviser called it a  ‘spectacular film’ that takes a critical look at progressivism while celebrating free markets.
Document DAMONL0020140308ea38005y5
