{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1104"}
____
News
Patten quits as BBC Trust Chairman after heart operation: Could troubled broadcaster's next chairman be a woman?
ALASDAIR GLENNIE TV CORRESPONDENT   
2,054 words
7 May 2014
01:49
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Shock announcement after being rushed to hospital 10 days ago
* Former Tory Cabinet minister will leave the BBC with immediate effect
* Since 2011 has overseen Savile scandal, row over pay-offs and IT bungles
* He announced his decision to quit six days before his 70th birthday
The BBC was plunged into fresh turmoil last night as its chairman Chris Patten quit following major heart surgery.
The 69-year-old was admitted to hospital with serious chest pains ten days ago.
He underwent a successful bypass operation that saved his heart from major damage.
But yesterday the former Tory cabinet  minister announced he was stepping down immediately on medical advice.
Lord Patten’s shock departure after three  turbulent years in the post leaves the BBC in the grip of a second leadership crisis in two years, following its hunt for a new director-general last year. He had been due to serve until next spring and oversee the start of the Corporation’s tricky charter renewal negotiations.
But Lord Patten, who previously had heart surgery seven years ago, said he had been ordered to rest for six weeks and would be left unable to work at the ‘same full pace’.
He added: ‘It would not be fair to my family to continue as before; and equally it would not be fair to the BBC and those it serves not to be able to give that commitment which the role demands.’
Finding a successor as chairman of the BBC Trust will be the first major challenge for the new Culture Secretary, Sajid Javid.
Mr Javid, who took up his post only last month, will oversee the selection process before an appointment is approved by the Prime Minister and given royal assent.
Among possible candidates are  presenter David Dimbleby, who applied for the job in 2004, and former Sony boss Sir Howard Stringer.
BBC ROLE WAS JUST THE LATEST IN A CAREER IN THE FIRING LINE
Chairing the BBC Trust was just the latest in a string of high profile - and often controversial - roles Lord Patten has held.
Born in 1944, he studied history at Balliol College before joining the Republican campaign machine in New York and later the Conservative Research Department, which he later ran from 1974 and 1979.
He was elected MP for Bath in 1979 and quickly rose through the ranks, becoming Minister for Overseas Development in 1986.
Margaret Thatcher then handed him the poisoned chalice of becoming Environment Secretary - in charge of the deeply-unpopular Poll Tax.
Under John Major he became Tory party chairman in charge of the 1992 election campaign, but lost his own seat to Lib Dem Don Foster.
In July 1992 Patten was handed the role of the 28th and last Governor of Hong Kong, to oversee the handover to China.
He famously wept during his speech at the handover ceremony.
By 1999 he was a European Commissioner, where he remained until 2004.
He became BBC Trust chairman in 2011 after Labour-backed Sir Michael Lyons did not have his term renewed.
However, the Coalition is said to be keen on appointing a woman to the role for the first time, with former Pearson boss Marjorie Scardino being heavily tipped last night.
Lord Patten’s tenure saw the BBC hit by a series of scandals, starting with the revelations that former BBC DJ Jimmy Savile had been a serial paedophile. Then in 2012, his choice as new director-general, George Entwistle, was forced out after only 54 days amid another Newsnight row.
And last year he was quizzed by the public accounts committee over the BBC Trust’s role in the £369million pay-offs handed to departing BBC staff, including £60million to senior managers.
Last night, Tory MP John Whittingdale, who chairs the culture, media and sport committee, said Lord Patten had had a ‘torrid’ time.  ‘I am genuinely sad that Lord Patten has had to stand down in these circumstances,’ he said. ‘He has had to oversee a relentless succession of disasters at the BBC, mostly not of his own making.
‘The problem is, many potential candidates won’t want to touch this job with a barge pole. The BBC’s governance structure is fundamentally flawed and the job is in many ways impossible.’
BBC director-general Tony Hall said: ‘I have enjoyed working with Chris over the last year, he is staunch believer in the BBC and he has brought his vast experience to the role of chairman of the BBC Trust.
‘He has steered the BBC through some of its most difficult days. In undertaking this role he brought  unrivalled experience, wisdom, and an overwhelming desire to ensure that the BBC remains the best public service broadcaster in the world.’
Mr Javid wished Lord Patten a  ‘successful and speedy recovery’,  adding that he had ‘embraced the challenges that have confronted the BBC, putting in place improvements to governance and building a stronger executive team helping the BBC to move forward with confidence’.
Labour culture  spokesman Harriet Harman said: ‘Lord Patten... helped the BBC to turn a corner under new leadership with Tony Hall.
‘He proved himself a firm friend of the BBC and its values.’
Lord Patten’s successor will have two years to launch a defence of the licence fee as the Government reviews the BBC’s charter.
In recent months, critics have called for the charge to be scrapped and replaced with a subscription model, while others have suggested the BBC Trust should be scrapped.
STEPHEN GLOVER: DOOMED BY THIS POISONED CHALICE
When Christopher Patten looks back on his long and often distinguished career as a public servant, it is unlikely that he will remember his three-year stint as Chairman of the BBC Trust with much fondness.
Nor is it probable that he will be particularly upset that major heart surgery has led him to stand down from his job with immediate effect a year earlier than he had intended.
To be fair to him, he was passed a chalice when he accepted the post that was more dripping with poison than he or most reasonable observers could have possibly guessed.
The outgoing director-general, Mark Thompson, had fostered a culture in which sometimes mediocre BBC employees received enormous pay-offs. Bureaucracy had mushroomed wildly, and so had the pay of senior executives and ‘stars’.
The hope was that with his vast political experience at the highest level – after leaving Westminster politics in 1992 he had been the last Governor of Hong Kong, as well as a European Commissioner – Lord Patten would be able to knock heads together, and take charge of a bloated and self-satisfied organisation.
In the event he must be judged to have failed. He was never able to grasp the Corporation’s deep-seated difficulties with the acuity he had shown in previous roles, and he showed a surprising lack of sure-footedness in coping with unforeseen problems, of which the Jimmy Savile scandal was undoubtedly the greatest.
'The BBC has to convince ordinary licence payers that it has not grown too big and that its executives and stars are not overpaid'
For a time, though, things went smoothly enough. Lord Patten was evidently more than happy to see the back of Mark Thompson, and engineered the appointment of George Entwistle, an apparently competent BBC insider, as his replacement. 
He was partly attracted to Mr Entwistle because he believed he could control him.
The high point of Lord Patten’s reign was the BBC’s outstanding coverage of the Olympics in the summer of  2012.
Though the Chairman of the BBC Trust could hardly claim personal credit, he could legitimately bask in the Corporation’s triumph.
But the plot began to unravel in the autumn of 2012 after an ITV programme alleged that Jimmy Savile, whose long career had been nurtured by the BBC, had been a serial sexual abuser on a scarcely credible scale, with some of his assaults taking place on BBC premises.
Allegations surfaced that, almost a year earlier, in December 2011, Mark Thompson had been told about the stories concerning Savile a few weeks before the BBC aired a saccharine Christmas tribute to the monster. A BBC2 Newsnight exposure of him had also been suspiciously canned.
As criticism of the Corporation mounted, and some of its executives traded blows, Lord Patten might have seemed the ideal person to stamp his authority on the scandal.
In fact he was notably slow off the blocks, though eventually a report by Nick Pollard, a former Sky TV executive, was commissioned.
Things went from bad to worse in November 2012. Mr Entwistle was forced to resign as director-general of the BBC after only 54 days in the job when it emerged that Newsnight had falsely implicated the former Tory Party Treasurer Lord McAlpine in a North Wales child abuse scandal.
The best that could be said about this affair is that Mr Entwistle was skewered in a coruscating interview by the BBC’s own John Humphrys on the Today programme. One of the Corporation’s best journalists betrayed a keener sense of its failures than any of its executives.
Having backed a horse that had ridden through the first fence, Lord Patten did not endear himself to the growing band of critics by taking it upon himself to crown as Entwistle’s successor Lord Hall, a former BBC employee who over a decade earlier had not been considered director-general material.
The question remains why someone considered such a safe pair of hands should have proved less than adept. I suspect that the answer is that, with the BBC in the state that it was, it needed a full-time chairman to help sort it out.
But Lord Patten had other irons in the fire. He is Chancellor of Oxford University, and has been a paid adviser or non-executive director to a clutch of companies, including BP.
All inevitably made demands on him, leaving him less time for the BBC than was desirable, especially when it was in crisis.
Lord Patten didn’t succeed in ending the culture of huge pay-offs and excessive executive pay as quickly as he should have done.
It was not until last September that he admitted, at a hearing of the Public Accounts Committee, that pay-offs to senior executives had been ‘eye watering’, adding that he had failed to protect the interests of the licence-fee payer by clamping down on the issue earlier.
Needless to say, he always acquitted himself with great aplomb on these occasions, brushing aside MPs’ concerns with marvellous insouciance.
Accusations that he has not always been as transparent as he might have been were revived last December when he refused to release documents to MPs about the BBC’s madly extravagant and aborted Digital Media Initiative, which cost the licence payer £100 million.
He said that publishing them would inhibit ‘free and frank exchanges between BBC staff’.
Such lordly condescension may have gone down well when Lord Patten was the Governor General of Hong Kong or a European Commissioner.
It may possibly impress the dons of Oxford University. But it has not suited, or helped, the BBC.
What progress Lord Patten was making in producing the BBC’s case for its next Charter Review in 2016 – when its future role in our national life will be examined – is not clear. But the Corporation needs a more vigorous defence than Lord Patten seemed likely to give.
The BBC has to convince ordinary licence payers that it has not grown too big, that its bureaucracy is still not too large, and that its executives and stars are not overpaid.
It has to confront charges of bias, especially in its reporting of Europe and immigration.
In fact, a thorough going review of the future of the BBC is required.
Lord Patten was not the man for that task, any more than he has been the right person to steer it through its recent tribulations.
A fresher and more self-critical broom is needed than Christopher Patten could ever supply. That said, his announcement does signal the end of a remarkable career in public life.
Document DAMONL0020140506ea56006my
