{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2555"}
____
TV&Showbiz
A romantic Endeavour: A young Morse finds love with a nurse in the prequel to the TV detective series
HANNA FLINT   
407 words
16 March 2014
19:27
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
It debuted in 2012 as a feature length story to celebrate the 25th anniversary of Inspector Morse.
Now the prequel to the TV detective show, Endeavour, has returned to ITV for a second mini-series.
And this time around Morse, played by Shaun Evans, finds love during the swinging sixties with his next door neighbour.
Shvorne Marks has joined the cast as Monica, a nurse who lives across the corridor from Endeavour Morse, and according to show writer Russell Lewis, is ‘a second generation immigrant who captures the changing times of the 1960s’.
‘It was essential she worked in nursing to highlight the talented immigrants who have done so much for the country,’ he told the Sunday Express.
Speaking of his new romance, Shaun said: ‘Monica comes into Endeavour’s life when he’s on his knees. I think it’s very telling that the relationship comes along at this time.
‘It’s ironic she’s nurse; she automatically has that caring, nurturing nature he needs. He’s a broken man and she contributes to his mending. I think it’s a very good thing. 
Shaun added: ‘Apparently it was very common in those days for policemen to be with nurses. We don’t know how their relationship is going to develop or end. It’s very much up for grabs.’
This will be Shvorne’s first major TV role, since graduating from Arts Educational Schools (Arts Ed) – an independent co-educational school specialising in the performing arts – in 2011.
She has starred in plays including Trust Fund, (The Bush) Colour Blind, (Soho Theatre) Seasoned, (The Tobacco Factory) and Samm- Art Williams comedy Home.
Endeavour, set before the acclaimed series Inspector Morse (1987-2000), starring John Thaw, also sees the return of Roger Allam as senior Detective Inspector Fred Thursday, as well as show regulars Anton Lesser, James Bradshaw, Jack Laskey, Caroline O'Neill, Sean Rigby and Abigail Thaw.
The first full series of Endeavour screened earlier in 2013, with each of the four episodes averaging 7.0m and a 25% share, making it one of the best performing drama series on ITV that year alongside Broadchurch and Mr Selfridge.
The new series will comprise 4 x 120 minute films; Nocturne, Sway, Neverland and beginning with Trove on Sunday March 30th on ITV.
Document DAMONL0020140316ea3g0070v
