{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"875"}
____
  
News
FARAGE'S PLAN TO TACKLE UKIP RACE STORM? POSE WITH BLACK MEMBERS!
BY JAMES CHAPMAN    
587 words
5 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
12
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
NIGEL Farage is planning a series of appearances alongside black and ethnic minority candidates in an attempt to show Ukip is not a racist party.
As more damaging details emerged about his candidates, the Ukip leader conceded that too many 'idiots' had slipped through the party's vetting procedures.
He said he planned to 'fight back' against the negative impression they had made on voters.
Two days ago it emerged that a candidate in Stockport had been suspended after calling Islam 'evil' and saying Pakistan should be 'nuked'.
Mr Farage said yesterday the party had 'made mistakes' but should not be judged by a 'handful of people' saying 'idiotic things'.
He insisted : 'These people are not representative of Ukip at all. Not only am I adamant that we are a non-racist party, this week we are going to fight back against it.
'You will see our election address for the local elections this year and you will see a lot of black ethnic minority candidates who are proudly standing for Ukip. I am going to approach this differently in future.' Sources said Mr Farage was planning to appear alongside ethnic minority candidates, including Amjad Bashir, a business spokesman for the party, and Steven Woolfe, an economics spokesman who is of mixed race.
However, he risked further controversy as he ramped up his party's anti-immigration message in the European Parliament election campaign - saying people should be worried if immigrants from Eastern European countries moved into their neighbourhoods.
'The question was, you know, "If a whole load of Romanian men moved in next door to you, would you be concerned about it?". Perhaps you would, yes,' Mr Farage told the BBC's Andrew Marr programme.
He insisted the Eastern enlargement of the EU had allowed criminals to enter Britain.
'We have opened up the doors to countries that have not recovered from communism and I'm afraid it has become a gateway for organised crime. Everybody knows that. No one dares say it.'
Meanwhile, Tory MP Jacob Rees Mogg repeated his call for an electoral pact between his party and Ukip, which would see each agreeing not to field candidates against each other in certain seats.
He told Sky's Murnaghan programme: 'It is tremendously important because actually Ukip and the Conservatives both want one big thing in common and that is a totally new relationship with the European Union.' He added that 'both our interests are allied in doing some sort of a deal'.
But Tory Party chairman Grant Shapps said: 'Every party has to manage who their candidates are, I think it is pretty apparent by this stage that Ukip have not done that. They have a remarkable string of individual circumstances which add up something bigger which does lead you to have concerns about some of the people involved in that party.'
Ukip was mired in further controversy after it emerged candidate in Liverpool had suggested homosexuals are 'ten times more likely' than 'normal men' to be child abusers. Paul Forrest also said the 'end of Islam is coming' and that its followers who refuse to 'turn to Christ' will be 'gone'.
Former Labour minister David Lammy said the country was 'on the cusp of a serious bit of self-mutilation' in backing Ukip.
'Many of its candidates are saying terrible things about people of colour, terrible things about people who are gay,' he said.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140504ea550001q
