{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2842"}
____
  
News
MERKEL DAMPENS DAVE'S EU DREAM; ANY REFORMS WILL BE LIMITED SHE TELLS PM ON RED CARPET LONDON VISIT
BY JAMES CHAPMAN    
829 words
28 February 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
8
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
ANGELA Merkel made a passionate plea for Britain not to quit the EU yesterday but suggested David Cameron can hope to achieve only limited reform before a referendum.
The German Chancellor used a visit to London to back the Prime Minister's calls for a clampdown on EU migrants' right to claim benefits and indicated the UK and non-eurozone countries could win concessions as the eurozone integrates further.
But she warned she would disappoint British calls for her to commit now to fundamental reform of the EU - and dodged any promise of the full-scale treaty changes.
Mrs Merkel claimed she was 'caught between the devil and the deep blue sea', with some countries demanding massive changes and others insisting Europe must not 'pay almost any price' to keep Britain in the union.
But accommodating Britain's demands could be done, she said. Mrs Merkel was treated like a visiting monarch as she called on Mr Cameron in Downing Street.
She was afforded the rare honour of making a speech to both Houses of Parliament, gathered together in the Lords, and later visited the Queen at Buckingham Palace. In her address, she suggested Britain could not expect to be treated as a special case and warned those expecting her to promise a fundamental shake-up of the EU at this stage would be disappointed.
However, she was more positive when asked in Downing Street whether she would support Mr Cameron's attempts to negotiate a looser, more trade-based relationship with Brussels ahead of a referendum the Tories have committed to holding in 2017 if they are still in power.
'I firmly believe that what we are discussing here is feasible, is doable,' she said after a 90-minute meeting over lunch in the Prime Minister's Downing Street flat. 'Where there's a will there's a way.'
She also suggested that she agreed freedom of movement rules should be amended to restrict rights to claim benefits, saying it was wrong that a new immigrant could claim the same level of handouts as people who had paid into the system for several years.
'That would not be the interpretation of freedom of movement that I would have,' she said. 'That is just as much of a headache for us in Germany as it is for the British people.'
She suggested she was ready to agree reforms that would mean new rights for countries who are not members of the single currency.
'If one wants Britain to remain in the European Union - which is what I want - if one at the same time wants a competitive union... one can find common solutions.'
However, Mrs Merkel warned Mr Cameron that it would not be a 'piece of cake' for changes to be agreed across the EU.
She also said that Germany was grateful to Britain for placing trust in her country following the Second World War and 'the break in civilisation' represented by the Holocaust.
Speaking in the anniversary year of the outbreak of the First World War, she said: 'This is a special year of commemoration for Britain, where you remember your dead, your losses and the untold suffering that Germany brought through these wars to you.
'As German Chancellor, I bow my head before the victims of these horrible wars.'
Eurosceptic Conservative MP Bernard Jenkin said: 'What Angela Merkel said came as no surprise. She wasn't going to suddenly offer a whole load of concessions.
'What's important is how good relations are between David Cameron and Angela Merkel. He has vetoed a treaty, promised an in/out referendum, cut the EU budget against everyone's wishes, and still Angela Merkel comes over here and is extremely friendly and positive.'
Tory MP John Baron, another Eurosceptic, was less convinced, saying: 'She made it clear the direction of travel is "more Europe" - closer economic and political integration.'
Douglas Alexander, Labour's foreign affairs spokesman, said: 'Chancellor Merkel's remarks have confirmed that David Cameron's approach to Europe just isn't working.'
But Labour MP Austin Mitchell said Mrs Merkel has also created a big problem for Labour.
It was clear, he said, that the choice for Britain was to 'join the euro and central group or be relegated to periphery'. 'Miliband can't accept either,' he added.
Comment - Page 14
* DAVID Cameron caused confusion when he seemed to be listening to Mrs Merkel's speech without the aid of earphones delivering translation. He appeared to be laughing and nodding even though he has a limited grasp of German. There was speculation that he was pretending to understand while avoiding being pictured with the large earphones most parliamentarians had clamped to their ears. Aides revealed later, however, that Mr Cameron had been listening to the English translation via a smaller, concealed earpiece.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140228ea2s00020
