{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1677"}
____
  
Features
THE CUDDLY SIDE OF THE CHINGFORD SKINHEAD
2,273 words
19 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
38
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Cameron? Silly. Blair? Offensive. Cherie? Urggh. Norman Tebbit's as savage as ever — except about the wife he adores and the dog who inspired his startling new book
BY JANE FRYER
Every time Lord Tebbit looks in danger of getting a bit worked up, his wife Margaret gently interjects.
'No, Norman. Oh dear. Oh no, Norman. Don't get into that, darling. You mustn't work yourself up.'
And on each occasion, he smiles tenderly: 'OK, love. Of course.' And then presses on in his quiet, strong voice about David Cameron, the IRA, John Major, forgiveness, religion, food banks, he cost of carers and, right now, Maria Miller.
'It would have been better if they'd taken my advice in the beginning. There's a sort of nit-picking approach — "it was only £5,000 and she did apologise". But to me that's not the point. She was working the system. It offends against common sense.'
We are sitting in his very warm study at their beautiful home in Bury St Edmunds, sipping tea.
He, grey and stooped in slacks, beige socks and leather slippers. Margaret, immaculate in pink and grey, aloft an enormous electronic wheelchair that took four tries to get through the narrow doorway and looks like something out of Star Trek.
She has been in this chair, and others before it, since the IRA planted a bomb under a bathtub in the Grand Hotel during the 1984 Tory Party Conference at Brighton, killing five people and injuring 34, but missing their main target, Margaret Thatcher.
But right now Margaret Tebbit's terrible injuries, IRA bombs, Europe, and even the awful Tony Blair are put to one side so we can discuss a topic the Beast of Chingford is fantastically soppy about: dogs.
Indeed, he has just written a rather unlikely (but very good and surprisingly moving) children's book about a Labrador called Ben (named after their late pet Labrador) and his master, Sam, a 14-year-old boy paralysed from the waist down in a car accident.
The fictitious Ben isn't any old dog. He is a 'help' dog (linked to a real-life organisation called Canine Partners in Midhurst, West Sussex, which trains dogs to help disabled people) who can open doors, pick up clothes, helps Sam get dressed, pushes Sam's wheelchair and is a true and loyal friend.
Even better, he can also can read people's minds and communicate by placing his thoughts in their heads.
The real Ben beams out of a silver photo frame on the sideboard. 'He was just a pet, not a help dog from Canine Partners, but he was special. He really did know what I was thinking and I often knew what he was thinking,' says Norman.
'In the car, he'd stand up and paw my arm. "Master, you've taken the wrong turn".'
Today Ben, sadly put to sleep when he was 14, lies beneath a beautifully crafted headstone in their old back garden in Sussex. His last supper, to give him a good send-off, was a steak with a fried egg on top — 'I think he knew,' says Norman.
'It reads, "Ben Tebbit. A gentleman dog." The stonemason made me add that last bit so people didn't think he was a child.' In the book Sam, the injured boy, is treated at Stoke Mandeville Hospital (where Margaret spent a year and Norman nearly three months).
'Suffering a severe injury is so much worse for a youngster. Suddenly it's all taken away and all that's left is a great big void,' says Norman.
But surely it's just the same for older people, like them? 'Yes. But it's worse if you're younger,' insists Margaret.
'Because you're less well equipped to deal with it,' adds Norman. 'And it's your whole life. At least we had . . . well, it's now less than half our married life, but for a kid . . . just awful.' Which is a typical Tebbitism.
Their bodies have been smashed to bits, their retirement vaporised, their lives are dominated by hospital appointments, catheters and carers — who flit in an out, pouring tea and adjusting head rests — but they wouldn't dream of feeling sorry for themselves.
'There are two rules of disability — it takes longer and it costs more,' Norman says crisply. 'We don't really go on holiday any more, it's just too difficult. But we potter around the town and have very good friends who come and stay and our three children have been marvellous.'
'And we have five grandchildren and one great-grandson,' adds Margaret.
I'd heard she wasn't well right now, but she's funny and bright — if occasionally struggling over a name (who doesn't?) and clearly adores Norman.
She has a calming effect on him. He seems to bask in her presence.
They can still remember every detail of the bombing. 'The last person I spoke to was the BBC journalist John Cole, outside our bedroom door. It was quite late, almost one o'clock, because we'd been at [Lord] McAlpine's soiree. And I said "I'd better get to bed".'
The blast gouged out the front of the hotel and sent the Tebbits' bed hurtling four floors down under hundreds of tonnes of masonry.
How long were they trapped? 'Ten or 12 years, it felt. But we were conscious and could talk to each other.'
'We could reach out and hold hands,' says Margaret. 'At first. But then the debris shifted and we were moved apart. We had to shout to each other in the dark.'
Did they panic? 'No point. I couldn't think of anything to panic about. There was only one question — would we be dug out before we died?'
Anyone over 40 will remember footage of Norman being stretchered out, ashen faced, still in his pyjamas.
'That was the remarkable thing — nobody seemed to be caught in the wrong bed. Everyone was fully pyjama'd at a Tory Party Conference!'
It seems light years since Tebbit's infamous 'cricket test' (he said that immigrants who supported their native cricket teams rather than England were not sufficiently assimilated) and wrestling with trades unions and appearances on Spitting Image as the leather-jacketed Chingford Skinhead.
'If you think about it, my puppet was always winning. He was never being pushed around.' No — he was liquidising people's limbs and stirring his tea with cut-throat razors. 'Yes, that's right!' he squawks in delight.
He was the architect of the Thatcher era, but today some of his views seem to chime better with Ukip.
'I think Farage is a very clever political operator. He has touched on a well of public opinion,' says Norman
And has he been approached by Ukip to defect? 'Of course. Lots of times. But I joined the Conservative party in 1946 and I'm still a Conservative. And I'm not going to be pushed out of my party after 70-odd years.' Particularly not by David Cameron.
'We've only ever had two or three direct conversations. I think I'm regarded as too Thatcherite, out of touch and all that. I rubbed him up the wrong way in the run-up to the general election when I asked him why his lead was getting narrower and narrower. He got quite cross with me, which I thought was very silly.'
'Come on now, Norman. Don't get worked up again.'
'It's OK, love . . . and then I made it plain I didn't think it was wise to enter a coalition.' And now — does he think Cameron can win the next election?
'Well . . . I don't think it would be sensible for the Conservative Party to change its leader now. There isn't an obvious candidate. This certainly isn't what I'd call a good time for the Conservatives.
'Safe to say, we've not exactly been habituees of Number 10 in the last few years.'
'But what about that lovely party we went to?' says Margaret. 'That was the funniest, kindest party ever.'
'That was when Brown was PM,' says Norman. 'I don't join in all the attacks on Brown. I think he was essentially a decent man who was just wrong about almost everything. And unlike Blair he was not greedy.
'You don't have to acquire umpteen houses and umpteen millions of pounds. I find that just offensive. And Cherie . . . urggh.'
'But tell her about the party,' says Margaret.
'Well, we went with this bloody great wheelchair and we couldn't get it in the lift at Downing Street. Brown spent ages up and down the stairs, making sure we had drinks and people to talk to until our car came back with a smaller chair. He wasn't trying to prove anything. It was just genuine niceness.'
He is less gushing about Major.
'John's big problem was he was very prone to flattery. People would tell him what a genius he was and he'd be convinced he really had been terribly clever. Not so.'
And sceptical about Boris's chances of becoming Prime Minister. 'I love Boris dearly. I think he's a great writer and a fun person to have around, but I don't think he's got the self-discipline or focus. And there's that streak of self-indulgence.'
Not something Norman seems to possess. Aged 83, he enjoys simple pleasures — cooking, reading, writing, attending evensong in the local cathedral and gardening. Gently. He still has a limp from his own injuries and looks rather frail.
Because Margaret's injuries were so terrible, Norman's are often overlooked. Reluctantly, he lists them.
'Broken shoulder blade, fractured vertebrae (although I didn't find out till sometime afterwards), leg bone cracked. A lot of smacks around the face. Broken collar bone. I lost the iliac crest on the top of my left hip and all the muscle girdle across my stomach was severed, so I needed quite a bit of plastic surgery to patch it all together.'
He hated hospital. He set up a 'minister's private office' in the ward and discharged himself after only three months. Margaret was in hospital for two years — after a year in Stoke Mandeville she was moved to Stanmore, closer for Norman (and his minders) to visit.
'After the bombing, I was promoted by the IRA quite high up their "must kill" list. Apparently they regarded it as a bit of an affront that I hadn't done the decent thing and died in Brighton. But my minders were lovely men. A loyal and funny bunch of guys.' One of them married a nurse he met at Stoke Mandeville.
Before the bombing, Norman was fiercely ambitious and hotly tipped by many to succeed Thatcher as PM.
'I would have given it a go, but after we were injured, I promised Margaret I wouldn't carry on beyond the next election.' Would he have enjoyed life at Number 10? 'Probably. Good address. Nice garden — good for a dog.'
Instead, he resigned himself to commenting from the sidelines — regularly stirring everyone up with (sometimes outrageously) provocative Tebbitisms, such as suggesting gay marriage could lead to a lesbian Queen marrying and having a child by artificial insemination.
'I like to wind people up. I like pulling people's legs.' He recently caused outrage by claiming many people used food banks at the same times as spending money on junk food.
He still works as a newspaper columnist, after-dinner speaker, you name it, to help pay for Margaret's round-the-clock carers. The bills must have been astronomical.
'Don't get me started . . .'
There was a lump sum from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board and an anonymous fund donated by a group of people whose names he still does not know, masterminded by the late lawyer and political fixer Arnold 'Two Dinners' Goodman. Most of which is gone now, but it helped enormously.
While Norman is not one for self-pity, he is not ready to forgive.
'I will forgive them when they follow what it says in the prayer book. Firstly they have to accept that they have sinned. Secondly they have to confess their sins. Then they have to do penance. Come on! There is no penance.
'I don't know whether God exists, but it would be a good idea if he did and I would like to see him be quite active.'
'Oh Norman, don't . . .'
Then Margaret turns to me — or as much as a turn as you can turn when you're pinned to a wheelchair by paralysis — and grins lopsidedly. 'Good thing I love him so much!'
I can see why. Norman Tebbit is amazing — fantastically good, sharp and clever company, if rather frail of body. Whether or not you agree with his politics, it is impossible not to admire his loyalty, humanity and extraordinary strength of character.
'I don't go in a lot for "might have beens". People who say, "If only I'd done that, then this might have happened". 'Basically, they're day-dreaming, aren't they? That's not realistic. I'm a realist.'
'You've got to face facts — your old life isn't happening. You've got to make a new life. You have to count your blessings and move on. So we did.'
* Ben's Story will be published by Bretwalda Books in June, at £7.99.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140418ea4j0000f
