{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1151"}
____
Books
POPULAR FICTION
WENDY HOLDEN   
437 words
20 March 2014
18:18
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
CAT OUT OF HELL BY LYNNE TRUSS (Hammer £9.99)
Truss's first work of fiction for a decade is not what you might expect.
It’s a horror story; it jumps about from email to image file to narrative and its main characters include a talking cat called Roger. Stick with it, though; it’s as compelling a read as it is a funny one.
Alec takes a break by the sea to recover from the death of his wife. Alone with his laptop in his holiday cottage, he opens a mysterious file.
An incredible tale begins starring the talking cat, plus a provincial-rep actor, another scary cat and some ex-colleagues who aren’t as innocent as they look. Full of trademark dry Truss humour and lovely literary references, this book has some unforgettably gory bits, too. You may never look at a cat in quite the same way again.
THE ALL-GIRL FILLING STATION’S LAST REUNION BY FANNIE FLAGG (Chatto £12.99)
I loved this Alabama-set book from the author of Fried Green Tomatoes At The Whistle  Stop Café. It has more heart than a shopful of Valentine cards and some absolutely wonderful characters.
It’s hard to describe the plot without giving the game away, but it’s basically a warm, funny riff on family and identity and what happens when you find out late in life that you’re not who you think you are.
Sweet, easygoing Sookie is nearly 60, yet still in thrall to her overbearing, snobbish mother. But is Lenore really her mother? The subplot explores the experience of immigrant Polish female pilots during World War II; swashbuckling Fitzi is a wisecrackin’, thigh-slappin’ Jane Russell of a gal with a heart the size of her native Wisconsin. But how is she related to Sookie?
BE CAREFUL WHAT  YOU WISH FOR BY JEFFREY ARCHER (Macmillan £20)
Twist, twist, twist. This latest  in the series about the glamorous Barringtons is a typical Archer corkscrew of turns and surprises. It opens with a bang, quite literally; one character is murdered on the motorway. But is it his body in the hospital morgue? It ends with another, much bigger, explosion, which I won’t spoil for you.
Villain Pedro Martinez wants to bump off the entire Barrington family. He picks them off one by one in ever more evil and ingenious ways. But he has reckoned without cautious Yorkshireman Cedric, an absolute sweetheart with a moral compass the size of Greenwich.
What I personally wish for is that Cedric’s in the next one.
Document DAMONL0020140320ea3k0053q
