{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3341"}
____
  
News
FOUR YEARS ON, HE'S STILL LESS POPULAR THAN BROWN
BY JAMES CHAPMAN AND TAMARA COHEN   
525 words
14 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
2
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
ED MILIBAND'S ratings are worse than those of Gordon Brown and he has 'nothing to say' on key issues, senior Labour MPs are warning.
The Labour leader faces growing unrest over an alleged '35 per cent' election strategy - which aims to deliver victory thanks to disaffected Liberal Democrat voters and Commons boundaries which favour Labour.
It is believed one unnamed 'senior party staffer' yesterday said of Labour's vanishing poll lead: 'If we draw, we still win.'
This is due to the fact that even if the same number of people vote Labour and Tory next year, the in-built electoral boundary advantage for Labour means the party would win a greater number of seats.
Labour's jitters over its prospects at next year's general election have grown, after two polls showed it had fallen behind the Tories for the first time in more than two years.
But Mr Miliband yesterday insisted he and his party were focusing on 'the issues the country is facing'.
'The cost of living crisis, how we create good jobs with good wages in this country, including with successful British industry, how we improve the NHS - that's where Labour's focus is and that's where it will remain,' he said, adding that he sees himself as 'more personally competent' than David Cameron to lead Britain.
But Labour MP Graham Stringer said local council elections taking place next week 'confirm there is a trend away from where the Labour Party has been over the last two years, in front in the polls'.
His party yesterday had their first briefing from US president Barack Obama's former campaign guru, David Axelrod, who is now a part-time adviser to Mr Miliband.
The Labour leader has faced pressure to toughen his stance on areas such as immigration and welfare, where the Conservatives are seen as strong.
One former Labour minister said: 'Ed Miliband is comfortable talking about how bad business is and rent controls and the Bedroom Tax. He has got nothing to say about the issues the public is concerned about. He doesn't talk about immigration. He doesn't talk about welfare. We're about to go into a [European] election under his leadership and we are not going to win it.
'It's not inconceivable that we could end up coming third. That would be calamitous. MPs are in a tailspin. Plenty of them are panicking.
'Ed Miliband has had four years and hasn't managed to shift his personal ratings and public perception one iota. His numbers are catastrophic - worse than Iain Duncan Smith or Gordon Brown.'
Mark Ferguson, editor of unofficial party website LabourList, attacked the 'keep calm and carry on brigade', who note that Labour could still win the general election with even as little as 32 per cent of the vote, as 'complacent beyond belief'.
But a spokesman for Mr Miliband denied Labour had a '35 per cent' strategy, saying: 'I have never heard anybody mention it.'
j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140513ea5e00014
