{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3427"}
____
News
Thousands of parents being stopped at Britain's borders by officials who think they've kidnapped their own children because of their different SURNAMES
IAN DRURY   
1,309 words
15 May 2014
19:20
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* 600,000 mothers and fathers quizzed at airports, ferry and train terminals
* Passport system doesn't recognise children might have different surname
* The issue particularly affects women who remarry and cohabiting couples
* Childrens' passports only list a youngster's name, date and place of birth
Hundreds and thousands of parents are being stopped at Britain's borders by officials suspicious they have kidnapped their own sons and daughters.
Some 600,000 mothers and fathers have been quizzed at airports, ferry and Eurostar terminals because the UK's 'out-of-date' passport system does not recognise their children might have a different surname.
Many innocent families have been forced to endure the embarrassment of being held up by officials and asked to prove they are the legal guardians at the end of their holidays.
The problem is expected to get worse because of social changes that have seen a rising number of parents and children who do not share the same surname.
The issue particularly affects women who remarry, those who keep their own name when they wed, and cohabiting couples - the fastest-growing family type in the country.
The Home Office says passport and immigration staff have a duty to screen for child abduction or trafficking and advises parents to carry documentation proving their relationship when travelling abroad.
Childrens' passports - introduced in the 1990s - only list a youngster's name, date and place of birth.
Now a campaign which reaches Parliament yesterday is battling to end the confusion by allowing both parents and guardians' names to be added to passports held by under-18s.
WHY COLETTE MACKINTOSH WAS STOPPED AT GATWICK AIRPORT
Flying back from Majorca after a sunshine break with her children, Colette Mackintosh was stunned to be quizzed by border officials about whether she had abducted them.
Her son Harry and daughter Anastasia have a different surname - Scott - because Mrs Mackintosh remarried. But when officials spotted this they questioned the children as to whether she was really their mother.
Now Mrs Mackintosh, 47, a personal assistant from Cobham, Surrey, needs to carry a letter from her ex-husband allowing her to travel with the youngsters.
Farcically, border staff had no problem with her travelling with her stepdaughter Isabella who shares her surname but is not related by blood.
The incident happened two years ago when Mrs Mackintosh arrived at Gatwick with Isabella, then 16, Harry, then 14, and Anastasia, then 12.
She said: 'We were travelling back from Spain when we were stopped at border security re-entering the UK by staff, who challenged me to prove that I was the mother of my children.
'Border staff were happy for me to travel with my stepdaughter, who shares my surname, but took my son and daughter aside to ask whether I was their mother.
'At that point, I said, "My son does not go anywhere without me, I want to oversee this". He was asked to confirm that I was his mother, to which he said yes. They asked me to produce a letter from my ex-husband giving the children permission to travel with me. I’m their mother for goodness' sake.
'What made the experience even more absurd is that my biological children look the spitting image of me – we all have dark hair – while my stepdaughter Isabella is fair, with blonde curly hair. Eventually they allowed us to pass through, even though we had not produced any evidence – after 10 or 15 minutes of questioning and unnecessary hassle, they just seemed to accept that I was who I said I was.
'It was not a pleasant experience. It was embarrassing to be stuck there when you watch hundreds of people in the other queues going through.
'It's ridiculous that I now have to travel with a letter from my ex-husband giving permission to travel with my own children. It is all amicable between us, but there could be a situation where a former partner was not.
'It's not right that some parents have to go through this hassle at border security just because they don't share a surname with their children.
'A simple addition to the information available on passports would rectify this injustice.'
Helen Perry, who has founded the Parental Passport Campaign, will meet with MPs, including three ministers, for their support in urging Home Secretary Theresa May to solve the problem by changing the rules.
Mrs Perry, whose children Marcus, 16, Sasha, 14, and Tessa, 10, use their father's name, has been asked to prove they are hers several times.
She said that while questioning adults was a vital tool to prevent child trafficking, this measure would allow parents to be listed on the child's paperwork, saving time and money.
Mrs Perry, a housewife from Weybridge, Surrey, launched the campaign in 2010 after being stopped as she and her children returned from a holiday in South Africa.
She said: 'At the airport I was asked if I could prove they were mine and I said, "You could ask the children," and she replied, "Don't take that tone with me."
'She asked me for proof but of course I hadn't got any. Things got sorted out but I am determined to take action.
'Modern Britain is made up of a myriad of different family types, with nearly millions of children living with cohabiting, unmarried parents.
'Parents with different names often suffer harassment and delays when crossing borders. A simple change to passports would reduce the trauma to parents and children, and reduce unnecessary delays.
'Passports are out of date and have not kept up with the modern family. UK passports should make it easier for families to travel, not make it more difficult.
'I'm not saying getting stopped is the most important issue in the world. But the government could easily solve the problem.'
A survey for YouGov found almost 30 per cent of parents with children under 18 said that their child does not share a surname with both parents.
Of those who travelled abroad, a third said that their child's surname had delayed them at border security at least once.
If an immigration officer is in any doubt, a parent and children travelling with them will be questioned about their relationship, asked to provide documentation, or to call a parent with the same name to prove they have permission to travel.
Campaigners say it is impractical carrying up to seven documents proving they are legal guardians. Also, some people do not have amicable relationships with their ex-partners who might refuse to provide a permission letter.
Valerie Burgess, who is not married to her partner, said she was often stopped flying home to London with her two daughters, aged six and eight.
She said: 'The most recent case was last October. The official checked all the passports, then said directly to my eldest: "Who is this lady?" It sent a total panic through my daughters. They thought something was dreadfully wrong.'
The Home Office said that there were no plans to change the system.
A spokesman said: 'A passport is a document for travel. Its fundamental purpose would change if it were to be used to identify a parental relationship.
'In order to protect children and detect possible cases of trafficking, Border Force officers may ask adults travelling with children about their relationship with the child. We endeavour to do this as quickly and sensitively as possible to ensure there is no delay to journeys.
'Safeguarding the interests of the child is of the utmost importance.'
Anyone wanting to support the campaign can sign a petition at http://epetitions.direct.gov.uk/petitions/55636
Document DAMONL0020140515ea5f005n3
