{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1829"}
____
  
Features
CYRIL SMITH SCANDAL AND A PARTY IN DENIAL
BY DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
643 words
23 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
AND still they deny they knew anything. It is 11 days since the Mail exposed the horrifying scale - and shameful cover-up - of Cyril Smith's sexual abuse of young boys, which lasted at least four decades.
But as demands grow for an independent inquiry, Paddy Ashdown yesterday became the fourth Liberal Democrat leader to say he knew nothing about it.
'You ask whether I was aware of allegations about Cyril Smith during the time you refer to,' said the man who led the party from its inception in 1988 to 1999. 'The answer is no.'
So he joins Nick Clegg, Charles Kennedy and Vince Cable in professing ignorance of a scandal first mentioned in print in 1979 then widely and repeatedly spoken of at Westminster since.
Indeed, Mr Clegg's denial that any Liberal or Lib Dem MP or peer had heard about it is 'demonstrably not true'.
And no, those are not the Mail's words. This was the verdict of the Times, which wrote in its leader column on Monday: 'What the Liberal Democrats knew and when they knew it about Smith's assaults is a matter of urgent public interest and a gathering scandal.'
As for the deputy prime minister's insistence that the Liberals and the Lib Dems were separate entities, the paper comments: 'Mr Clegg's answers have so far been legalistic and unconvincing.'
When the Jimmy Savile scandal was finally exposed, the BBC set up three inquiries into why it protected him for so long. When will the Lib Dems face their responsibility to inquire into this hideously similar scandal of their own?
The right to be heard
TRUE, many may quarrel with some of the claims made in Ukip's Euro-election posters, warning of the impact of EU migration policy on British jobs. Others might object to their bellicose tone.
But surely nobody can deny their success in focusing public attention on a crucial issue we ought to be debating in the run-up to polling day.
So how depressing that the reaction of the liberal Establishment, as ever, has been to try to silence all discussion of immigration, with wearily familiar accusations of 'racism' and bad faith against anyone who raises the subject.
Let us be clear. This paper has deep reservations about Ukip, whose leading lights inspire little confidence in their fitness for the business of government.
And, yes, its posters may melodramatise the party's case. It is clearly absurd, for example, to suggest that all 26million of the EU's unemployed have their sights on jobs in the UK (though many have).
But we fail to see what is 'racist', 'divisive' or 'offensive' about expressing widely-held concerns over the pressure of numbers on the jobs market - or, indeed, about arguing that: 'British workers are hit hard by unlimited foreign labour'.
If europhiles wish to argue that British workers have benefited from the EU's open borders policy, they are free to do so.
But they should allow eurosceptics equal freedom to argue the opposite case. Isn't this what democracy is all about?
Indeed, where migration is concerned, Labour and the Tories might have less to fear from Ukip this month, if only they had shown more respect in the past for democracy and the will of the people.
Gordon's grey appeal
IN a timely intervention in the independence debate, former prime minister Gordon Brown rightly spells out the huge advantages of the Union to Scotland's pensioners.
One wry reflection. In his days as chancellor, with Ed Balls's advice, this is the man whose annual tax raids brought the UK pensions industry to its knees. What a pity it has taken him until now to realise just how important pensions are.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140422ea4n0000h
