{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1382"}
____
News
Cameron told to ditch 'nonsense' immigration policy and warned of 'dangerous complacency' over Ukip threat to Tories
WILLS ROBINSON   
635 words
2 March 2014
10:13
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Former Cabinet minister says Prime Minister needs a radical overhaul
* Liam Fox, former defence secretary, said Tories risked losing majority
* Said party should look at reducing number of 'low-skilled migrants'
* Those in the party are concerned he Cameron will not deliver on his promise to reduce migration by 'tens of thousands'
The Prime Minister has been told he must introduce strategies to reduce the number of migrants moving to Britain and get rid of the 'statistical nonsense' of his immigration policy.
A former Cabinet minister also advised David Cameron that he needed a radical overhaul to win back voters from Ukip.
Former defence secretary Liam Fox said the Conservative leader will be at risk of 'complacency' if he ignores the increasing threat of Nigel Farage's party.
Writing in The Sunday Telegraph, the MP for North Somerset said the Tories should abandon their target to cut 'net migration' and reduce the number of low-skilled migrants to lighten the impact on public services.
He added that 'current betting' put Ukip as favourites in the European polls on May 22.
'If they do well, many will point to the sucesses or previous minor parties that did well in the Euro elections only to fail the next general election,' he said.
'This could be dangerous complacency, especially for the Tories.'
He added the most appropriate response would be to set out a 'positive vision, clear philosophy and definable objectives.'
Dr Fox also warned that the party would lose out on a majority in the Commons if they did not adopt a 'clear narrative' on immigration.
Those in the party are concerned Cameron has no chance of reducing the number of foreigners coming to Britain by 'tens of thousands', a promise he made last year.
Bill Cash, who chairs the Commons EU scrutiny committee said the policy could cost the party '50 or 60 marginal seats'.
It comes after migration experts and rival politicians accused the Government of losing its grip on immigration policy as official figures revealed earlier this week that the net flow of migrants.
The Tories were dealt a huge blow last week after new suggested net migration to Britain had rocketed by 60,000 to 212,000 in the year to September 2013.
Liberal Democrat Business Secretary Vince Cable said the figures were 'good news for British workers' and showed that the Conservative drive to get net migration under 100,000 - which has never been accepted by the Lib Dem side of the coalition Government - was 'unworkable'.
Meanwhile, the Conservative leader of Guildford Council said that he feared the borough would lose its Tory majority for the first time in 12 years and that MP Anne Milton would be defeated at the election because of government policies.
In a letter to Mr Cameron, Stephen Mansbridge accused the Prime Minister of undermining the party's chances of winning at the next election, saying: 'We have lost many Conservative Party members - indeed whole branches of the local association - due to carious government policies, and Ukip won over 20 per cent of the vote in the local elections last year in Surrey.
'Immigration, the EU and gay marriage are frequently given as reasons for this.'
It was driven entirely by a 40 per cent leap in the number of people taking advantage of EU edicts on free movement.
Fox stood unsuccessfully in the 2005 Conservative leadership election.
In 2010, he was appointed Secretary of State for Defence, a position from which he resigned from in October 2011.
He stepped down over allegations that he had given a close friend, lobbyist Adam Werritty, access to the Ministry of Defence and allowed him to join official trips overseas.
Document DAMONL0020140302ea32004pk
