{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2206"}
____
News
'I would love to be Prime Minister', Clegg tells the Lib Dems to LAUGHTER from activists at his own conference
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
571 words
8 March 2014
16:23
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Lib Dem leader challenged about not campaigning for a majority in 2015
* Snorted and appeared lost for words about his chances of outright victory
* Insisted the best way of having Lib Dem policies in power was in coalition
Nick Clegg today declared he would 'love to be Prime Minister' - triggering laughter from his own party members.
The Lib Dem leader was challenged at his spring conference in York about why he was not trying to cross the finish line first with an outright majority at the next election, instead of pitching for another coalition.
But he appeared for lost words and snorted at the very idea of voters handing him the keys to Number 10, before laughter broke out in the auditorium.
Mr Clegg used a question and answer session with party members to defend hikes to tuition fees, attack the Tories over immigration and push for further income tax cuts for low paid workers.
But he appeared stumped when an activist asked him: 'Can we please campaign to form the next government alone. Under first-past-the-post nobody can vote for a coalition.'
Mr Clegg struggled for an answer, telling the conference hall at the York Barbican: 'I would love to be Prime Minister...'
But he was drowned out by applause and laughter from the party faithful.
He went on: 'I want us to campaign for Lib Dem policies, values and people in government. I don't go around campaigning for this coalition or that coalition.'
And in apparent admission that the Lib Dems' only hope of power is a power-sharing deal with Labour or the Tories, he added: 'I just so happen to think that most people realise that the way to get Lib Dem policies, values and people into government... right now is going to be done in power with another party.'
He repeatedly pushed his pro-EU message, which has dominated the conference ahead of Brussels elections in May.
But minutes earlier councillor Jill Hope told the Lib Dem leader that the party's conference: 'The theme for this conference is "in Europe in work", but no-one on the doorstep cares'.
Turning his fire on the Tories, Mr Clegg launched an outspoken attack on Immigration Minister James Brokenshire, who used a speech this week to accuse a 'wealthy metropolitan elite' of enjoying cheap tradesman and services.
The speech triggered a major coalition row, with Mr Clegg, David Cameron and Theresa May employ foreign nannies and cleaners.
Mr Clegg said: 'Over the last 24 to 48 hours we have seen in many respect some of the most ugly sides of the immigration debate.
'It is truly dispiriting to see the Conservative and Labour parties, the two largest parties in British politics, driven, as far as I can see, entirely by panic on this issues.
'You have got a Conservative Party which is no longer standing up for business - quite a big development, that. I think, personally they do so at their peril. The Institute of Directors absolutely slammed the irresponsible speech made by a Conservative minister this last week on immigration.
'And yet the Labour Party who won't stand up against xenophobia. Instead of trying to actually reduce the temperature of the debate they try and stoke it.'
Document DAMONL0020140308ea38006eq
