{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"1075"}
____
VIDEO: Teen stowaway jumps from plane wheel well after FIVE HOURS on board
Jaymi McCann   
363 words
7 May 2014
11:59
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
THIS is the extraordinary moment a 15-year-old jumps from a jet after five hours stowed in the wheel well.
Somali immigrant Yahya Abdi’s legs dangle briefly from the plane and he drops onto the concrete at Maui airport.
Hawaii transportation officials released the footage this week and confirms previous accounts given by FBI and airport officials of Yahya’s unbelievable story.
He ran away from home, hopped a fence at Mineta San Jose International Airport and climbed into the wheel well of the closest plane.
Abdi survived the flight at 35,000 feet despite low oxygen and freezing temperatures.
The six minutes of security footage that the Hawaii Department of Transportation released show Abdi lowering himself from the Boeing 767 and jumping to the ground.
He sits on the concrete for 13 seconds, then gets up and slowly walks toward the front of the plane.
Related articles VIDEO: Police dog bites man in the NECK during arrest VIDEO: Watch Manchester United wonderkid James Wilson score stunning solo goal
He wobbles slightly as he walks, pausing briefly a few times in the roughly 40 seconds it takes him to get under the passageway connecting the front of the airplane with the terminal.
Abdi, who lived in California, walks up to an airport worker driving a cart, and the two talk for about three minutes before walking away together.
The boy stays standing the whole time. Hawaii Department of Transportation spokeswoman Caroline Sluyter said the footage was released after the state attorney general's office reviewed media requests.
San Jose, California, police spokesman Albert Morales said the Abdi flew back to California over the weekend and was being cared for by Santa Clara County Child Protective Services.
Morales said in a statement Tuesday that authorities plan to work with the boy's attorney to set up an interview with him in the near future.
After the department concludes its investigation, it will consult with Santa Clara County district attorney's office and city of San Jose representatives to decide whether to file charges against him, Morales said.
Document DAICO00020140507ea5700231
