{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"112"}
____
TV documentary exposes how gypsies are happy to exploit British benefit system
Tom Rawle   
462 words
3 April 2014
01:00
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
A NEW documentary is coming to your telly showing the lives of three gypsy families who say they love sponging off benefits in Britain.
Gypsies On Benefits And Proud will show the unique stories of three immigrants after they travelled freely to the UK with their families once working restrictions were lifted in January.
The programme, which is the first episode of the second "And Proud" series, shows how easy it is for immigrants to now travel to the UK and join the nation's generous benefit scheme.
Ion Lazar, 36, who came to the UK with five other immigrants, says it is so simple to walk into Britain and get everything given to you.
He says on the show: “I know it’s very, very easy to take benefits in England… She’s give me home free, she’s give me money free, she’s give me everything."
He is now focusing on earning £40,000 to take home to Romania to build a house in his small village where he grew up.
“I need maybe forty thousand from benefits.... four zero thousand pounds for my family and I think this money I can make in one years maybe two," he said.
Katarina Cisarova
Katarina Cisarova has brought her eleven children and eleven grand-children with her to an estate in Rotherham.
The 43-year-old Slovakian Roma said she is happy to be here without having to worry about work.
She said: “My country, I no had a job, no food, nothing. No going back, never.
"I like here England. England give me house, give me doctor, give school, benefit, England good.
"Thank you so much England."
The third gypsy being documented is Viorel Dinu.
He came to the UK after losing both of his legs in Romania when he was seven years old.
In Romania, he begged for money on his skateboard, but here he gets £750 a month in handouts.
He revealed: “I come to the UK because I don’t have a nice life there.
“In England is more better life because here they don’t look on you if you black or not.  They don’t think if your gypsy or not.
"Every door is open here, this is the most easy."
Executive Producer Jacqui Wilson says: “This programme reinforces the determination of the “And Proud” series to bring ground-breaking content, unearthing controversial characters and challenging stories that viewers have never have seen before.
"People should watch this programme before jumping to conclusions. Some of its revelations will make people think twice about Gypsies in the UK.”
Gypsies On Benefits And Proud will air on Friday April 11 on Channel 5.
Document DAICO00020140402ea43003s6
