{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3020"}
____
Travel
The ultimate food selfie! Photographer captures mouthwatering shots of local cuisine around the world
SARAH GORDON   
517 words
8 May 2014
17:32
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Half the joy of travelling is trying out different foods, from the delicious to the bizarre.
So perhaps it is no surprise that globetrotter Nick Mollberg has taken to giving his holiday snaps some context, by featuring key dishes and snacks in each shot.
The software consultant, who travels the world for his work, started keeping his friends up to date with his trips by posting pictures to Flickr and Facebook.
Now the amateur photographer has quite the following, with eager foodies trying to guess the snacks he features in each shot.
The American adventurer, who is based in Austin, Texas, loves nothing more than sampling the local street food when he travels.
He told MailOnline Travel: 'So much about understanding a new culture comes from experiencing their cuisine - and so I always try to wander as far away from the typical tourist areas as possible, and try to find local, authentic food. If I can share this with others, so much the better.
'I've got nothing against white table cloths and fine dining, but some of the best food I've ever had in my life has been in tiny cafes and from street carts.'
The 31-year-old has been taking food photos for decades, but decided to combine them with scenery while travelling in Europe.
He said: 'I started the "street eats" photos randomly while enjoying some pastries walking along the seine in Paris about five years ago.'
Mollberg's favourite foodie destination is Istanbul, in Turkey, where he says the street food culture is 'phenomenal'.
He told MailOnline: 'Fez, Morocco, was similarly incredible - with so many winding, twisting alleys, positively teeming with tiny food stalls.'
He added: 'Prague was fantastic - lots of excellent pastry and sausage. The part of central texas I live in was settled by Czech immigrants, so I even recognized some food when I got there!'
The globetrotter said he also has to adapt his street food photos in some destinations.
'Paris street food is kind of hard to find, but the bakeries and patisseries are absolutely unparallelled. Plus, the entire city is an excellent backdrop for this type of photography,' he said.
Despite his years travelling the world, there are still destinations that the consultant hasn't reached yet.
'I'm really excited to make my first foray into Asia soon - Singapore and Malaysia are really high on my list of places to go, and I'd love to get back to Africa sometime soon - hopefully Capetown or Cairo.'
And his followers can expect some more tasty pictures soon. Mollberg is currently in Santiago, Chile, having just departed the Argentinian capital Buenos Aires and will be crossing the globe again soon.
He said: 'Work is sending me to Mumbai in a few weeks, so I'll be packing my camera (as always), and trying to taste and capture as many exciting new foods as I possibly can!'
More of Mollberg's shots can be found on Flickr and his Facebook page.
Document DAMONL0020140508ea58003h3
