{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1979"}
____
  
Features
DAILY MAIL COMMENT
612 words
30 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Farce of the overseas aid spending splurge
AS the NHS, schools and the Armed forces scrimp and save, the Department for International Development had the opposite problem in December.
How could it get rid of our money fast enough to meet the Coalition's arbitrary target of spending 0.7 per cent of the nation's income on foreign aid before the end of the year?
So frantic was the spending spree, finds an eye-opening report from an all-party Commons committee, that the department splurged almost £100million a day, offloading a quarter of its annual budget in that single month.
Surreally, this included a £1billion donation to the Global Fund, which can already rely on the almost limitless generosity of Bill Gates.
Now the overseas development committee is demanding evidence from ministers that the spending was 'rational and cost-effective'. How could it be, when it was spent in such haste?
As the entire country is aware, the overseas aid budget - now more than double the developed world's average - is merely a ministerial vanity project.
Every day that it continues to grow, while the money is desperately needed at home, is another snub to the hard-working Britons who earn it.
Playing Farage's game
IF they had set out deliberately to boost Nigel Farage's support, members of the mainstream parties could hardly have devised a more effective way than a joint campaign to accuse Ukip of racism.
Can Labour's Barbara Roche and her Tory and Lib Dem allies really not understand how deeply they insult the 30 per cent of voters who say they will vote Ukip in next month's euro-elections?
Can't they see how they make Mr Farage's case for him when he claims the traditional parties are all the same - cut off in a political class of their own from the public they claim to represent?
Certainly, Ukip appears to attract more than its fair share of unsavoury candidates - and remarks made by a handful of its would-be councillors and MEPs range from the bonkers to the obnoxious.
But it simply won't wash to say that the party's opposition to uncontrolled EU migration can spring only from an irrational hatred of foreigners.
Indeed, as Stephen Glover argues on this page, Ukip wouldn't command anything like its current support if its views didn't chime with those of millions of decent voters, who are heartily fed up with having their reasonable concerns about our open borders ignored.
For decades, through opinion polls and the ballot box, this disregarded majority has made clear its unease about the impact of mass immigration on jobs, housing, school places, the NHS - and, yes, on our national identity.
When the political class clubs together to insult them, no wonder they are tempted to take their votes elsewhere.
This paper shudders to imagine Mr Farage (who already has eyes on Patrick Mercer's seat) and his motley crew exercising any kind of power. But doesn't it sometimes seem as if the mainstream parties are conspiring to bring it about?
Independent choice
ONE thing can be said with certainty about the first chairman of IPSO, the tough self-regulatory body set up in response to the Leveson Inquiry: like the process by which he was appointed, Appeal Court judge Sir Alan Moses is wholly independent.
In his hugely challenging job of offering redress to those wronged by the Press, while upholding the vital importance of the public's right to know - and to read the kind of papers they enjoy - the Mail wishes him nothing but well.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140429ea4u0000j
