{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"3035"}
____
  
Features
'Starr treatment was an absolute disgrace'
695 words
8 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
31
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
Re Freddie Starr. Was sad to see him looking so frail. Hope you can put this dreadful ordeal behind you, freddie and be happy again! Lets have anonymity for the accused as well as the accuser. Pat, T. Wells
How sad that pic of Freddie Starr. Hope his 'so called' victims rot in hell. Get well soon Freddie and show the b******s they haven't won. lou, yorks
Freddie Starr and his family have been to hell and back, for what? Stay strong Freddie you put a smile on a million faces. CHINNA MOSHA
Poor freddie starr, he is a great comedian and he will bounce back. Come on freddie, hold your head high and get back on the scene! I'll be your new sidekick for a laugh. A SMALL STAR! ALAN SMALL, EDINBURGH
Nick Clegg is about to get the biggest following ever: all the "Waccy- Baccy" lovers. Farouk Crosshill
i see Esther "McVile" McVey the employment minister is at it again, to strip people of benefits if they dont accept zero hours contracts is shocking. i wonder how this puppet iain duncan smith sleeps at night. FREEDOM
Re alex: well said mate. it started with thatcher and her cronies selling electric and gas and cameron is fi nishing it. u know what to do nxt may. Daffy
Apparently, when I am filling in forms, I'm told it's not politically correct for me to put my nationality as English. If all those immigrants can call themselves British, nobody is gonna stop me calling myself English. Captain Sens ible
DWP will not be Stopping the LUMP of LARD Dee's Taxpayers handouts. why not? She is being paid by her Agent to go abroad so in reality she is claiming Benefits and also being paid on top by someone other than DWP, JUST FIDDLING. cse
Stop white dee's benefits now! im a hard working tax payer. i have to save bloody hard for my holiday in the sun. she's a disgrace! joey
since takeaways are selling halal chicken so as not to offend Muslims, B&Q have stopped selling nails & timber to not offend Christians. Blurred Wines
when did we become a muslim country. I dont want to eat halal meat. Mr hoy
i dont see anyone complaining when radio stations play the song oliver's army by elvis costello, when he says the n word then, so whats the difference? the radio stations shouldnt be playing it really. Tina, london
Oh dear jeremy. i predicted in ds in march when you were slagging off Piers that he would be working long after clarkson's little boys' show was finished. Looks like my prediciton may soon come true. Tom dunne
In one of the biggest opinion polls ever carried out in Scotland before the referendum people were asked would they rather be called Scottish or British. the majority said Polish! FUNKY LEVEN
UKPLC no longer the sick man of Europe, no the sick man of the world. Hotel room in London, only £14,000 per night, much more than the average pension for a year. What a sicko country this has become. R Hamilton
I know trainee hairdressers have to practise on somebody but the last time I saw a haircut like Gordon Ramseys was on a Cabbage Patch doll - and it looked better! sid
Re A Small, Edinburgh buying a doorbell. Guess he must be a whisky glass half full kind of bloke. LEO, LEEDS
Why is it that food like Rustlers & Kit Kat have shrunk in size but not in price? NICKYBOYZ
Would'nt it be a good idea if marriages were licenced for a set period and then after that you could both decide if you want to go on or not? LEODIS
to amy childs: u r beautiful. give up the surgery amy. david sidcup
BORED THIS SUMMER? WHY NOT SIT IN YOUR FRONT GARDEN POINTING A HAIR DRYER AT PASSING CARS TO SEE IF THEY SLOW DOWN. MARTHUR
TEXT OF THE DAY
MILEY CYRUS TO SING COLDSICK COVERS? CAN IT GET MUCH WORSE? HARVEYMUSHMAN
Document DAISTA0020140508ea5800023
