{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2301"}
____
News
Homeless man rescued after making his bed on top of an 80ft cliff... and rolling over the edge in his SLEEP
CHRIS PLEASANCE   
346 words
20 May 2014
22:54
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Romanian immigrant, 33, was sleeping rough at the top of the 80ft cliff
* In the night he rolled over and fell, injuring his head, shoulders and legs
* Coastguard scrambled a helicopter to winch the man to safety
* He was then flown to hospital where he remains in a stable condition
A homeless man was rescued after making his bed on top of an 80ft cliff and rolling over the edge in his sleep.
The 33-year-old Romanian immigrant was sleeping rough on a wooded outcrop high above Meadfoot beach in Torquay, Devon, when the accident happened.
Locals were woken up by the sound of his screams after he tumbled over the edge in his sleeping bag, injuring his head, legs and shoulders.
The secluded spot could not be reached by ambulance so coastguards scrambled a helicopter to hoist him back up the cliff.
The homeless man was then flown to hospital where he remains in a stable condition.
Tony Jackson, 71, who lives in a nearby block of nearby apartments, said: 'A few of us had heard shouting from 6am and we all thought it was a drunk.
'Then at about 8.30am three of us went to look and I climbed all the way down.
'He had fallen about 80ft. I think he said he was Romanian. He was showing me his injuries.
'His head was bleeding, his shoulder looked broken, he had a really swollen right hand and his right foot and ankle were all bruised and swollen.
'The coastguard told me to stay with him until the helicopter got there.'
Coastguards from Berry Head and Torbay staged the hour and a half-long rescue, assisted by police and lifeboats from Torbay.
A spokesperson for Devon and Cornwall Police said: 'At the moment the man’s got injuries to his shoulder and his leg but he seems to be in a stable condition. He has been taken to hospital.'
Document DAMONL0020140520ea5k0083u
