{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"3169"}
____
Benefits mum branded a 'disgrace' after blaming government for making her fat
Jerry Lawton   
396 words
11 April 2014
02:20
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
A MOTHER who blames benefits cash for making her fat has been branded a disgrace.
Stacey McFarlane, 33, said she ballooned to 19st because she had £400 a week to spare from her state handouts and blew the lot on food.
The mum of three, from Rochdale, eats out up to five times a week and wants the Government to cut her £1,800-a-month benefits to make her diet.
After we highlighted the scandal this week, MPs and taxpayers have been queueing up to condemn Stacey’s easy life.
Local Labour MP Simon Danczuk said: “It’s ludicrous to blame the state for her poor choices with food. People need to take responsibility for their lifestyles and stop blaming others for bad decisions.
“These kind of stories make hard-working people in Rochdale extremely angry and frustrated.”
Local Labour MP Simon Danczuk
North West Ukip MEP Paul Nuttall stormed: “Talk about living off the fat of the land. Our benefits system is supposed to be a safety net for the needy, not luxuries for the greedy.”
Stacey admitted she received a “fortune” in handouts, saying: “The amount of disposable income I have is probably more than 90% of working people.
“It’s crazy. I spend it on food. I love my food. I’m able to go out five times a week to restaurants.
“These ladies that lunch, most of them have rich husbands who work. I don’t, I have benefits.’’ She said she started piling on the pounds after son Jamie was born deaf in 2003. Her handouts soared by £800 a month due to his disability.
But our website was swamped with messages from furious readers.
Jamesh said: “She is the epitome of the work-shy generation who expect others to pay for her to live in luxury.’’ Joe added: “You are not fat because of benefits, you are fat because you are greedy.”
Related articles White Dee slums it for a life without benefits on new Channel 4 poverty TV series Couple set up massive drugs empire at home in a plot mirroring Breaking Bad TV show Woman claims to be fat because of too much money given on benefts Britain to ban immigrants from claiming benefits for up to a year, vows Iain Duncan Smith
Document DAICO00020140411ea4b0008d
