{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3651"}
____
News
'I'm seriously going to kill some f**king kids': Montana man pleads not guilty in shooting death of German exchange student in his garage
JONATHAN BLOCK   
390 words
22 May 2014
21:21
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Markus Kaarma, 29, is accused of shooting 17-year-old Diren Dede in his garage after Dede allege went into the garage looking for alcohol
* Kaarma had been burglarized before and said he shot Dede in self-defense
* State's attorney said Kaarma had acted aggressively in the past and even his neighbors were scared of him
* Germany has threatened to bring a case against Kaarma over Dede's death
A Montana man pleaded not guilty to charges that he killed a 17-year-old German exchange student who entered his garage.
Markus Kaarma, 29, was arraigned Wednesday in the April 27 death of Diren Dede from Hamburg Kaarma is charged with deliberate homicide.
He’s accused of killing Dede after the exchange student walked in to the garage, which was left partially open, apparently to look for alcohol. Dede set off motion sensors and Karma blindly shot four times in the garage, hitting Dede.
Kaarma later told police he had been the victim of a robbery before and that when he fired he was trying to protect himself, his girlfriend and baby.
Kaarma's attorney, Paul Ryan, has said his client didn't intend to kill Dede, according to ABCNews.com.
'He was scared for his life,' Ryan said.
However, Missoula County Deputy Attorney Andrew Paul denies it was self-defense, but rather murder from a man who has his own neighbors on edge.
'Many of his neighbors have contacted our office and have expressed serious concerns about neighborhood safety,' Paul said. 'They are scared of him.'
In court documents, Kaarma is described as acting aggressively toward other drivers on the road and telling stylists at a hair salon that he’d been waiting up at night for intruders, saying 'I’m seriously going to kill some f--king kids.'
'There’s been some death threats,' Ryan said. 'Certainly he’s uneasy being in his own house.'
Even if Kaarma is found innocent, he's not out of the woods yet. German authorities have sent a letter saying they may launch a case of their own.
Dede is the son of Turkish immigrants. He was buried May 5 in Bodrum, Turkey.
Document DAMONL0020140522ea5m008sp
