{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"226"}
____
TV&Showbiz
Another hair raising look! Billie Piper sticks to usual bedraggled style for London launch of her new TV show Penny Dreadful
DAILY MAIL REPORTER   
327 words
13 May 2014
01:07
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Her co-star Eva Green looked a million dollars in a black and cream ruffled dress as she attended the the London launch of her new TV series Penny Dreadful on Monday evening.
But Billie Piper once again decided to keep it casual as she celebrated her role in the Sky Atlantic series.
The 31-year-old sported her usual ‘just got out of bed’ hair, while swamping her frame in a loose vintage inspired dress.
Over the top she wore a black blazer, as well as opting for thick black tights and shoe boots.
While her hair was all over the place, she did make an effort with her make-up  - displaying smoky eyes and accentuating her lips with red lipstick.
In the series the one-time pop singer plays Brona Croft, an Irish immigrant who aims to escape from her dark past.
Speaking to the Guardian about the Sam Mendes produced project she said it's ‘a more darkly dressed version’ of a period drama – ‘Savage and gory. Loads of blood. Loads of sex.’
Opening up about her character previously the mother-of-two said: ‘Brona is a prostitute who is living with an awful illness and in spite of all of that has an incredible spirit.’
She stars alongside Hollywood actress Josh Hartnett and Eva Green in the series which is named after a form of British fiction from the era, which focused on lurid and sensational subjects.
It features a number of characters from classic fiction including Dracula, Dorian Gray and Frankenstein.
The series was written and executive produced by Skyfall duo John Logan and Sam Mendes in their first collaboration for television, with the ensemble cast including Timothy Dalton, Harry Treadaway and Rory Kinnear.
Penny Dreadful starts on May 20 at 9pm on Sky Atlantic.
Document DAMONL0020140512ea5c009sz
