{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2688"}
____
News
Former Trade Minister Lord Davies wants women in quarter of board positions by 2015
GAYNOR PENGELLY   
1,258 words
1 April 2014
12:45
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
British boardrooms have experienced a ‘culture change’ with an increasing number of women now in decision-making roles, says a leading report.
Lord Davies, Britain's former trade minister, said women now accounted for 20.7 per cent of board members in the FTSE 100 firms, up from 12.5 per cent in 2011.
He wants women to occupy a quarter of all board positions by 2015.
The report also highlights a ‘growing recognition’ of the benefits of equality to business.
He said: ‘The rate of change that we have seen at the heart of our biggest companies over the last three years has been impressive.
‘The voluntary approach is working and companies have got the message that better balanced boards bring real business benefits.
We are finally seeing a culture change taking place at the heart of British business.’
But he warned the ‘eyes of the world’ are on Britain and the UK must prove it can promote equality on a voluntary basis, not by regulation.
Commenting on Lord Davies’ annual report on women on company boards, Lisa Buckingham OBE, senior adviser on diversity at the Institute of Directors and founder of the Breaking the Mould awards, which celebrate companies doing the most to create a pipeline of female talent, said: ‘It is encouraging to see how companies have improved boardroom diversity since Lord Davies' initial recommendations in 2011 - particularly as this has been achieved voluntarily without the need for quotas.
‘However most of the increase in female representation has been non-executive and the IoD believes strongly that we should be looking for better balanced boards at the executive level. We therefore warmly welcome Lord Davies' new emphasis on improving the numbers of women executives.
‘The IoD supports companies such as Lloyds Banking Group which are setting public targets for female representation in their top executive positions.
‘This is the way to ensure that British business does not miss out on the highest calibre of people.
Unless there is a scale increase in the numbers of senior women executives we run the risk that the real improvements achieved to date will not be sustainable in the longer term.’
Business Secretary Vince Cable, who will speak at the Breaking the Mould Awards in November said: ‘98 of the FTSE 100 boards are now made up of at least one woman and we need fewer than 50 new women appointments to FTSE 100 boards to reach our target of 25 per cent of women on all FTSE 100 boards in the next year. 
This is a huge improvement from where we started just three years ago but we need a renewed, concentrated effort by company chairs and chief executives to change the make-up of their top table.
More needs to be done to improve the number of women in executive positions.
These will be the CEOs of tomorrow and businesses still aren't tapping into the vast talent pool available to them.’
Figures from the Cranfield's School of Management show that, since the university began reporting on the gender make-up of FTSE companies in 1999, the percentage of women on boards has tripled.
Just two businesses in the FTSE 100 have male-only boards, compared to one-in-five in 2011. The two companies with male-only boards are copper mining company Antofagasta and natural resources group Glencore Xstrata.
Other companies with low numbers of women on their boards include gold and silver mining business Fresnillo, fund management firm Schroders, and Coca Cola
In the FTSE 250, a total of 50 companies still do not have any women on their boards.
The Breaking the Mould Awards
The Breaking the Mould Awards, in partnership with the Institute of Directors and in association with the 30 per cent Club and The Mail on Sunday, This is Money's sister title, celebrate those companies doing the most to create a pipeline of senior female executive talent.
The awards are open to companies of all sizes as well as Professional Services firms, Not-for-Profit enterprises as well as the State Sector.
Led by BAE Systems chairman, Sir Roger Carr, the judges for the Awards include Helena Morrissey CBE, chief executive of Newton and founder of the 30 per cent Club, Sarah Rapson, director general UK Visas and Immigration at the Home Office and Dr Ines Wichert, chief psychologist at the Smarter Workforce Institute.
The deadline for entries is August 31st and judging will take place on September 18th.
The Breaking the Mould Award winners will be unveiled at a celebration dinner at the Institute of Directors on November 4th when Business Secretary Vince Cable will deliver the keynote speech and classical singing superstar Laura Wright will perform.
Submit an Entry
Entering the Breaking the Mould Awards couldn’t be simpler and it’s absolutely free.
All you have to do is provide a brief description of your company and details of what you are doing to create a pipeline of talented senior women.
To help you make the most of your entry here are a few of the key points the Breaking the Mould
Award judges will be looking for.
1) How have you identified your organisations’s shortcomings?2) What are you doing to correct these?3) How will you measure whether these changes have been successful?4) Who is your programme targeting?5) Where does responsibility for the programme ultimately lie?6) Please include examples of success – i.e. numbers of women in senior roles even if not on the management or main board.
We are trying to estimate the cost of losing talented women to British business.
Please include details of what the average cost of recruitment is for school/university leavers, middle managers and senior managers.
What female attrition rates do you experience at these levels and how has that changed in recent years? Your response will be treated in total confidence.
The judging day will be September 18th in Central London and companies should be prepared to send someone along for interview by our judging panel.
Our lucky finalists will be given a free ticket to the Awards dinner (usual price £150 plus VAT) and will be given preferential access to apply for additional places.
Complete and submit the form online now to be considered for one of our prestigious awards. 
Alternatively complete the application and return by email to lisa@breakingthemouldawards.co.uk. 
Don’t forget to let us know, whether you are happy for us to publish your entry online after the winners have been announced.
This will help us create an Academy of Excellence where best practice can be shared and inspiration offered to other companies.
HOW TO SUBMIT YOUR ENTRY FOR THE BREAKING THE MOULD AWARDS
The categories are:
* Large Corporates
* Medium-Sized Corporates
* Smaller Private and Quoted Companies
* Professional Services
* Public Sector
* Charity/Not-for-Profit
Your Name (required)
Your Telephone (required)
Your Mobile Telephone (required)
Your Email (required)
Additional Contact Name (required)
Additional TelephoneAdditional Mobile Telephone
Additional Email
Company name
(required)
Number of employees
Latest annual turnover
Category entered
(required)
A description of the company (250 words)
A description of the pipeline (500 - 1000 words)
Yes I'm happy for my entry to become part of the Academy of Excellence I'm happy for my entry to become part of the Academy of Excellence but please use it anonymously No please don't publish any part of my entry
Document DAMONL0020140331ea3v002xw
