{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"642"}
____
  
Features
DAILY MAIL COMMENT
595 words
10 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A phoney love letter from flip-flop Clegg
ANYONE wondering why the Lib Dems trail far behind Ukip should look no further than Nick Clegg's toe-curling speech to his party's spring conference.
Leave aside the folksy, phoney list of his 'loves' about Britain - from queuing to gay marriage, Prince George, the shipping forecast and flip-flops (he means the footwear, apparently, not his speciality as a serial pledge-breaker).
When it comes to policies, isn't it almost as if he is determined to prove he despises most voters?
Take immigration. While polls highlight huge public concerns over the pressure on housing, schools, jobs, the NHS and social cohesion, Lib Dems insist we should throw open our borders even wider to admit migrants' grandparents.
Meanwhile, Mr Clegg sees it as a matter for unalloyed rejoicing that 'our cities are home to every race, religion, colour and language in existence'.
Or foreign aid. Despite overwhelming public demand that it should be diverted to relieve hardship at home, he wants a law saying 7p in every £10 this country earns must be given away overseas.
Or consider internet porn, on which his party votes by a vast majority against automatic filters to protect children.
It's the same with the EU and human rights law. While voters want less integration, Mr Clegg wants more, accusing opponents of 'backward-looking bile'.
Does he still have his eye on a plum job in Brussels, where his heart truly lies?
After multiple U-turns yesterday, Mr Clegg's office denied he would stand down if he loses power next year.
But then this opportunist swore he would scrap tuition fees, before trebling them. With his love of flip-flops, why should we believe another word he says?
Climate of immorality
LORD Justice Fulford says he has no memory of his role in founding a campaign, in 1979, to back arrested members of the notorious Paedophile Information Exchange.
Nor does he recall the details of his work for the Conspiracy Against Public Morals group - though documents show this included organising demonstrations to support PIE members and publicly championing their right to seek contact with other paedophiles.
True, this was a long time ago (though it was as shocking in the 1970s as it is today). And like Labour grandees Patricia Hewitt, Jack Dromey and, grudgingly, Harriet Harman, the judge now expresses 'regret' that his group had links with PIE.
But with PIE members under renewed investigation for 'industrial-scale' child abuse, isn't it disturbing that those who helped create a moral climate in which the likes of Jimmy Savile could flourish are now at the heart of the Establishment?
Bins and bluster
REPEATEDLY since coming to power, Local Government Secretary Eric Pickles has huffed and puffed his 'passionate' pledge to uphold our 'fundamental right' to have our bins emptied once a week.
Yet on his watch, the number of households condemned to fortnightly collections has increased by five million.
'It's never been just about the collection of bins,' Mr Pickles blustered last year. 'It's about how disconnected the political classes have become from the people.'
You said it, minister. No wonder so many have come to believe voting is pointless.
Prescription for harm
THE Mail accepts there are few more emotive subjects than assisted suicide.
But as ministers clear the way for allowing doctors to kill terminally ill patients, this paper fears we are sleep-walking into a law that will cause infinitely more anguish than it will relieve.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140309ea3a0000a
