{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3100"}
____
  
Features
SOMERSET'S SEDUCTION WITH ROSIE
BY VAL HENNESSY    
555 words
25 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
52
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
CAKES AND ALE
by W. Somerset Maugham
(Vintage £8.99 % £8.49)
THE curmudgeonly Maugham endured a miserable childhood in Whitstable, Kent. The unhappy years with his snobbish guardian — a vicar — are worked into his witty Thirties novel.
Narrator Willie, as a child, had been befriended by a fun-loving, rackety couple with whom he enjoyed freewheelin' through the Kent countryside on his bike.
The man, Driffield, was a 'common' old cove who enjoyed pubs and playing cards. His seductive wife, Rosie, was the sort who 'when she liked anyone, it was quite natural for her to go to bed with them'.
The vicar didn't approve. But gorgeous Rosie eventually seduces Willie, and later skedaddles abroad with a bankrupt bounder.
Years later Driffield has become 'one of the glories of English literature' and his prim second wife is determined to prevent his almost sacred popular image from being tarnished. So, what is Willie to do when a wheedling biographer begs him for his memories of Driffield before literary fame transformed him into a national treasure?
All great fun, and we'd all do well to heed Rosie's advice: 'Enjoy yourself while you have the chance . . . we shall all be dead in a hundred years.'
THE ASSISTANT
by Bernard Malamud
(Atlantic £9.99 % £8.99)
URBAN America is the setting for Malamud's great American novel of 1957 about the immigrant experience in the Fifties.
A struggling Jewish family runs a failing grocery store, and the stuck-at-home adult daughter dreams of further education and escape.
A dodgy drifter begs for work at the store where he works all hours, improves takings and he becomes hopelessly infatuated with the indifferent daughter.
Slowly a nasty truth about the drifter, who is trying to atone for past sins, is disclosed.
This is a gripping love story of great restraint and tenderness, of caution and self-denial.
It is also a depiction of the alienation and frustration experienced by an immigrant underclass working all hours yet denied the American dream.
The shock ending will leave you numb.
JAMAICA INN
by Daphne Du Maurier
(Virago £8.99 % £8.49)
IF YOU had trouble hearing Jamaica Inn on TV, why not read the book and fill in the gaps.
A swaying carriage rattles across the rainswept Cornish moors, past twisted trees and bubbling bogs. Newly orphaned farm girl Mary hurtles towards desolate Jamaica Inn to live with her aunt.
Little does she know that her aunt is a battered wreck and her uncle is a murderous drunk.
'If you ask me any questions I'll break every bone in your body,' he roars, twisting Mary's arm up her back. Oo-er! It's like Wuthering Heights on steroids.
Smugglers, wreckers, drunks, murderers . . . Luckily, spunky Mary is a girl who fires on all cylinders. But can she survive?
Will she be saved by the vicar — an albino in a shovel hat who resembles a stoat? Or having caught 'the sudden fever of love that devastates reason and makes havoc of logic', will she be seduced by roguish Jem?
You'll spot the twist coming despite the murky, swirling Cornish fog, but there's still much to relish in du Maurier's rousing tale.
RETRO READS
val hennessy
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140424ea4p00017
