{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1398"}
____
  
News
TEAM BLAIR AND THE STENCH OF AMORALITY
BY RUTH DUDLEY EDWARDS    
1,273 words
3 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
20
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
We, the public, are not fools. We know peace negotiations involve distasteful compromises, and that sickening deals sometimes have to be done with bad people.
Desperate for peace in Northern Ireland, there were many victims of terrorism who voted for the Good Friday Agreement of 1998, even though this involved letting out of jail even the most heinous offenders if they had served at least two years.
So why are we outraged that John Downey, suspected of murdering four members of the Household Cavalry in Hyde Park in 1982, was set free for good last week because he had been mistakenly informed that no police force wanted him?
It's because there's a stench around the secret deal that has been uncovered. And it's the stench of amorality, a characteristic many associate with the reign of Tony Blair.
Amorality is an indifference towards morality, often accompanied by conviction in one's own righteousness and an obsession with ends rather than means. Blair and his inner circle had ability and tenacity and often the best of intentions, but they lacked the visceral sense of right and wrong found in the average person in the street.
Unlike the little people, you could hear them thinking, we understand the big picture. Their success in achieving a settlement added hubris to their arrogance, which is why afterwards they conducted deals with murderers behind the backs of democrats.
Let's look first at Jonathan Powell, who was 36 when I interviewed him in Washington in 1993. I thought him clever and energetic — and one of the most arrogant people I had ever met.
Unlike his brother Charles, Margaret Thatcher's long-time Private Secretary, he was devoutly Labour, and he wanted to emulate his brother's glittering career. In 1994, stipulating it must be a big job, he accepted an invitation from Blair to work for him; in May 1997, he took over in Downing Street as Chief of Staff.
Sorting out Northern Ireland was a high priority, made easier for Powell because he seemed relaxed about dealing with the leaders of the IRA, which had murdered hundreds of police and soldiers, as well as more than 600 civilians, had tried to murder two prime ministers and had just missed killing his brother when they mortared Downing Street in 1991.
The past didn't bother him. 'We were the younger generation,' he says in his book Great Hatred, Little Room: Making Peace In Northern Ireland, 'and the war against Irish terrorism was not our war.'
It was commonplace for us worried observers of the peace process to spot those who got a frisson out of 'the smell of the cordite'. Mo Mowlam, for instance, the Secretary of State, had the instincts of her flower-power generation, and preferred paramilitaries to the police who protected her from them. Her relationship with Martin McGuinness was so chummy she called him 'Babe'.
Political ideology came into it, too. Admitting recently that in his diaries he had been very unfair to David Trimble, then leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, Alastair Campbell attributed this partly to his belief that Trimble would have been a Conservative had he been in mainland politics.
At the head of it all was Tony Blair. In 2007, Seamus Mallon — once the main negotiator for the SDLP (the constitutional nationalists) — was asked if Blair was an honest broker. 'Here was a guy with a moral dimension to everything,' he said. 'And I'm not sure at what point I began to realise that in his political dealings he was amoral and didn't know the meaning of the word "honesty".' This was known in official circles as 'creative ambiguity', and involved talking out of both sides of your mouth.
No one can fault the Blair team for courage, resilience and industry, but although they have been feted for it all over the globe, the truth is that their approach was catastrophic for the Northern Irish because they handed the province over to the bigot Ian Paisley and the terrorist godfather Martin McGuinness, whose parties run two sectarian fiefdoms: they don't share power, they split it.
Adams, McGuinness and their fellow negotiators were the hardest of hard men, and very early in the process they discovered that they could usually get their way with the Blair team if they told them there might be a 'wobble' among discontented foot soldiers.
Hence the nickname for Blair of 'naive idiot' in documents seized in 2002 from an IRA spy-ring. By that time, the IRA were beaten and had no desire to go back to war, but no negotiators would call their bluff and insist that, if fugitives from justice were caught they would go before the courts, and if guilty, serve their two years.
Preposterously, Sinn Fein would accept the amnesty it was offered only if it excluded members of the security services. But instead of facing them down, Blair's men did a shabby secret deal. Sinn Fein would submit to an official a list of their favoured suspects, the Police Service of Northern Ireland would check on their status, and letters saying whether the suspects were or were not wanted would be handed to Sinn Fein.
Those told they were still being sought knew to keep out of Northern Ireland, and the others were safe to return. Hyde Park suspect Downey's so-called 'comfort letter' — mistakenly informing him he was off the hook — was the result of a disastrous police mistake.
Now, as the media furore rages, politicians are pointing the finger at each other and those like Sinn Fein, Powell and Peter Hain (Secretary of State at the time) are telling us that everyone knew about the deal and we must think of the big picture.
The truth is the big picture is New Labour amorality. Did Powell really need, in 2007, to invite mass murderers Adams and McGuinness to the party celebrating his wedding?
At least the Blairites are consistent. Remember the 'creative ambiguity' about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq? Or the subsequent hounding of Dr David Kelly? What about the revelation from a one-time Blair adviser of a deliberate decision to encourage mass immigration 'to rub the Right's nose in diversity and render their arguments out of date'.
And where's the embarrassment about sanctimonious New Labour's embrace of Mammon? Blair has become a multi-millionaire through giving advice even to very dubious regimes. Campbell has become rich through his diaries and his PR work: one firm for which he works won a contract in repressive Kazakhstan with Blair's help.
These days Jonathan Powell runs a firm dealing in 'conflict resolution' and is on the international circuit pontificating on the back of the peace process. Among whose with whom he has travelled is Sinn Fein's Gerry Kelly, who is not only unrepentant but proud of bombing the Old Bailey and shooting a prison officer in the head.
At one gathering, he and Powell were described as 'eminent persons' and 'friends'.
We need to know if this secret deal operated in practice as an amnesty; if, as is alleged, there were royal pardons granted; and if we are indeed in the crazy and immoral position that British soldiers on duty on Bloody Sunday, for example, but not IRA terrorists are being pursued by the police.
And we need our government to deal with this openly, honourably and morally.
Accord: Tony Blair with Martin McGuinness and Gerry Adams at Downing Street in 2005
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140302ea330001y
