{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"1081"}
____
  
Features
Ed's daft food advice is hard to swallow
721 words
7 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; Scotland
37
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
I work damn hard to earn my pay. eat a lot of junk food and im not obese, so ed siliband can take a running jump if he thinks he can tell me what food i should be eating. DMAN
This country is full to over flowing with immigrants, streets are awash with terrorists, and all Miliband is concerned about is that smoking, drinking, salt and sugar are bad for us. diz
Red Ed wnts 2 ban cheap booze. Wnt work! Wen I worked 4 a well known supermarket they used 2 cum in on a Friday nite nick small bottles booze, neck them in the toilets then go out on the town & that was mainly females! REBEL
Wowee! John Clarkson builds up a burger 5ft 4in tall. what use is it? Serve it to a classful of kids? Serve it to an old folks home in which case you would have to chew the meat up for them. So it really is a waste of good food. Farouk Crosshill
Nice of John Clarkson to get White Dee's burger ready for her coming back from hols! Judging from how it stands unaided he must hav put viagra powder in the relish! DAVE
the government are making jobseekers apply for zero hours. That should keep the morons who slag off people on benefits on this page happy. Ghost inverness
The dictatorship that masquerades as government say people have to take zero hour contract jobs. no use at all for single people. just tories bullying. tam
I'm not surprised at the underhand schemes this Tory Gov will bring in 2 destroy the working class. Theres the growth of zero-hrs contracts, then there's plans 2 force those on the dole 2 do wrk schemes. Lets remember all this at election time! SARAH JANE
Re bin collections every 3wks. That's enuff! I had scarlet fever at 6 in 1950. They had to fumigate bedroom after n also below manhole in garden. We had weekly c'tions then. We shud get back to that. What are we paying council tax for? Don't want any more plagues thank you! Pat, T. Wells
we could save millions in the nhs if they got rid of all the fat cat managers and put it back in the hands of experienced matrons. i worked at our local hospital for 20 years and our matron was top class. i dont think managers would know how to put a plaster on a finger. terry wolves
david cameron and co have destroyed nhs and other public services. the people wont forget that. jock
Tony Blair should be charged with treason. Signing up to the human rights act has destroyed this country's security. We cant deport foreign terrorists, rapists, murderers etc but his wife & her cronies can make a fortune from the legal aid system. Disgrace. True Brit
this goverment disgusts me. they have sold everything there is. no great britain any more. alex
im surprised cameron hasnt sold the unemployed for slaves. he has sold everything else. sandy
when scotland get independance will there be a duty free shop. happy boy appleby
JTM: these care workers u see in flashy cars. were u in Saudi Arabia when u saw them, because the ones I know are overworked underpaid and often covered in bruises from the assaults inflicted on them by those they care for. Munkaree
Energy firms not passing on green levvies to customers. Just goes to show these b******* do what they want. Time to renationalise. CHUD
I think someone called Leo must have done Bionic Gran a great misjustice somewhere down the line. LEO F
when someone tells me to avoid a pub. I always end up having a pint there. PUBLUNCH
my friend BARRY sez dont waste money on expensive binoculars, simply stand closer to the object you wish to view. MARY HOUGH
Can i have my mega-rat with relish and fries plz? Oh and easy on the bubonic plague sauce! LEO, LEEDS
TEXT OF THE DAY
Gordon Ramsay: when u get fed up of wearing that roadkill on ur head could i have it plz? it will make a nice stew 4 me n my grand-kids! Gretna grinch
Document DAISTA0020140507ea5700066
