{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1284"}
____
News
Romanian who stole Tesco trolley with 54 bottles of whisky told a court it was his first mistake... even though he’d only been in the UK for nine days
HARRIET ARKELL   
588 words
28 February 2014
09:12
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Simon Calin, 37, from Barrow-in-Furness, stole £1,108 of Famous Grouse
* Pushed trolley out of shop and loaded up car, which was stopped by police
* Calin, who came here from Romania on 2 January, had no job or money
* He admitted theft and failing to surrender and was given curfew and fined
* But the married father of one escaped doing unpaid work as his English was not good enough to understand health and safety instructions
* Furness Magistrates Court heard he is now hoping to work in a car wash
A Romanian immigrant who stole a Tesco trolley loaded with £1,000-worth of whisky bottles told a court it was his 'first mistake' in the nine days since he’d arrived in the UK.
Simon Calin, 37, loaded 54 bottles of Famous Grouse into his trolley in Tesco in Barrow-in-Furness and then walked out of the store, put them into a car and drove off, Furness Magistrates' Court heard.
Calin, who admitted theft and failing to surrender, was given an eight-week 7pm-7am curfew and ordered to pay costs and a victim surcharge, but escaped having to do unpaid work because the court was told his English was not good enough to understand health and safety instructions.
Peter Kelly, prosecuting, told magistrates in Cumbria that Calin had been lured to Britain with the promise of a good job to help him support his wife and child, and he arrived on 2 January.
But by 11 January the job had failed to materialise, and Calin had no money.
That day, the court heard, he went into the Tesco store in Barrow and put the bottles of whisky, some tissues and some bags into his trolley before pushing it out of the shop and loading the stolen goods into a car.
CCTV caught Calin, who lives in Barrow, getting into the car, and police stopped him and arrested him.
The prosecutor said: 'He told police he was on his own and had been here one week, two days, his money had run out, and this was the first mistake he had made.'
Mr Kelly said the total value of the goods stolen was £1,108.79.
Trystan Roberts, defending, said: 'What Mr Calin tells me is he arrived in the UK about one week before this incident.
'He was coming, as people do, in order to find work and to provide for his wife and child in Romania.
'He had been told when he came over here there would be a job available for him and that work would be well paid, but the reality was very different.'
Mr Roberts told the court Calin had been cajoled into being the ‘fall guy’ by a group of others who said by stealing the whisky it would answer his money troubles.
The goods were all recovered in a re-saleable condition, and the court was told Calin now had the promise of a job in a car wash in Leigh, where he is living with his sister.
Calin was given an eight-week curfew from 7pm to 7am, and ordered to pay court costs of £85 and a £60 victim surcharge.
The court was told he could not undertake unpaid work as his English was not good enough to understand health and safety information.
Document DAMONL0020140228ea2s004ek
