{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2841"}
____
  
News
WHY PM'S A PRISONER OF EU RULES
BY JAMES SLACK   
335 words
28 February 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
2
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
DAVID Cameron is no longer in charge of his own destiny on the crucial Tory promise to cut net migration to the 'tens of thousands'.
The inflow which the Government can control - migrants from outside the EU - fell by 25,000 last year. Every visa route into Britain, from family reunion to student visas, has been tightened.
But it is proving to be of no avail because of the numbers pouring in under the EU's free movement directive.
In the year to September 2013, 209,000 EU nationals moved to the UK - an increase of 60,000.
The figure explains the entirety of the overall increase in net migration, which is the difference between the number of people arriving in Britain and leaving.
Significantly, it is not just Eastern European workers who are heading here (although Poles still top the list of people given National Insurance numbers last year).
There has also been a sharp rise in immigration from the so-called 'old EU' as workers from Portugal, Spain and Italy flee the continued economic turbulence in the eurozone. Last year there was also a leap of almost 25 per cent in the number of French citizens granted National Insurance numbers.
Observers point to very high levels of youth unemployment in France and the punitive levels of taxation introduced by President Hollande.
Ministers wish to present this as a story of Britain's economic success and plentiful supply of jobs.
But that will not help Mr Cameron one bit when it comes to the target of cutting net migration to the tens of thousands - a promise Tory MPs believe is crucial to the party's chances of re-election.
The fact is that Mr Cameron is a prisoner of the EU's rules on free movement.
And, politically, the mixture of rising immigration and Brussels - not Britain - being in control of the UK's borders could hardly be more toxic.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140228ea2s00015
