{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3509"}
____
  
Features
THE ANDREW PIERCE COLUMN
BY ANDREW PIERCE   
787 words
21 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
18
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
YOU PAY MORE TAX TO END HUNGER, CHURCHES TOLD Conservative MP John Redwood has turned the tables on the Church and the hundreds of clerics and 47 bishops who have demanded as part of an 'End Hunger Fast' campaign that the Government spend more money on welfare. If these men of the cloth think people should pay more tax, he asks, why does the Church not lead by example? 'Churches legally avoid large amounts of tax. They receive substantial donations from some of their richer members on death. 'These gifts are free of inheritance tax,' he writes on his blog.'They receive substantial donations from their living members. Much of this money is Gift Aided, so the Churches receive large sums from the State as repayment of the income tax which the donors had paid before their gift. The Churches, led by the Church of England, have tax-free endowment funds, which generate income and capital gains that are untaxed. Some of this money is used for current spending.
The Church Commissioners manage a fund worth around £5.5?billion.'Those who think we need to tax and spend more might like to say who they wish to tax more. The Churches might like to answer the question. Why do they pay so little tax if they think taxes are too low?'As of yesterday, Redwood hadn't even started on why the Church Commissioners still hold a stake in the savagely criticised payday loans company Wonga (which charges usurious interest rates to some of the poorest in society), an embarrassment the Archbishop of Canterbury admitted this Easter weekend that he could do nothing about.--MIND YOUR LANGUAGES!Communities Secretary Eric Pickles has ordered officials in his department to stop spending money on translating public documents. Is he about to extend the rule to Labour-run Tameside council in Greater Manchester, which uses taxpayers' money to translate instructions for rubbish collections — and many other leaflets — into 140 languages. He recently said: 'Even its binmen offer a translation service. This doesn't help people integrate into our society.'-Tipped for promotion to the Cabinet, the Wirral Tory MP Esther McVey tweeted a link to a press release saying: 'Wirral Labour can't be trusted.' Timing is everything in politics. Couldn't the Merseyside MP have chosen a better moment than during the service to mark the 25th anniversary of the Hillsborough football stadium tragedy?  -JOBS HEADING FOR THE BUFFERS?The Transport Secretary Patrick McLoughlin is advertising for no fewer than eight policy advisers to work on the HS2 rail project.The starting salary is £32,156. 'You could be involved anywhere in this complex, high profile project, from briefing Ministers for key debates in Parliament to developing the railway's commercial and financial framework, securing funding from the Treasury, monitoring project delivery and determining long-term strategy for high speed rail.' As Parliament still hasn't approved HS2 you could also be out of a job if Red Ed Miliband moves into No?10 after the election.--UKIP leader Nigel Farage's uncompromising stance on immigration has helped his party secure a record  15 per cent opinion poll rating. So where were UKIP's peers during a House of Lords' debate on immigration? Lord Stevens of Ludgate is excused — he was apparently too ill to attend — but what of former party leader Lord Pearson of Rannoch and  Lord Willoughby de Broke? We know Ukip MEPs have an appalling voting record — now the party's peers seem to be taking after them.-The admirable Labour MP for Rochdale, Simon Danczuk, whose book about the Liberal MP Cyril Smith paedophile scandal was serialised in this newspaper, is not just a forensic investigator. He is also a successful businessman.With his wife Karen, he has established Danczuk's Deli in Rochdale city centre. Mrs Danczuk gave up her job as her husband's political secretary at the Commons to set up the enterprise. Since he has a majority of only 889 over the Lib Dems, the business seemed a sensible investment in case he lost his seat at the next election. But after his hugely damaging revelations about the Lib Dems and the Cyril Smith cover-up, defeat is hardly on the cards any more.--Spot the odd one out: Lynton Crosby, Australian Tory election strategist; David Axelrod, Labour's new election guru hired from the Obama campaign; and Ryan Coetzee, the South African brought in to do the same job for the Lib Dems. It's Coetzee, because the taxpayer pays Coetzee's £110,000 salary, whereas the other two are funded by the political parties. How very Lib Dem!
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140420ea4l0000e
