{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"769"}
____
  
News
MUM TRIED TO SNEAK MIGRANTS INTO UK IN HER CAMPER VAN TO SETTLE DRUG DEBT
BY JAYA NARAIN   
555 words
25 February 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
28
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A MOTHER tried to smuggle four illegal immigrants into Britain in a VW camper van in an attempt to pay off her cocaine debt.
Crystal Mosley, 27, and her boyfriend, Daniel Hassard, 25, travelled to France under the pretext of choosing a campsite for a family holiday.
However, they were caught as they waited to board a ferry home.
French border patrol officials found the illegal passengers - three from Vietnam and one from China - hiding in the back of the van.
Canterbury Crown Court heard how Mosley, the driver, was stopped by officers at Coquelles, near Calais in the early hours in August last year.
Officers were suspicious and ordered the back of the van to be opened where they discovered one man crouched on the floor.
A search uncovered two more illegal immigrants hiding in a bunk bed and a fourth man crouched in a corner.
Mosley feigned shock when confronted, telling officials: 'I didn't know they were there.' But she later confessed, saying she and Hassard had run up huge debts using cocaine.
She claimed they had both lost their jobs shortly before making the trip and had no way of paying back the drug dealers.
She claimed they had been offered between £2,000 and £3,000 to carry out the job, and said they had been supplied with a rented camper van and given £200 to buy ferry tickets and fuel for the journey.
In mitigation for Hassard, Kerry Waitt said the plan had been Hassard's idea, adding: 'Had it not been for my client and his encouragement and inveiglement, his co-accused would not be sitting in the dock next to him.
'He takes full responsibility for her position today. He is a young man who foolishly had run up debts to people who it is not comfortable to owe money to. It was made clear in graphic detail what would happen if the money was not found.'
Christopher Wray, for Mosley, said she was now drug-free and had moved house to stay away from former friends involved in the drugs scene.
Mosley, from Marton, near Blackpool, was handed a 15-month prison sentence, suspended for two years so she could care for her nine-year-old son. Hassard, a painter and decorator, also from Marton, was jailed for 15 months.
After the case, David Fairclough, of Home Office Criminal Investigations, said: 'Those involved in people smuggling prey on the desperation of others in order to line their own pockets and are a major factor in illegal immigration to the UK.
'This case sends a strong message to those who think they can cheat the system.'
The Daily Mail has previously highlighted the problem of people smuggling through Calais - with estimates suggesting as many as 15,000 illegal immigrants are sneaked into Britain every year.
Philippe Mignonet, the town's deputy mayor, who is also its immigration chief, has said Calais is a 'magnet for illegal immigrants'.
The UK Border Force shares responsibility with the French for patrolling Calais, but there have been calls for the main controls to be transferred to the south coast of England to deal with what is principally 'a British problem'.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140225ea2p00020
