{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1201"}
____
  
News
DOCTOR IS FIRST IN UK TO BE PROSECUTED FOR FGM
BY CHRIS GREENWOOD CRIME CORRESPONDENT   
476 words
22 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
12
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A DOCTOR yesterday became the first person in Britain to be charged with female genital mutilation.
Dr Dhanuson Dharmasena, 31, is accused of performing the brutal, illegal procedure on a woman after she gave birth.
The crime is alleged to have taken place at Whittington Hospital in north London, in November 2012.
The decision was announced by the country's top prosecutor Alison Saunders, who said a second man is also accused of aiding the crime.
It is the first time a prosecution has been brought since the crime, known as FGM, was first made illegal in 1985.
The move was welcomed by campaigners who have put huge pressure on the authorities to crack down on the abhorrent practice.FGM is most prevalent in sub-Saharan and North East Africa but also takes place in Asia and the Middle East among immigrant communities.
The brutal practice is undertaken by untrained 'cutters' using dangerous and primitive methods with no anaesthetic.
Investigators have been horrified by cases in which young British girls have been taken on 'holiday' to their parents' native countries and mutilated.
But police have struggled to build cases against those responsible because of a lack of evidence.
And many inquiries have collapsed because they hinge on a young girl giving incriminating evidence against their parents. In the Whittington Hospital case, it is understood that the victim had already suffered FGM and the doctor 'repaired' the act after childbirth.
Announcing the prosecution, Miss Saunders also revealed that legal obstacles are too great to proceed in four other cases.
In one, two parents were accused of arranging for their daughter to be subjected to FGM while overseas.
Prosecutors said the procedure in this case involved a procedure which left no physical evidence. None of those involved were British.
In another, prosecutors considered charging a man after he rang an 'FGM helpline' asking how he could arrange the procedure for his two daughters. John Cameron, of the NSPCC, revealed its FGM helpline has received 174 calls from the public and professionals since it opened last summer.
He said: 'This is great news for the fight against FGM. The fact that we hadn't previously had a prosecution in the UK for this child abuse despite it being a crime for almost 30 years is unacceptable.'
Dr Dharmasena, of Ilford, north-east London, qualified as a doctor in 2006 after studying at the University of London, according to the General Medical Council. He will appear alongside Hasan Mohamed, 40, of Holloway, north London, before Westminster magistrates on April 15.
It is also an offence for UK nationals or permanent residents to carry out FGM abroad, or to procure the carrying out of FGM abroad. The maximum penalty is 14 years' imprisonment.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140321ea3m0001d
