{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1115"}
____
News
Celebrity restauranteur ordered to pay out $2.5m to ex-bartender who said he 'fondled her breasts' and 'threatened to kill her'
DAVID MCCORMACK   
634 words
6 May 2014
19:39
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Italian restauranteur Pasquale Marino, 53, has been forced to pay a former bartender $2.5m after she claimed that he sexually harassed her
* Russian immigrant Tatiana Mironova, 28, claims that Marino also threatened to throw her from his 40 story balcony
* When she escaped he told her that no one would believe her story because she was an immigrant
* Italian-born Marino has said that he plans to appeal the court's verdict
* Celebrity friends and regulars at his restaurant include actor Chris Noth and Extra host Mario Lopez
The owner of an Italian restaurant featured in Sex In The City who is also a friend of celebrities including Mario Lopez and Chris Noth has been ordered to pay out $2.5m to a bartender who claims that she was sexually harassed by him.
Pasquale Marino, who owns Da Marino Ristorante Italiano on West 49th Street near Times Square in New York, was ordered to pay damages to Tatiana Mironova by a Manhattan federal court on Friday.
Jurors had found Marino, 52, guilty of sexual harassment, sexual assault and fostering a hostile work environment.
Scroll down for video
In her 2013 lawsuit, married Russian immigrant Mironova, 28, claimed Marino had repeatedly pestered her.
The lawsuit states that Marino told her ‘he hated his wife and said, "I want other women. I can’t eat a burger every day. Sometimes I want pasta."'
In May 2010 Marino is alleged to have trapped Mironova in his office, fondled her breasts and then ejaculated on her back.
When she managed to escape, he warned, ‘You have no rights! You are an immigrant! Nobody will believe you anyway,’ according to the court papers.
During the trial, Mironova spoke of another incident when she alleges that Marino threatened to kill her.
Mironova said she was asked her to deliver cash to his apartment and that he allegedly pushed her to the edge of his balcony on the 40th floor.
According to Mironova he then unzipped his pants and forced her to the floor, before she managed to escape.
‘It’s been really, really painful,’ Mironova told The New York Post on Monday. ‘The whole experience was terrible. It was hell. But it’s over and I’m glad justice was served.’
Criminal charges have however been dropped because the Manhattan DA determined Mironova wasn’t credible because she had collected unemployment benefit while working at the restuarant.
Italian-born Marino has said that he plans to appeal the court’s verdict.
The married father of a young son founded his Theater District restaurant in 1996.
Da Marino featured in a season two episode of Sex And The City, The Man The Myth The Viagra, during which Mr Big took Carrie there on a date.
In real-life the actor who played Mr Big, Chris Noth, is a regular and one of Marino's biggest advocates.
‘It's a neighborhood of friends and artists who come in to taste Pasquale Marino's southern Italian food,' Noth has said in the past.
'His mussels are incredible. Or sometimes he'll say, "I'm inspired, let me just make this dish for you." Pasquale is from Calabria, very spirited and truly the captain of his ship.’
Another celebrity friend of the establishment is Extra host Mario Lopez. He has even filmed a short video for the restaurant’s YouTube channel in which he described Marino as his ‘buddy’ and ‘an amazing guy’.
Other celebrities who've visited Marino's restaurant include Bono and Ronnie Wood from The Rolling Stones.
Video: Marino's restaurant as featured in Sex In The City
Video: Mario Lopez recommends Marino's restaurant
Document DAMONL0020140506ea560070t
