{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1099"}
____
  
News
A YEAR TO ELECTION AND A WARNING FROM CAMERON ...
BY JAMES CHAPMAN    
488 words
7 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
12
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
THE 'Great British Revival' is at stake in the general election a year today, David Cameron warned last night.
With a poll showing Ukip doing the Tories serious damage, the Prime Minister urged supporters to stick with the Government's economic plans.
Otherwise, he said, the Labour Party would take charge and spend and borrow more.
Tory strategists accept that many of their supporters will back Ukip as a protest in next month's European poll - and must be brought back into the fold before the general election.
An analysis by YouGov showed that 42 per cent of those who voted Conservative in 2010 plan to back Ukip in the European elections this month.
Of 9,000 people questioned by the polling group, almost 2,000 said they would vote for the anti-European party if a general election were held now. Tory defectors outnumbered by three to two the Labour and Lib Dem defectors together.
YouGov's Peter Kellner said: 'Farage should not claim that his party is winning votes from Labour on anything like the scale that it is taking them from the Conservatives.'
Former Tory deputy chairman Lord Ashcroft, now a leading pollster, says Mr Cameron remains his party's 'biggest electoral asset' but time is running out to persuade voters that he and his colleagues are on their side.
He argues that Ukip is 'an ideal conduit for the blowing of mid-term raspberries' but those who want their vote to count in 2015 will have to choose between the main parties.
Mr Cameron, who addressed MPs and peers with his chief election strategist Lynton Crosby last night, said: 'The general election is one year away. For each of those 365 days, the Conservatives have one clear message: we are the team that is turning Britain around.
'We have set out a serious, long-term economic plan: reducing the deficit, cutting income taxes, backing business, capping welfare, reducing immigration, delivering the best schools and skills - and that plan is working for families across our country.'
He said the deficit had been cut by over a third, the economy was one of the fastest growing in the developed world and 1.5million more people were in work.'
He added: 'Immigration is down. Welfare has been capped. And something I'm very proud of: today 250,000 fewer children are being taught in failing schools. All this means more peace of mind for families, more young people with the chance to get on in life, and more financial security.
'From the ashes of the Great Recession we are building a Great British Revival. All this is at stake a year from now. Labour's only plans are for more spending, more borrowing, more debt - more of the same that got us into the mess.'
Comment - Page 14
Sarah Vine - Page 15
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140506ea570001y
