{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1651"}
____
News
Revolt over Ed Miliband’s £20k bill to take an ‘army of aides’ on trip to Middle East
BRENDAN CARLIN, MAIL ON SUNDAY POLITICAL REPORTER   
369 words
20 April 2014
02:31
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Labour leader took 12-strong delegation to Israel and West Bank
* Tour included eight party officials as well as Shadow Foreign Secretary Douglas Alexander and Labour peer Stewart Wood
* The Milibands took business class flights and stayed at 5-star hotels
Ed Miliband is facing a Shadow Cabinet ‘cost of living’ revolt after spending more than £20,000 of public money taking ‘an army of aides’ on an overseas trip.
The Labour leader sparked anger among senior colleagues for sanctioning a three-day visit by a 12-strong delegation to Israel and the West Bank earlier this month.
Apart from Mr Miliband and his wife Justine, the party included no fewer than eight Labour officials as well as Shadow Foreign Secretary Douglas Alexander and Labour peer Stewart Wood.
They are understood to have racked up a bill of more than £20,000, including business-class flights for the Milibands as well as five-star hotels for his entourage.
In contrast, Tory sources claim that when David Cameron was Opposition leader, he often used to travel with no more than three or four aides.
Last night, Labour frontbenchers privately condemned the ‘lavish’ spending. One said: ‘This  was an important trip and  no one would begrudge Ed from making it.
‘But did he really have to travel with this sort of presidential-style entourage and an army of party flunkeys?
‘When we’re desperately trying to paint the Tories as out of touch with people struggling with the cost of living, it just doesn’t feel right.’
Mr Miliband is the son of Jewish immigrants and he lost 60 members of his family to the Holocaust.
Foreign trips such as this are usually paid for with so-called ‘Short Money’ – the annual taxpayer-funded subsidy  given to Labour to carry out its Opposition duties.
Mr Miliband’s office said last night: ‘This was a big and important trip and an appropriate number of people were on it.
'All those from Labour on the trip were funded from the leader’s office in the normal way.’
Document DAMONL0020140420ea4k000b6
