{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"256"}
____
  
Features
FEUDING THAT'S NO WAY TO RUN A GOVERNMENT
BY DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
622 words
12 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
16
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
 
FOUR years ago to the day, in the sun-kissed surroundings of the Downing Street rose garden, David Cameron and Nick Clegg launched their shiny new coalition government with a string of grandiose claims.
Their language was beyond effusive: 'Today we are announcing a new politics where the national interest is more important than party interest. Where co-operation wins out over confrontation. Where compromise, give and take, reasonable, civilised, grown-up behaviour is not a sign of weakness but of strength.'
How hollow those words sound today. With a year to go to the General Election, the Government has descended into a shambles of infighting and embarrassing Punch and Judy politics.
The latest spat over education began with a story leaked to the BBC that Nick Clegg's much-vaunted proposal to give free school meals to all pupils was far more costly than he was admitting and could be achieved only at the expense of cuts in front-line teaching budgets.
The Lib Dems responded with a retaliatory attack on Education Secretary Michael Gove's free schools programme, saying it was stealing resources from mainstream schooling. A 'senior government source', presumed to be Lib Dem schools minister David Laws, described his boss Mr Gove as 'an ideologically obsessed zealot'.
These are hardly isolated examples of acrimony at the heart of government. Iain Duncan Smith's welfare reforms, Home Secretary Theresa May's crackdown on immigration and knife crime, and Mr Cameron's tax breaks for married couples, are all bitterly opposed by the Lib Dems.
Indeed the Coalition is now so incapable of agreeing on any major policy area that Parliament will shut down on Thursday for a 19-day break because MPs have so little to do.
It follows their ten-day February vacation and 17 days for Easter, and precedes a six-week summer break from July 22. They return in September for eight days, then have another month off, leaving even more time for party posturing and poisonous backstage briefings.
This has been aptly described as a 'zombie government', but because of the five-year fixed term of office laid down in the Coalition agreement, we can't get rid of it for another 12 months.
Meanwhile of course, MPs draw full salary and allowances while enjoying their seemingly endless holidays.
Is it any wonder the electorate is so disillusioned with Britain's increasingly remote and self-serving political class?
Con trick on care
ALTHOUGH the Government has promised a lifetime cap on care fees of £72,000, calculations by the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries show better-off elderly people could end up paying double that amount before the State steps in.
Many believe the limit is already too high, but it now transpires that hidden charges could mean only a tiny minority of pensioners will receive any help at all.
With a rapidly ageing population and the public finances still in trouble, how to fund the huge costs of care is a real dilemma.
But to promise a cap, then ensure that almost no one benefits from it would be little more than a confidence trick.
Courting crime
THE revelation that nearly a third of 'prison' sentences handed down by the courts are suspended - up from just two per cent a decade ago - is a disturbing illustration of how the justice system is quietly becoming more and more lenient.
Some 11,000 criminals had more than ten previous offences on their record, yet still received suspended sentences.
With this kind of ludicrously soft justice, aren't they just being encouraged to keep on preying on the law-abiding public?
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140511ea5c00008
