{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2743"}
____
News
White people TWICE as likely as ethnic minorities to say they are disabled
STEVE DOUGHTY   
795 words
2 April 2014
11:53
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* One in five of white people surveyed said they had a long-term illness
* But just one in 10 people from ethnic minority backgrounds said the same
* Charities believe ethnic minorities are less likely to report their disabilities
* People from ethnic minorities are also less likely to receive benefits
White people are twice as likely to say they are disabled compared to those from ethnic minorities, according to a large-scale state survey.
One in five of white people surveyed said they had a disability or a long-term illness that limits their ability to work or to take part in social activity.
But just over one in 10 people from ethnic minority backgrounds said the same.
The disability gap, revealed for the first time yesterday by the Office for National Statistics, has prompted a new debate about why people from ethnic minorities appear much less likely to suffer disabilities that limit their lives.
Disability charities suggested the reason may be that many disabled people from minority backgrounds are less likely to report their illnesses, because they do not see themselves as disabled, or because they worry about stigma that they might attract.
However, figures suggest that the far lesser likelihood of ethnic minority members to declare themselves disabled may also be linked to the benefits system. 
Black and minority people are much less likely to claim disability benefits than white people, statistics show.
The ethnic differences over disability were revealed by results from the Opinions and Lifestyle survey, which questioned more than 50,000 people over the age of 16 in 2012.
It found that 20 per cent of white people said they had a ‘limiting long-standing illness or disability’ - one that prevented them from undertaking at least some activities. But the figure was just 11 per cent among all non-white ethnic groups.
The ONS breakdown said a limiting disability was reported by eight per cent of people of mixed ethnic background; 12 per cent of Asians; 13 per cent of black people; and seven per cent of Chinese and other ethnic minority groups.
There was a similar pattern among people reporting any disability at all: 36 per cent of white people did so in the survey, compared to just 21 per cent of people from non-white groups.
White people in Britain are more likely to be older than ethnic minority people, and therefore likely to suffer more disabilities.
However, the white group included by the ONS for the disability survey was at least partly balanced because it included large numbers of generally young white immigrants from Eastern Europe and elsewhere.
The ONS said: ‘People from white ethnic groups were almost twice as likely as those from non-white ethnic groups to have a limiting long-standing illness or disability.’
But officials made no attempt to explain the disability gap.
The disability charity Scope said it believed the discrepancy was a result of the failure of ethnic minority people to declare their disabilities.
It suggested that ethnic minority people may be more reluctant to report disability or less able to do so.
A report by the charity published in 2012 said that ethnic minority people are much less likely to receive disability benefits than white people.
The finding raises the question of whether ethnic minority people are less likely to be among the large numbers thought to exploit the benefits system by claiming disability handouts when in reality they are fit to work.
The ONS report found that unemployed people were twice as likely as the employed to say they were disabled, and the workless who were not looking for jobs had the highest rates of limiting disability of all. More than four out of 10 said their lives were confined by disability.
Only six per cent of people with incomes over £50,000 said they had a disability, compared to nearly a third of those with less than £10,000.
Dr John Middleton of the Faculty of Public Health said: ‘Some groups of ethnic minority people may be more stoical than the white indigenous population. They may not see some conditions as disabilities.
‘There may be communication difficulties and language barriers. There may be differences in what people regard as disability - a limiting condition might not be a disability if you have good family support.’
Dr Middleton added: ‘It is possible that we need to look at the economic picture. Ethnic minority groups may not know they are entitled to disability benefits, or they may be unwilling to claim them.’
He said it was ‘plausible’ that many immigrant families are anxious to work and are less likely to claim out-of-work disability benefits.
Document DAMONL0020140402ea42002xw
