{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"3694"}
____
  
Features
Cameron's rich mates are the only winners
738 words
22 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; Scotland
34
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
? cameron stop the spin. the economy is on the up for millionaires but not for the working class. jock .
if all the rich nob heads made richer by the condems vote Cameron and the millions of plebs like me made poorer make a protest vote, Thursday will be a historic day for politics. pete in Lancaster .
why should people graft and pay taxes so the likes ov barlow and co can pay nil. mug worker .
next time all u moaners complain about ppl on benefits just remember your taxes are keeping hookie hamza's family in luxury. stig2 .
None of us expects politicians to be popping down the supermarket every week the way we have to but surely Ed Miliband could keep up with what ordinary people have to spend - as Labour leader, we are the people he is supposed to be helping. sweetsue .
? SSE energy sales down cos mild winter. Still had 10% increase in profit to £1.5billion. Rip off or what? CHUD TEXT THE .
Barry Tomes has admitted White Dee has been earning AND that its been declared to DWP so why the hell haven't her benefits been cut or stopped before now? lou, yorks Regarding surgeon who the wrong surely everyone's allowed b*****BOB .
? so sponger dee gets £214 a wk. my wk wage 192, pay full rent 82quid wk, 15wk ? so sponger dee gets £214 a wk. my wk wage 192, pay full rent 82quid wk, 15wk coun tax so 95 left 4 food, leccy, gas, water, bus fares. no hols 4me. depressed my arse. she's as happy as a pig in s*** on us tax payers cash. ann staffs .
So White Dee is to be probed by David Cameron. Rather him than me. LL .
It comes as no surprise that fewer people are going to the cinema. I'm sick of paying good money to see a film and then have it ruined by brain dead idiots looking and texting on their mobile phones. FLOYD .
the money the bbc squanders is a disgrace. look what they are going to spend on the world cup and its our money. alex ? the bbc splurge £30m on fancy hotels for world cup. get rid ov the .
tv licence now. voice ov the people ? Who do the BBC think they are? .
Judging evryone on their crap TV progs. Its the PPL who run it that we shud be judging to see if that joke license fee is legal! Bates .
You can't open your mouth about immigration in this country without being called a racist. Whatever happened to freedom of speech. SCOUSE ? WE WANT OUR UK BACK AGAIN.
. NO ONE WANTED TO COME HERE WHEN NATIONAL SERVICE WAS HERE. EX SGT RAMC .
Thur morn, sun shining, susanna reid looking stunning, good start 2 the day. c h garstang .
you know when you're bored when you are watching the hairy bikers and actually enjoying it. PUBLUNCH .
Why is it 95% of drivers cant negoiate f*****g roundabouts? Giles .
Why are the ENGLAND squad wearing American ties. TESS, TICKLE .
.still worth getting excited about.
? Even if England go out in the group stages, it's still worth getting excited about. LEO F OF DAY .
I was asked why I wore ear plugs at the match. I said so I couldnt hear the swearing around me. Its disgusting. SARAH JANE the removed testicle: to dropa k.
.gamme. thanksgiving in usa and aliens attacked them? Wat i didnt get was the ? Did anyone watch that alien abduct progamme. thanksgiving in usa and aliens attacked them? Wat i didnt get was the mam neva let go of her glass of red wine even when they attacked and lass died in front of them? Real or fake? Ingrid from the waff ? MY OLD MAN JOCK IS SO MEAN.
. WHEN HE FOUND A BOTTLE OF INDIGESTION MIXTURE, HE ATE A JAR OF PICKLES. OLD MOTHER REALLY .
a bloke walked up to me wearing a silly red hat and asked "hiya spice remember me". i replied, "no but yer fez looks familiar". Spice of stockton .
According 2 legend, St. Patrick drove all the snakes out of Ireland. Well weve all done some pretty weird stuff wen wre drunk! Momma Towel .
my mate asked if i wanted to buy a sat-nav. i told him to get lost. danny dawson of eston
Document DAISTA0020140522ea5m0006h
