{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"458"}
____
  
Features
DAILY MAIL COMMENT
632 words
12 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Is jail really the way to shore up the BBC?
IMAGINE the public outcry if we had a law making it a criminal offence to read the Mail or any other paper without first having bought a subscription to the Guardian.
Unthinkable, of course. Yet the extraordinary truth is we already have a very similar law in Britain, which makes it a crime to watch ITV or other channels without first handing £145.50 to the BBC.
Indeed, more than a tenth of criminal trials in Britain - 180,000 a year - are prosecutions for evading the licence fee, punishable by a fine of up to £1,000 backed by prison for non-payment.
Now at last Justice Secretary Chris Grayling is attempting to inject a hint of sanity into this madness, with a plan to ease the pressure on magistrates' courts by switching licence-fee evasion from a criminal to a civil offence.
Yet with their jaw-dropping sense of entitlement, BBC chiefs are resisting even this most modest measure, insisting it should remain a crime for any TV owner to fail to contribute to their bloated Corporation of 23,000 employees.
To decriminalise evasion would be a 'huge risk', says James Purnell, the former Labour minister now raking it in as the BBC's director of strategy and digital. It could cost up to £200million a year, he says, perhaps forcing the closure of BBC4, CBBC and CBeebies.
With respect to Mr Purnell and his Labour sympathies, this is the least of the Corporation's problems.
The fact is that countless young people already watch the BBC through online devices, thus sidestepping the fee. Meanwhile, demands are growing for the increasingly attractive option of funding the whole enterprise by voluntary subscription - which would decimate BBC output.
Let us make our own position clear. Yes, we have often expressed our exasperation with the BBC's relentless Leftish bias - bravely admitted on Monday by its own John Humphrys - on such subjects as mass immigration and EU integration.
But like most of our readers, we retain a strong affection for our national broadcaster. What it does well, it often does very well indeed.
Yet who can deny that it has grown far too big? With its massive website, cornucopia of channels and 8,000 journalists - more than all Fleet Street put together - it crushes competition, stifling plurality and so impoverishing national debate.
Meanwhile, it churns out far too much trash, of a kind freely available on countless commercial channels.
With its charter coming up for renewal in 2016, it is time for the BBC to start thinking seriously about the purpose of public service broadcasting, trimming its output to the core of what it does best - and slashing the licence fee accordingly.
Indeed, we would be content to preserve BBC1, BBC2 and Radios 3 and 4, with the rest sold to the private sector.
What is certain is that merely opposing every suggestion of reform can only encourage demands for the fee to be scrapped altogether.
As for the Mail, we are happy for our readers to go on buying the paper because they want to - and not because they're forced to by law.
How to boost turnout
BROUGHT in to boost pitifully low turnouts, postal voting on demand has spawned industrial-scale electoral fraud, while making the once crucial closing stages of any campaign pointless to the many who vote weeks in advance.
So the Mail applauds the wisdom of judge Richard Mawrey, who wants postal ballots only for those who, through physical infirmity or absence from home, genuinely can't make it to the polling station.
If parties want more people to vote, they should try offering better policies, better candidates - and keeping their promises.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140311ea3c0000i
