{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2649"}
____
News
Breaking the Mould Awards: Celebrating companies working to promote female talent
THIS IS MONEY   
795 words
31 March 2014
13:41
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
The Breaking the Mould Awards celebrate those companies doing the most to create a pipeline of senior female executive talent.
The awards are open to companies of all sizes as well as Professional Services firms, Not-for-Profit enterprises as well as the State Sector.
Big business is under pressure to move towards the targets set out in Lord Davies's 2011 report for government which recommended 25 per cent of board roles should be filled by women by 2015.
Although the FTSE 100 is currently at 20 per cent, smaller organisations are a long way behind.
Led by BAE Systems chairman, Sir Roger Carr, the judges for the Awards include Helena Morrissey CBE, chief executive of Newton and founder of the 30% Club, Sarah Rapson, director general UK Visas and Immigration at the Home Office, Dr Ines Wichert, chief psychologist at the Smarter Workforce Institute and Tina Southall, director of diversity and inclusion at Vodafone.
The deadline for entries is August 31st and judging will take place on September 18th.
The Breaking the Mould Award winners will be unveiled at a celebration dinner at the Institute of Directors on November 4th when Business Secretary Vince Cable will deliver the keynote speech and classical singing superstar Laura Wright will perform.
Simon Watkins, City Editor of the Mail on Sunday which is media partner to the Awards said: ‘Opening up Britain's boardrooms is critical to ensuring our businesses reflect wider society and that they are selecting talent from the widest possible pool.
‘Short-term targets are part of that, but if change is to be lasting, we need to be thinking about the role of women throughout our companies to make sure there is a pipeline of potential women board directors.
‘Breaking the Mould is all about encouraging companies to take the steps needed for that long-term change and Financial Mail is delighted to be a supporter.’
How to enter Breaking the Mould
Entering the Breaking the Mould Awards couldn’t be simpler and it’s absolutely free.
All you have to do is provide a brief description of your company and details of what you are doing to create a pipeline of talented senior women.
To help you make the most of your entry here are a few of the key points the Breaking the Mould
Award judges will be looking for.
1) How have you identified your organisations’s shortcomings?2) What are you doing to correct these?3) How will you measure whether these changes have been successful?4) Who is your programme targeting?5) Where does responsibility for the programme ultimately lie?6) Please include examples of success – i.e. numbers of women in senior roles even if not on the management or main board.
We are trying to estimate the cost of losing talented women to British business.
Please include details of what the average cost of recruitment is for school/university leavers, middle managers and senior managers.
What female attrition rates do you experience at these levels and how has that changed in recent years? Your response will be treated in total confidence.
The judging day will be September 18th in Central London and companies should be prepared to send someone along for interview by our judging panel.
Our lucky finalists will be given a free ticket to the Awards dinner (usual price £150 plus VAT) and will be given preferential access to apply for additional places.
Complete and submit the form online now to be considered for one of our prestigious awards. 
Alternatively complete the application and return by email to lisa@breakingthemouldawards.co.uk. 
Don’t forget to let us know, whether you are happy for us to publish your entry online after the winners have been announced.
This will help us create an Academy of Excellence where best practice can be shared and inspiration offered to other companies.
The categories are:
* Large Corporates
* Medium-Sized Corporates
* Smaller Private and Quoted Companies
* Professional Services
* Public Sector 
* Charity/Not-for-Profit
If you want to email in an entry, please mark and complete the following categories.
Your Name (required)
Your Telephone (required)
Your Mobile Telephone (required)
Your Email (required)
Additional Contact Name (required)
Additional Telephone
Additional Mobile Telephone
Additional Email
Company name (required)
Number of employees
Latest annual turnover
Category entered (required)
A description of the company (250 words)
A description of the pipeline (500 - 1000 words)
Yes I'm happy for my entry to become part of the Academy of Excellence I'm happy for my entry to become part of the Academy of Excellence but please use it anonymously No please don't publish any part of my entry
Document DAMONL0020140331ea3v0038v
