{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1280"}
____
News
'I got it wrong on Paedophile Information Exchange': Patricia Hewitt finally apologises over group's links to National Council for Civil Liberties when she was its boss
MICHAEL SEAMARK and MARK DUELL   
1,245 words
28 February 2014
00:29
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Former Labour cabinet minister was general secretary of NCCL in 1970s
* Hewitt says she takes responsibility for the mistakes made at the time
* 65-year-old adds that NCCL was 'naive and wrong' over links with PIE
Former Health Secretary Patricia Hewitt finally apologised last night over the shocking links between the National Council for Civil Liberties and the vile paedophile group that campaigned to legalise sex with children.
She said the NCCL was ‘naive and wrong’ in dealings with the Paedophile Information Exchange and conceded: ‘As  General Secretary then, I take responsibility for the mistakes we made.
‘I got it wrong on PIE and I apologise for having done so.’
The ex-Cabinet minister had remained silent since the Mail revealed the extraordinary connections between the NCCL and the predatory paedophile group, who wanted the age of consent to be cut to just four.
Earlier this week Labour’s deputy leader Harriet Harman, the NCCL’s former legal officer, belatedly expressed ‘regret’ but refused to apologise over links between the left-wing pressure group and PIE.
Miss Harman maintained she had nothing to apologise for and dismissed the Mail revelations as a ‘politically-motivated smear campaign’.
In contrast, Miss Hewitt – general secretary when PIE was allowed to ‘affiliate’ with the NCCL – said she took responsibility for the mistakes that had been made.
Miss Hewitt, who claimed she had been away for the past 12 days while the controversy raged, said any suggestion that she had condoned or supported the ‘vile crimes’ of child abusers was completely untrue.
But she acknowledged that she should have done more to protect the integrity of the NCCL from the activities of PIE.
Police are now investigating PIE as part of the Operation Fernbridge child sex inquiry, launched in the wake of the Jimmy Savile scandal.
DAILY MAIL COMMENT
Yes, it was too long in coming, but Patricia Hewitt has at least had the decency to apologise for offering succour to a group of vile paedophiles while in charge of the National Council for Civil Liberties.
Admitting to being ‘naïve’ and ‘wrong’, the ex-Labour Cabinet minister says she takes ‘full responsibility’ for the ‘mistakes we made’.
What a shaming contrast with her friend and NCCL sidekick Harriet Harman, who managed only a grudging expression of ‘regret’.
Like so many on the Left, she holds the arrogant, invincible conviction that she can never ever be wrong – no matter how damning the evidence.
A senior source said there was evidence PIE members were abusing children ‘on an industrial scale’.
The Home Office is also looking into shocking claims that the Labour government of the 1970s may have helped finance the paedophile group.
Miss Hewitt said: ‘NCCL in the 1970s, along with many others, was naive and wrong to accept PIE’s claim to be a “campaigning and counselling organisation" that “does not promote unlawful acts".
‘I should have urged the executive committee to take stronger measures to protect NCCL’s integrity from the activities of PIE members and sympathisers and I deeply regret not having done so.’ 
In particular, she said that PIE leader Tom O’Carroll should never have been allowed to join the NCCL’s gay rights sub-committee.
Miss Hewitt, Miss Harman and her MP husband Jack Dromey all held key roles in the NCCL in the 1970s and 1980s when strong links were forged with PIE.
A Mail investigation discovered that Miss Hewitt described PIE in glowing terms and revealed that the NCCL lobbied parliament for the age of sexual consent to be cut to ten – if the child consented and ‘understood the nature of the act’.
The NCCL also called for incest to be legalised in what one MP dubbed a ‘Lolita’s charter’.
Miss Hewitt – who was at the helm of the NCCL from 1974 to 1983 – said that the proposal by the NCCL to reduce the age of consent had not been hers, although she admitted that it had been the policy of the organisation and the executive committee.
‘I do not support reducing the  age of consent or legalising incest,’ she said.
'As the NCCL archives demonstrate, I consistently distinguished between consenting relationships between homosexual men, on the one hand, and the abuse of children on the other.’
She defended the roles played by Miss Harman and her husband – who is also a Labour frontbencher – when they were prominent figures in the NCCL.
‘When Jack Dromey, as NCCL chairman in 1976, vigorously opposed PIE at the NCCL AGM, he did so with the full support of the executive committee and myself as general secretary,’ she said.
‘Harriet did not join the NCCL staff until 1978. She was one of two legal officers, neither of whom was a member of the executive committee.’
Miss Hewitt said that she was proud of the achievements of  the NCCL during her time as  general secretary.
‘NCCL in the 1970s played a leading role in anti-discrimination and equality campaigns. We helped to secure the Sex Discrimination Act, anonymity for rape victims and an end to discriminatory immigration rules against British women with a foreign husband. We also built support for equalising the age of consent for homosexual men – a change eventually made in 1998,’ she said.
'As General Secretary then, I take responsibility for the mistakes we made'
Patricia Hewitt
‘I am proud of the contribution NCCL made to these and other important reforms during my time as general secretary.’
She added: ‘Although the evil of child sexual abuse is now properly recognised, as a society we still have a long way to go in protecting children, tackling the sexualisation of girls and supporting the survivors of sexual abuse.
‘I hope the lessons that are being learnt from the mistakes of the 1970s will contribute to those goals.’
Labour leader Ed Miliband publicly defended Miss Harman on Monday.
He said: ‘Harriet Harman is somebody of huge decency and integrity. I have known her for 20 years. I do not set any store by these allegations.
‘I know she has a long and proud record of being on the right side of all of these issues.’
The apology by Miss Hewitt, who nowadays has a lucrative seat as a non-executive director on the board of BT, earning £160,000 a year for a part-time job, came as more evidence emerged linking her with PIE.
Archive documents revealed letters she exchanged with its chairman Keith Hose in 1975.
Hose wrote to the NCCL general secretary – on PIE notepaper which features a logo of two young children sitting bare-legged on a rock – asking her to consider PIE’s view in its policy on ages of consent.
Miss Hewitt wrote back to the paedophile group saying: ‘Dear Keith, We have found your evidence... most helpful and I think it has certainly been taken into account by the people preparing our evidence.’
A memo from 1978 also emerged in which she said the NCCL would be prepared to offer legal advice to adults who wanted to have sex with 14-year-olds.
The Mail yesterday reported that the NCCL placed a recruitment advert for new members in PIE’s house magazine and told how Miss Hewitt shared a conference platform with O’Carroll in 1977.
Document DAMONL0020140228ea2s001p6
