{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2062"}
____
RightMinds
What you need to know about Nigel Farage before you vote this Thursday by JAMES O'BRIEN
JAMES O'BRIEN   
1,236 words
18 May 2014
13:50
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
For some time now, I have felt like the only person in the theatre not laughing at the antics of the actors.
As much of the nation and my media colleagues were being seduced by the blokeish bonhomie of UKIP leader Nigel Farage, my work as a radio phone-in presenter on LBC had made me question if something uglier lurked behind the cultivated ‘pint and a fag’ facade.
In recent weeks, with so many people poised to vote for UKIP in Thursday’s elections, I have become increasingly interested in one of the slickest and most dissembling political leaders in memory. 
Scroll down for video
On Friday I finally got the chance to interview Farage.
Why was I disturbed by the surging popularity of a man so many apparently saw as a powerful force for good, a perfect antidote to stagnant and self-serving political debate? Was I mad – or was he really that bad?
It wasn’t just the murky associations, casual bigotry and apparent hypocrisies of the man himself that convinced me; it was the remarkable effect he was clearly having on two types of callers to my daily show.
First, people who make no effort to disguise their disdain for foreigners – long a staple of phone-ins – seemed emboldened to go beyond the boundaries of what they like to call ‘political correctness’ but I prefer to think of as good manners.
‘You’re not allowed to say what you think any more’ is a popular refrain.
It has always confused me, so I generally ask callers to say what it is they think they are not allowed to say. The question is rarely conducive to further conversation.
Rightly or wrongly, these people were clearly of the view that Farage was one of their own and whenever the issue of UKIP arose on air, they would be out in force.
They also stalk my Twitter account like so many keyboard terrorists, employing multiple anonymous identities, referencing Nelson or St George and sending seemingly endless tirades of rancour and racist recrimination.
Why, I wondered, were so many possessed of truly rancid views drawn to a man generally portrayed so positively?
Second, and of much more concern to me, were the callers who could not in a million years be described as racist or bigoted or bad. They were simply scared. And often rather angry.
Scared that their homes were going to be overrun by hordes of Bulgarians, scared their children or grandchildren would have no school to go to due to a shortage of places, angry that foreign criminals were not being deported and convinced that ‘faceless bureaucrats’ in Brussels were ruining their lives.
They seemed to see Farage as some sort of saviour and, while he fed their fears and exaggerated their concerns, they became angrier and he more popular.
I like these people. They are my friends, my colleagues and ultimately my livelihood.
The more I read, the more I heard and the more I learned about Farage, the more they seemed to me to be dancing blindly behind a political Pied Piper.
Finally, last Friday morning, in what will probably rank as the most surreal and spectacular studio encounter of my career,  I got the chance to look into those eyes and work out what really lies beneath. I am not going to forget the experience.
It came about after a caller said he was keen to enlist Farage’s help in combating my own frequently expressed fear that the UKIP leader was fomenting racism.
With characteristic cool, Farage laughed off the accusations and laid down a ‘challenge’ to meet me ‘face to face’ in order to put me straight.
I was also, apparently, ‘a member of the political class and their friends in the media’.
The toothy grin, the relaxed demeanour, the impeccable tailoring and the firm handshake were in evidence immediately. It took mere moments for something less wholesome to appear.
That morning it had been reported that UKIP’s small business spokesman, Amjad Bashir, was being investigated for allegedly employing seven illegal immigrants.
Farage claimed his man had no involvement  with the firm. I pointed out he resigned as a director three days after the immigration raid.
'The toothy grin, the relaxed demeanour, the impeccable tailoring and the firm handshake were in evidence immediately. It took mere moments for something less wholesome to appear'
Next, a listener had forwarded me some comments from a UKIP council candidate in which he spoke of wanting to ‘shoot’ a ‘poofter’. Farage promised an investigation. I pointed out the comments had been made in February. He went quiet.
When I brought up the subject of his meeting with a particularly repellent resident of the far-Right in 1997, he trotted out the familiar line about the media ignoring the skeletons in other parties’ closets – so we moved on to people he consorts with at the European Parliament.
Farage is co-president of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy group, which includes representatives of far-Right groups such as the Danish People’s Party and the Italian Lega Nord.
He explained that I would need a better understanding of European politics to understand why he sits at the helm.
Later, the tale of feeling uncomfortable on a train when foreign languages are spoken caused him to squirm.
This was due to the simple expedient of pointing out that his own wife and daughters speak ‘foreign’ and presumably do so in public.
So tissue-thin are his principles he attempted to claim that his wife wouldn’t speak German  ‘on a train’ before trying to shift the conversation to primary schools. I was happy to follow.
It was, though, the Romanians that tipped it over the edge. As he attempted to defend feeling ‘deeply uncomfortable’ about the prospect of having some live next door, I wondered why it would be any different from having, say, German neighbours.
The mask slipped. ‘You know what the difference is,’ he said, before embarking upon an aside about people-trafficking.
I asked about Romanians, he talked about people-traffickers. I asked about Germans, he talked about easily identifiable ‘difference’.
I have no explanation for this save a conviction on Farage’s part that one’s country of origin or ethnicity determines one’s values and decency.
When we moved on to the  question of his finances, events took an even stranger turn.
Asked why he had reverse - ferreted on a pledge to publish his personal accounts, I offered him the transparency agreement employed by every Labour MEP in the European Parliament.
He sneered, stumbled, spoke of employing an auditor and finally looked up in shock as communications director Patrick O’Flynn tried to halt proceedings, eventually ‘helping’ Farage from the studio by those tailored lapels.
It was a remarkable conclusion. There is, of course, nothing racist about being concerned  by immigration levels or Brussels bureaucracy. Just as there is nothing racist about most people tempted to vote UKIP.
But when the man who leads the party lets his mask slip briefly, as it did on Friday, it is hardly surprising that people are beginning to ask questions about his convictions.
James O’Brien is on LBC radio every weekday from 10am. He is on Twitter @mrjamesob.
Document DAMONL0020140518ea5i0008r
