{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3392"}
____
News
'I'm not having this': Farage challenged on expenses, racism and Ukip candidate who wants to 'shoot poofters' in car-crash interview halted by a spin doctor live on air
TOM MCTAGUE, MAIL ONLINE DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
2,264 words
16 May 2014
16:20
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Ukip leader left reeling after confrontation live on LBC radio
* Tackled over extreme views of candidates in next week's elections
* Questioned about being 'uncomfortable' with foreign speakers on trains
* When quizzed about expenses, spin doctor Patrick O'Flynn interrupted
Nigel Farage was left reeling today after a car-crash radio interview in which he was challenged over racism, hypocrisy and secret EU expenses.
The Ukip leader was accused of stoking fears about immigrants amid a flurry of revelations about extremists standing for his party in next week's elections.
Mr Farage's media spin chief even tried to intervene to end the live LBC interview as he struggled to fend off the barrage of questions after appearing to suggest it was okay for his wife to speak German - but not in public.
He also claimed there was a big difference between Romanian immigrants and other foreigners.
Scroll down for video
The interview came after one Ukip councillor suggested shooting gay men and another was caught employing illegal immigrants.
During the confrontation live on LBC radio, Mr Farage was also challenged over his expense claims from Brussels and who paid his private medical bills. But the Ukip leader blasted: 'I'm not having this.'
The Ukip leader tried to downplay the latest revelations about extremists in the party. He said: 'All anyone wants to talk about is the idiots in Ukip.'
Council candidate John Lyndon Sullivan wrote online: 'I rather wonder if we shot one "poofter" (GBLT whatevers), whether the next 99 would decide on balance, that they weren't after-all? We might then conclude that it's not a matter of genetics, but rather more a matter of education.'
Mr Farage said Mr Sullivan would be challenged over the remarks but refused to say whether he would be kicked out of the party. The Ukip leader said: 'He will face a disciplinary charge.'
He added: 'People saying silly things, yes, we've had more of it than we would like. But, hey, hang on a second, what's going on in the other parties? Nobody ever does ask them.'
But Mr Farage was challenged that 'there is simply not the avalanche of bigotry emerging from the other parties'. The Ukip leader said: 'Oh yes there is.'
He added: 'We are not a party that wants to be linked to the far right.'
But he was challenged about his own controversial remarks that have sparked accusations of racism and homophobia.
During an increasingly tense 20-minute showdown, Mr Farage was put on the spot by LBC host James O'Brien.
He took Mr Farage to task over his remarks that he felt 'uncomfortable' about hearing foreign languages on a train and his claim that many schools in East London the majority of children 'don't speak English'.
Mr Farage said: 'I made the point that I got on a train and went for several stops and no-one around me spoke English. I didn't object to it - I felt uncomfortable.'
Mr O'Brien demanded to know whether the Ukip leader felt uncomfortable listening to his own wife speaking German to his children.
The Ukip leader responded: 'No, because they can speak English.'
He added that he 'got the distinct feeling' that for the people on the train English was not their 'language of choice'.
Mr Farage suggested it was okay for his wife to speak German – as long as it was in private. He said she wouldn’t speak German on a public train.
He then pointed to schools in east London where 'the majority don't speak English'.
LBC's Mr O'Brien asked why Mr Farage claimed bi-lingual children in London - like his own German-speaking children - could not speak English.
He accused the Ukip leader of misleading the public - and failing to point out that his own children would be classified as non-English speaking under the same definition.
Mr O'Brien said: 'You talk about children who can't speak English as their first language without mentioning that it includes your own children.'
In further controversial remarks, Mr Farage revealed he would be more uncomfortable if Romanian men moved in next door than if German children did. He told his LBC inquisitor that ‘you know the difference’.
He added: 'We want an immigration policy based not just on quality but on quality.'
As it became clear Mr Farage was struggling, his media handler Patrick O'Flynn jumped in and could be heard shouting 'I'm sorry, we had an agreement about timing and you've massively overrun...' before he was angrily waved away.
As the interview ended, it is understood Mr O'Flynn then pulled Mr Farage out the studio by his suit.
LBC PRESENTER JAMES O'BRIEN VERSUS UKIP LEADER NIGEL FARAGE
RACE STORMS
James O'Brien: 'John Lyndon Sullivan, he's a councillor of yours over in Gloucestershire.
'Overnight he's tweeted "I rather often wonder if we shot one poofter, whether the next 99 would decide on balance that they weren't after all. We might then conclude that it's not a matter of genetics, but rather more a matter of education".
'A fairly small fry in the UKIP machine, not a description you could apply to your small business spokesman, who it turned out this morning has employed seven illegal immigrants in the last year.
'Are they both idiots?'
Nigel Farage: 'Firstly, people say silly things. Yeah, of course, we've had more of it than we would like. But hey, hang on a second, what's going on in the other parties?'
O'Brien: 'So what happens to John Lyndon Sullivan then, for that tweet?'
Farage: 'He will face a disciplinary charge, on whether he's brought the party into disrepute.'
O'Brien: 'What about the small business spokesman who employed seven illegal immigrants?'
Farage: 'Well that, I think be a little bit careful on that story, you know. He founded a business, which he's no longer a director of, his sons run it, they have got a big row going on.
'He wasn't responsible for the day to day running of it. However, I've spoken to him this morning.  He says, they made checks and they are in dispute with the immigration authorities, and they've gone to appeal.  
'So we'll have to see how that plays out. But that doesn't make him an idiot, you know.'
UKIP'S ALLIES IN THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
O'Brien: 'What about the mud that's been thrown about the far right parties with which you sit in Europe - the Danish People's Party, the True Finns Party, the Dutch SGP, and perhaps most interestingly, the Lega Nord.
'I think you co-chair, do you, that group with Francesco Speroni...he described Anders Breivik [the far right Norwegian murderer who killed 77 people in 2011] as someone whose ideas are in defence of western civilisation.'
Farage: 'No he didn't actually, he didn't...one of his members did and we kicked him out of the group.'
O'Brien: 'No, no, you're thinking of Mario Borghezio, who went further and said in a radio interview that Breivik had some excellent ideas. 
'But Speroni himself, who is your co-chair of this group, said that Breivik's ideas are in defence of western civilisation.'
Farage: 'If you would come with me to Italy or Poland or Slovakia, and listen to the political discourse, you would realise how incredibly different it is to what we would consider to be acceptable in this country.  
'What I have done, in the European Parliament, is to try and draw a line and to say we will not sit with people who we believe to be on the extremes.  
'We will sit with people who we believe to have a reasonable, balanced point of view.
'Now, let's be honest, we have had a problem in this group with one or two members of the Northern League.'
O'Brien: 'Why don't you just leave then?'
Farage: 'Well we could leave it.'
O'Brien: 'Well why don't you leave it?'
Farage: 'We have said, that we will not sit, you know, with the Front Nationale, and parties like the Austria Freedom Party. 
'We have made that perfectly clear, that we are not a party that wants to be linked to the far right.
'But I promise you, if you look at the associations everybody has to form in the European Parliament, a degree of compromise is needed.'
FOREIGN LANGUAGES ON TRAINS
O'Brien: 'You've mentioned your discomfort at listening to foreign languages on a train recently.'
Farage: 'I made the point that I got on a train, went for several stops and there were a lot of people around me, and no one spoke English.
'And I thought, you know, this is... I didn't object to it, I felt slightly uncomfortable.'
O'Brien: 'You said, "I don't feel very comfortable in that situation", you did say you had a problem.'
Farage: 'I didn't feel comfortable, no.'
O'Brien: 'Your wife is a German speaker.'
Farage: 'Well my children are too, yeah.'
O'Brien: 'Does that make you feel uncomfortable?'
Farage: 'No, because they can speak English.'
O'Brien: 'How do you know those people couldn't?'
Farage: 'Well maybe they could, but I got the distinct feeling that it certainly wasn't their language of choice.  
'And if you look at the primary school situation in the East End of London, you know, where you've now got schools where a majority don't speak English.
O'Brien: 'The schools you refer to, the pupils you refer to, are registered and recorded as having English as a second language, they're not registered and recorded as not being able to speak English.
'Your own children would fit into that category.'
Farage: 'Well, hopefully lots of people can speak different languages.'
O'Brien: 'No, forgive me...the point you're making is that schools in the East End are full of children who can't speak English.  
'The children who are typified as speaking English as a second language would include your own daughters, their mother tongue being German.'
Farage: 'They come from homes where English is most definitely not the first language, and in too many cases is not their language at all.'
O'Brien: 'But no one's counted how many people are in the second category.'
Farage: 'No and it would be a very helpful and useful thing if they did, and perhaps we'd be even more surprised and even more shocked.'
O'Brien: 'Or perhaps we'd realised that most bilingual children in this country are children like yours.'
Farage: 'I made a comment there which wasn't intended to say anymore than I felt uncomfortable about the rate and pace of change and numbers of people...'
O'Brien: 'No, you were uncomfortable about people speaking foreign languages, despite the fact that presumably your own wife does when she phones home to Germany.'
Farage: 'Yeah I don't suppose she speaks it on the train, you know, that is the point I'm making.'
O'Brien: 'Why not?  Is she not allowed to, can't she speak German wherever she wants?'
Farage: 'Of course she can.'
ON LIVING NEXT DOOR TO ROMANIANS
O'Brien: 'What about the line about not wanting to live next door to Romanians.
Farage: 'I didn't say that. I was asked, if a group of Romanian men moved in next door to you, would you be concerned.
O'Brien: 'What about if a group of German children did?  What's the difference?'
Farage: 'You know what the difference is.'
O'Brien: 'No I honestly don't.'
ON HIS EUROPEAN EXPENSES
O'Brien: 'Finally, the question of your expenses and your financial arrangements.
'I heard you on Radio 4 saying that you'd submit to a full audit.  You've reversed ferreted on that on the grounds that other MEPs don't.
'So these are the transparency arrangements that all Labour MEPs sign up for.  Can you sign up for those today?'
Farage: 'Yeah, they don't...they don't actually.  What they do is they have an auditor who make sure they spend the money in accordance with the rules. There are no expenses.
O'Brien: 'You say that as if there's something wrong with it. They have an auditor to make sure they spend the money in accordance with the rules.'
Patrick O'Flynn [Ukip's media chief]: 'Sorry, we had an agreement about timing, you've massively…
Farage: 'Hang on, hang on.'
O'Brien: 'This is Patrick O'Flynn, UKIP's Director of Communications and former political commentator on the Daily Express. Is this a friend in the media or a member of the political class?'
Farage: 'There are no expenses, these are allowances, fixed rate allowances, which I've spent in accordance with the rules.'
O'Brien: 'So will you go for the audit that all Labour MEPs go for?'
Farage: 'We will make a decision en masse.
O'Brien: 'But yes, but Nigel you're in charge.'
Farage: 'But I'm very suspicious of the word audit used in that context.'
O'Brien: Are you?'
Farage: 'Yes.'
Document DAMONL0020140516ea5g0056c
