{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3351"}
____
  
News
SCAM COULD BE COSTING US MILLIONS; ANALYSIS
BY JAMES SLACK   
547 words
17 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
7
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
THE sale of language examination pass certificates exposes the taxpayer to a potentially huge benefits bill and severely undermines the Government's integration strategy.
The exam, which the Home Office insists is 'secure' and 'robust', is one of two tests that must be passed by a migrant who has been in Britain on a visa and wishes to stay permanently.
Along with the Life in the UK test, it qualifies a foreign national for indefinite leave to remain and, ultimately, British citizenship.
Citizenship not only qualifies a person for a passport. It also entitles them to the full range of state benefits such as jobseeker's allowance, housing benefit and unlimited healthcare.
The cost to society of allowing migrants to cheat the test could therefore run into the millions, depending on the scale of the problem.
Equally crucial is the possible impact on community relations.
In the wake of riots in Oldham and Bradford in 2001, a consensus emerged among the political class that migrants could not integrate unless they learned English.
MPs spoke of the dangers of communities becoming ghettoised and of newcomers with poor language skills being unable to find work.
A recent ONS study revealed more than half of migrants who failed to learn English do not have jobs. The 785,000 people aged between 16 and 64 in England and Wales who are 'non-proficient' in English, are significantly less likely to be in employment than those who speak English as their first language or the 2.9million migrants who have learnt it.
David Cameron said in 2011: 'Real communities are bound by common experiences forged by friendship and conversation, knitted together by all the rituals of the neighbourhood, from the school run to the chat down the pub.'
Earlier this year his communities minister Eric Pickles went further, saying that foreigners are 'welcome' in Britain but must learn the language. He added: 'If you can't go down the street to buy a pint of milk, if you can't talk to your neighbour, if you can't follow what your kid is doing at school, you're isolating people.'
These commitments are plainly undermined if a person who can barely speak a word of English can simply buy a test certificate for £500.
The urgent questions raised by our investigation is just how many migrants have benefited from this scam, which relates to people who arrived in Britain on a spouse's visa - and what is the Home Office going to do to identify them?
Given Learn Pass Succeed has approved 50,000 candidates, the numbers involved could be huge. Ministers must establish just how widespread this racket is among the hundreds of centres accredited to conduct the test.
The recent history of the immigration system is littered with examples of abuse, most notably bogus colleges.
Vast numbers pouring into Britain were seen by criminals and conmen as an opportunity to make millions and an immigration system buckling under the weight of the influx has often been painfully slow to respond.
On this latest scandal, Theresa May and her officials must act immediately if the integrity of the British passport is to be maintained.
James Slack's
analysis
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140516ea5h0001d
