{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3124"}
____
News
Polish MP lives as a migrant in London earning £100 a week to find out why his countrymen prefer Britain
MARTIN ROBINSON   
805 words
24 April 2014
19:21
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Artur Debski may work as chef and is sharing a £10 a night room in London
* He also wants to use a Job Centre to find work because they are 'efficient'
* More than one million Poles have worked in the UK since 2004
* 'We need to tell our government what works and bring these things to Poland,' he said
A Polish MP has flown to Britain to live as a migrant worker on £100 a week to find out why so many from his country prefer the UK to home.
Artur Debski arrived on a budget flight over the weekend, is currently looking for a job, and is living in a £10 a night room in Wandsworth, south-west London.
Mr Debski is heading to the Job Centre to find work because he believes the system could be used back home.
The politician, a regular on Polish TV, says he wanted to live the life chosen by more than one million Poles, who have flocked to Britain despite Poland having one of the EU's strongest economies.
'I have been in London for two days and have no job. It is not easy', he told MailOnline.
'I am living in Wandsworth in a room for £10 a night and sharing with my friend. It's okay.
'I am going to the Job Centre centre today and meeting a Polish businessman and I hope I will find work.
'The first job is not important for Polish people in the UK. It is normally low paid. I will be happy to work in a kitchen or as a cleaner. I hope to earn £6.50 an hour and stay for at least ten days'.
Mr Debski, a liberal Your Movement MP, which is Poland's opposition party, has arrived in the UK after a decade of substantial migration from his country to Britain.
Since 2004 more than a million Poles have moved to the UK and a recent poll found 70 per cent of people in the country would consider coming here.
'It's important that I am here. The system in Poland is broken, in Britain it works and I want to see why and bring it back to Poland,' Mr Debski said.
'70 per cent of young people want to immigrate. It is very dangerous in Poland. I want to see why people in Britain are happy and Poles are not'.
'We need to tell Poland and our government what works in the UK, and bring these things to Poland.'
He says he wants to look at Britain's job centres because 'in Poland job centres cost a lot of money but don't provide good value. I've heard that British ones are much more efficient,' he told the Daily Telegraph.
Ipsos said three-quarters of the those already here would like to stay for good, and almost half would consider becoming British citizens.
New figures from Poland's National Bank also revealed that less money is being sent back to the country, because Poles are spending money putting down roots here, including buying homes for themselves
Critics have said the MP's trip is only because 'he must be bored to death in parliament and he needs some adventure'.
Expert on Polish migration Ewa Winnicka said: 'This is nothing more than a PR stunt for his party'.
Immigration into Britain hit record highs after 2004, when Poland and seven other Eastern European countries joined the EU.
They were given immediate freedom to work in Britain without restrictions by Tony Blair’s government.
Only Ireland and Sweden did the same, with the result that more than a million Eastern Europeans came to work in this country while few took jobs in other major EU economies.
Germany and others followed Brussels rules and only opened their labour markets to citizens of the Eastern countries seven years after they joined the EU.
However, according to Eurostat, although Poles and other Eastern workers did flood into Germany, its immigration totals stayed below those of Britain.
Britain still remains the greatest magnet for migrants both from the EU and from other countries – even after other countries opened their doors to workers from Eastern Europe, according to official figures published in February.
The UK continued to draw in more than any other country in 2011, when citizens of Poland and fellow eastern nations finally won the right to work in Germany and other wealthy nations.
The UK accepted 566,044 immigrants, compared to 489,422 who went to Germany, according to Eurostat.
The EU statistics arm added that the number coming to this country was twice that who went to France – estimated at just 267,400.
Document DAMONL0020140424ea4o007pt
