{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"726"}
____
News
Tories and Labour are scared of taking us on, says Farage after Miliband calls for UKIP leader to be banned from leaders' debates
JASON GROVES   
1,763 words
4 April 2014
09:08
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Mr Farage says the two main parties are 'running scared' of Ukip
* Opinion polls show he trounced Nick Clegg in Wednesday's debate
* Ukip appears to be drawing support from Labour and Lib Dem voters
Ed Miliband last night demanded that Nigel Farage is barred from the leaders’ debates at next year’s  General Election.
His call came the day after Ukip leader Mr Farage trounced Nick Clegg in a second debate on Europe.
A senior Tory source indicated that the Conservatives would also seek to block Mr Farage – even though the anti-EU party has been ahead of the Liberal Democrats in the opinion polls for months.
Mr Farage last night accused the two main parties of ‘running scared’.
Scroll down for video
‘I am not the least bit surprised they want to exclude me,’ he said. ‘The establishment parties are frightened of our arguments, which they know have deep resonance with their own voters.’
Opinion polls suggest Mr Farage demolished the Deputy Prime Minister in Wednesday night’s debate broadcast on the BBC.
A YouGov poll for the Sun found Mr Farage triumphed by a margin of 68 to 27, and boosted support for the idea of Britain leaving the EU, with a six-point pro-EU lead in the polls transforming into a three-point lead for quitting in the immediate aftermath of the debate.
The poll also revealed that Ukip was drawing significant support from Labour and even the Lib Dems.
Some 57 per cent of Labour voters thought Mr Farage won the debate, as did 33 per cent of Lib Dems. Mr Miliband said yesterday he was ‘not that interested in Nigel Farage’.
He said his main concern was to debate with David Cameron, but said he would be happy to repeat the format from the 2010 election, which also included Mr Clegg.
One Tory said there was ‘zero interest’ in debating with Mr Farage. The Tories are also thought to be open to the idea of a straight debate with Labour, if it could be agreed with the main broadcasters.
Yesterday Mr Cameron said the debate had revealed that both Mr Clegg and Mr Farage held ‘extreme’ views on Europe.
The Prime Minister said: ‘Nick thinks there’s nothing wrong with Europe and we shouldn’t have a referendum; Nigel thinks there’s nothing right with Europe and we should just get out and leave.
'They’re both wrong. The right answer is to be tough for Britain, renegotiate, get a better deal and then give people the choice in an In/Out referendum.’
One Lib Dem MP yesterday said the debate had been so painful he had been reduced to watching it ‘from behind the sofa – with my hands in front of my face’.
But Mr Clegg yesterday insisted he had ‘enjoyed’ the debate and denied he was feeling ‘bruised’.
He said he had expected to lose in the opinion polls but said it was vital to start making the pro-European case.
Lib Dem aides believe that participation in the debate will boost Mr Clegg’s profile and could prevent the party suffering a meltdown in next month’s European Parliament elections.
Blow by blow, how Ukip chief humiliated floundering Nick Clegg
Snap polls in the immediate aftermath of the second debate on Europe suggested Nigel Farage beat Nick Clegg by a substantial margin.
Here Chief Political Correspondent Jason Groves assesses their answers to the big questions and analyses who won.
IMMIGRATION
FARAGE: ‘We have no idea how many people are coming here from the European Union next year, the year after or the year after that, because unconditionally we have an open door to 485million people.
‘Immigration on this scale has changed fundamentally the communities, not just of London, but actually of every city and every market town in this country. But worst of all what it’s done socially, it has left a white working class effectively as an underclass. And that I think is a disaster for our society.
‘[Large scale immigration] is good for the rich because it is cheaper nannies and cheaper chauffeurs and cheaper gardeners.
But it is bad news for ordinary Britons. We need to have a control on immigration, on the numbers who come here and over the quality who come here.’
CLEGG: ‘He claimed that 485million people were going to vacate the whole of the rest of the European continent and turn up in Britain.
'It’s as silly as me saying that five million people living in Scotland might all move to Orpington next Tuesday.
‘Let me just show you, this is a leaflet from UKIP. It’s a picture of a very unhappy-looking native American.
It says, “He used to ignore immigration, now he lives on a reservation.” We are not – by staying in the EU – going to be cooped up on a native American reservation. What are you going to say next? That you’re Crazy Horse or Sitting Bull?’
VERDICT: Farage won this argument hands down. He scored a direct hit by suggesting that immigration is liked by the better off because it has depressed wages in the service sector.
Clegg had no answer to the question of how to curb EU immigration while signed up to the EU’s free movement rules.
FARAGE : ★★★★★
CLEGG: ★★✩✩✩
THE EU REFERENDUM
NIGEL FARAGE: ‘The problem is the elite club of career politicians and big businesses don’t want you to have a say.
'You know why? Because they think you might give the wrong answer. They think you might say, “No, we’d rather govern our own country”.
‘By saying 7 per cent of our laws are made in Brussels, you [Clegg] are wilfully lying to the British people about the extent to which we have given away control of our country.’
NICK CLEGG: ‘I believe that when the rules change, when there’s a new treaty, when powers which rightfully belong to you are being given up to the EU, it shouldn’t be for the Government to decide – it should be for you to decide...
'Nigel Farage and others want a treaty today or next Tuesday or next Wednesday. I think that would put the economic recovery at risk.’ 
VERDICT: Farage wrong-footed Clegg with a reminder that he said a referendum was ‘vital’ in 2008.
Clegg insists his views have not changed, but even he admits his answer wouldn’t satisfy everyone.
FARAGE: ★★★★★
CLEGG: ★★✩✩✩
EUROPE IN TEN YEARS?
FARAGE: ‘The good news is in ten years’ time we won’t be members of the EU. We will have had our referendum.
'We’ll have got our democracy back, and I hope particularly for the sake of those people trapped in that idiotic eurozone in the Mediterranean... that the rest of Europe will follow us too.
'I want the EU to end, but I want it to end democratically.’
CLEGG: ‘I suspect it’ll be quite similar to what it is now. The main achievement of the EU has been this creation of what people call the single market.
'The most important reason for us to remain in the European Union is jobs, jobs, jobs and I think that will still be the case in ten years’ time.’
VERDICT: Farage’s vision of the future was verging on apocalyptic. But Clegg’s uninspiring picture of an EU that is ‘quite similar to now’ was out of tune with the public mood.
FARAGE: ★★★✩✩
CLEGG: ★★✩✩✩
THE POLITICAL CLASS
FARAGE: ‘I’m not a career politician. I got involved in this because I realised that with the succession of treaties that we were signing up to we were giving away our birthright.
‘I urge people to come and join the people’s army – let’s topple the establishment who led us to this mess.’
CLEGG: ‘It’s all very well for Nigel Farage to sort of pontificate from the sidelines of his taxpayer-funded job in Brussels.
'Nigel Farage has been a Euro politician, paid for by you in Brussels  for 15 years now... I actually  got elected as a new MEP on the same day as him.
'I’ve had the same thing now for a decade  and a half, the world’s going to come to an end, the European Union must come to an end, everything’s going to fall to bits. It hasn’t happened.’
VERDICT: Some may see Farage’s call for an uprising by a ‘people’s army’ as verging on rabble rousing.
But he is undoubtedly in tune with many.
Clegg’s attempt to paint Farage as an establishment figure himself looks desperate and is unlikely to stick.
FARAGE: ★★★★✩
CLEGG: ★★✩✩✩
FOREIGN POLICY
FARAGE: ‘You were absolutely hell bent on getting involved militarily in the war in Syria and I personally am delighted we didn’t go to war in Syria.
‘I don’t admire Putin, what I said was, he’d outwitted and outclassed you all over Syria. I also said I didn’t like him as a human being and I wouldn’t want to live  in Russia.’
CLEGG: ‘Nigel Farage’s loathing of the European Union is so all consuming that he’s now seeking to justify and defend the actions of Vladimir Putin.
‘There are 200 people dying in Syria, being mowed down in Syria, every single day and Nigel Farage says he admires the way that Vladimir Putin has played – as if it’s a game. His position is absolutely indefensible.’
VERDICT: Farage looked uncomfortable defending praise of Putin. But his portrayal of Clegg as a warmonger was an effective riposte.
FARAGE: ★★★✩✩
CLEGG: ★★★★✩
JOBS
FARAGE: ‘Let’s run our own  democracies in France, Britain and Germany, work and trade together in a European club, but not in a political union.
'Let’s re-embrace the big world, the 21st century global world. Let’s strike trade deals with India, New Zealand, all of those emerging, doing superbly, parts of the world.’
CLEGG: ‘It would be very detrimental indeed to the UK if we were to seek to renegotiate the 50 trade agreements that we have by way of our membership of the EU.’
VERDICT: Farage is right that trade with Europe would not end if we quit the EU, but Clegg paints a persuasive picture of the fraught negotiations that would be needed to keep trade flowing.
FARAGE: ★★★✩✩
CLEGG: ★★★★✩
AND THE WINNER IS:
FARAGE: 23 starsCLEGG: 16 stars
Document DAMONL0020140403ea43009c5
