{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1875"}
____
News
Low-skilled Brits were squeezed out of jobs during the recession, report finds as Clegg slams 'absurd' Tory immigration target
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
761 words
6 March 2014
13:43
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Home Office and Department for Business study finally released
* Says low-skilled workers were affected by immigration in the recession
* But overall there was little impact from migrant workers on UK labour force
The impact of immigration on British workers left the coalition bitterly divided today.
A major government report finally released today found low-skilled Britons were squeezed out of jobs by migrants during the recession, but overall there was ‘relatively little evidence’ of workers being displaced.
Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg dismissed a Tory target to reduce net migration as ‘absurd’, while the Conservatives said an influx of foreigners 'forces wages down and house prices up’.
David Cameron pledged to reduce net migration to the ‘tens of thousands’, but the Tory aspiration was never endorsed as coalition policy by the Lib Dems.
Figures released last month showed net migration to Britain had rocketed by 60,000 to 212,000 in the year to September 2013.
Ministers, including Tory Home Secretary Theresa May, have repeatedly cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) published in 2012 and covering the period from 1995 to 2010 that found 23 British workers were left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals from outside the EU.
But the new analysis released today stated that ‘when data from part of the period of economic downturn (2009 and 2010) were omitted, the impact of non-EU migration was not found to be statistically significant’.
It added that the MAC was careful to highlight a ‘tentative association’ identified in the data rather than a ‘causal interpretation’ and ‘this should be emphasised in any interpretation of this report's results’.
Mr Clegg accused the Tories of focussing on an unattainable target instead of implementing border checks to moinotr who enters and leave Britain.
Speaking on his LBC radio phone-in, Mr Clegg said: ‘I’ve always said to them the problem is it’s a target over which they don’t have full control because it depends partly on how many people live this country, how many Brits leave this country. 
‘Actually, the number of Brits leaving this country is now in its lowest level than it’s been for many, many years.  So, you can’t control that, you can’t tell a number of Brits to leave this country in order to meet those targets, it would just be absurd. 
‘That’s why it’s not a government target, but I think they’ve become very, very preoccupied with that, and I’ve always said to them there are certain things we’ve got to do, bear down on illegal immigration, bear down on abuses on the system, bear down on unscrupulous employers, reintroduce exit checks.’
The new analysis of immigration evidence by the Home Office and Department for Business aid: ‘Overall, our assessment is that there is relatively little evidence that migration has caused statistically significant displacement of UK natives from the labour market in periods when the economy has been strong.
‘However, in line with some recent studies, there is evidence for some labour market displacement in recent years when the economy was in recession.’
It added that ‘where displacement effects are observed, these tend to be concentrated on low-skilled natives’.
The evidence suggests that the labour market can adjust to increased net migration when the economy is strong, but during a recession and when net migration remains high as in recent years, there is a slower adjustment and ‘some short-term impacts are observed’.
The analysis added: ‘To date there has been little evidence in the literature of a statistically significant impact from EU migration on native employment outcomes, although significant EU migration is still a relatively recent phenomenon and this does not imply that impacts do not occur in some circumstances.
‘The evidence also suggests that where there has been a displacement effect from a particular cohort of migrants, this dissipates over time - that is any displacement impacts from one set of new arrivals gradually decline as the labour market adjusts.’
The row raged as Business Secretary Vince Cable prepared to hail free movement in the EU and attack immigration ‘scare stories’.
Speaking on the same day Tory immigration minister James Brokenshire delivered his inaugural speech in his new role, Mr Cable will tell an audience at the Mansion House the UK economy will be held back if the country is seen as ‘closed for business’.
Document DAMONL0020140306ea36005f9
