{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2575"}
____
  
News
PM: BRITAIN WILL END UP IN UNITED STATES OF EUROPE IF WE DON'T ACT NOW
BY TAMARA COHEN    
536 words
17 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
2
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
BRITAIN will be 'sucked into a United States of Europe' unless powers are clawed back from Brussels, David Cameron warned yesterday.
For the first time, the Prime Minister laid out seven targets for renegotiation of Britain's membership with the European Union including immigration controls and abolishing the principle of 'ever closer union'.
Mr Cameron said public support for EU membership in Britain is now 'wafer thin' and that the status quo in Europe 'is not working'.
He has promised to try to secure a better deal for the country if he wins next year's general election, and to hold an in-out referendum on Britain's membership in 2017.
The Prime Minister said he will campaign to stay in the EU if Brussels agrees to his new terms, which will hinge on support from other members, particularly Germany.
But one of his Eurosceptic backbenchers said the targets are too 'vague and vacuous' and that without more specific pledges, he has no faith that the Government will be able to deliver.
Mr Cameron's hit list for negotiations includes controls to stop 'vast migrations' across the continent when new states join the union, and tougher rules on access to benefits.
The principle of 'ever closer union' among EU member states, enshrined in the European treaties, should be abolished because it is 'not right for Britain', he said.
And centralisation of powers should be reversed with areas of responsibility 'flowing back' to national parliaments. He would also call for a new power for groups of countries to work together to block unwanted legislation from Europe.
Businesses should be freed from European red tape, and the police and courts freed from 'unnecessary interference' by the European Court of Human Rights.
Mr Cameron set out his proposals as a poll by ComRes, for the Independent on Sunday and Sunday Mirror, indicated that Ukip would win the largest share of the vote (30 per cent) in the European elections in May, with the Tories falling into third place on 21 per cent.
'I completely understand and share people's concerns about the European Union,' he wrote in The Sunday Telegraph.
'Our businesses value the single market. But they find the degree of European interference in our everyday life excessive.
'People are worried that Britain is being sucked into a United States of Europe; that may be what some others want, but it is not for us. They see decisions being taken far away, rather than by their elected representatives in Parliament. 'As a result, democratic consent for Britain's membership has worn wafer thin.' Mr Cameron said he was putting forward 'an ambitious agenda for a new European Union'.
But Douglas Carswell, Conservative MP for Clacton, said: 'John Major promised less red tape and talked about returning powers to national parliaments. Tony Blair talked about a more flexible Europe.
'For the past 20 years various prime ministers have promised these sorts of changes but they never happen. As someone campaigning for Britain's withdrawal, the vagueness and vacuousness of this argument makes it far easier for me.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140316ea3h0000j
