{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"126"}
____
News
Would YOU throw someone out of a lifeboat to save yourself? A terrifying shipwreck, a freezing ocean and a savage battle for survival. A new book poses the ultimate moral dilemma
ANNABEL VENNING   
2,352 words
3 April 2014
02:25
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* No Mercy tells the true story of the William Brown, which sank in 1841
* Passengers and crew piled into a lifeboat, overloading the unsteady craft
* So crew turned on the passengers - and one by one, threw them overboard
With a cargo of immigrants bound for a new life in America, the William Brown was a ship full of hope. It had set off from Liverpool five weeks earlier, on March 13, 1841, and was nearing the end of its voyage to Philadelphia.
A ship of 559 tonnes, it carried salt, coal and china, along with 65 passengers, mostly Irish and  Scottish families, as well as husbands and  wives joining spouses who had already made the journey from the old world to the land of opportunity.
There was thick fog as the ship entered the icefield west of Nova Scotia on the night of April 19. But rather than slowing down as other ships nearby were prudently doing, the better to avoid icebergs that might suddenly loom out of the darkness, the American captain, 48-year-old George Harris, kept the William Brown sailing at a brisk ten knots.
Harris was an experienced sailor, but he was under pressure from the ship’s owners to complete the voyage quickly because the vessel was about to be sold.
At 8.45pm, as the sailors on watch peered through the hazy darkness while the passengers relaxed below deck, there was a jolt and an ominous noise. The ship had scraped along a flat ice floe. But if the crew felt relief at getting away lightly, it was short-lived.
Fifteen minutes later, there was a horrifying jolt and thunderous noise as the ship collided head-on with a massive iceberg. The iron bows crumpled, a gaping hole appeared in one side and water began pouring into the ship.
The impact was enough to knock Mary Carr, the only passenger not in bed, off her feet. Below deck, 12-year-old Owen Carr, travelling from  Co. Tyrone with his large family, was thrown from his bunk. Another passenger, 19-year-old Bridget McGee, rushed on deck, fearing that ‘the ship had broken in two’.
She was not far wrong. The iceberg had catastrophically damaged the William Brown. Captain Harris surveyed the damage and ordered his crew to lower the lifeboats.
Shipwrecks were horribly frequent occurrences in the 19th century. Too many ships were poorly maintained or, like the William Brown, had too few lifeboats.
But what set this shipwreck apart from other disasters was the truly horrifying sequence of events that followed. They led to a sensational court case that captivated newspaper readers on both sides of the Atlantic and raised the ultimate moral conundrum: is it ever acceptable for one man to kill another to save his own skin? 
The terrible tale of the William Brown is featured in a fascinating new book about how people have reacted when they found themselves struggling to survive in remote, dangerous environments with limited supplies.
It prompts us all to ask what would we do in such circumstances. Would we do anything to save our fellow humans or would we be willing to sacrifice their lives to save ourselves? For the passengers and crew of the William Brown, these hypothetical questions became a dreadful reality.
After Captain Harris had given the order to his crew to abandon ship, they busied themselves launching the two boats on deck, one a longboat, about 20ft to 24ft in length, which had only oars and no rudder, the other a ‘jollyboat’, rounder and smaller, but more seaworthy. 
Several frightened passengers had, like Bridget McGee, come on deck to ask what had happened. Instead of telling them the truth, Captain Harris and his crew assured them all was well.
Mollified, they returned below deck. But when a male passenger, James Black, discovered the truth, he shouted down the hatches that the ship was sinking, and panic broke out.
By the time the terrified passengers had grabbed coats, roused their sleep-fuddled children and clambered up the hatchways, they found most of the 16 crew were already in the two lifeboats.
It was abundantly clear that there was not enough space in the boats for all 65 passengers. When one asked Captain Harris what they should do, he replied that they would have to do the best they could. He seemed to feel no responsibility for his guests.
The jollyboat had already launched, with eight sailors and just one female passenger, while the longboat was rapidly filling up. Panicking hordes rushed towards it, but in the stampede, those who were encumbered by young children or were simply too slow were left on deck. Young Owen Carr was pushed into the freezing ocean by another passenger, Julie McCadden. Bridget McGee and 17-year-old Biddy Nugent, who was on her way to join her father in Philadelphia, managed to scramble into the longboat, but a Swedish sailor on board, 26-year-old Alexander Holmes, ordered them out.
However, they refused and remained in the boat as it was lowered into the sea. The sailors, worried that the longboat was overcrowded, were picking on  young women, who had no man to protect them, and trying to evict them. 
Another teenager, 19-year-old Sarah Carr, had raced below deck to grab some warm clothing: ‘When  I returned, the longboat was  in the water alongside the vessel. I jumped.’
She landed on a sailor, Charles Smith, who ordered her to return to the sinking vessel, but she stayed put. The longboat was pushed away from the ship, but remained attached by ropes. 
A Scottish woman, Margaret Edgar, had managed to get three of her daughters into the longboat, but the fourth, Isabella, had fallen on the slippery deck and failed to get in.
Hearing her child’s pitiful cries for help among the screams of the other 31 passengers still on the sinking ship, Mrs Edgar cried out: ‘Someone! Save my daughter for pity’s sake.’
Swede Alexander Holmes, moved by a mother’s tears, ordered the crew to manoeuvre the boat back  to the William Brown. He bravely climbed up a rope onto the deck of the ailing ship and found Isabella among the petrified huddle of passengers. 
Hoisting her onto his shoulders, Holmes was about to carry her back down the rope when he was accosted by a doctor’s wife from Ireland, travelling with her three young children.
Realising that the ship was about to go down, the woman offered Holmes ‘as much money as he could earn in a month’ if he would save her life, even though this would mean him abandoning Isabella.
Incredibly, she was willing to leave her three children to drown in order to save herself, but Holmes refused, saying: ‘Money is not the object. It is lives I wish to save.’
The Swede then carried Isabella back down the rope to the long-boat before giving some of his warm clothing to a shivering Julie McCadden.
The two boats pulled further from the sinking ship. Several of their occupants had left relatives behind on the ship and they heard their anguished cries as they realised that they were being abandoned to their fate, the water lapping around their feet as they stood helplessly on deck.  
As light dawned, the First Mate, Francis Rhodes, put in charge of the longboat, begged the captain to take more people into the jollyboat. Though there was room, Captain Harris flatly refused
Around midnight, the pleading stopped. The freezing air was filled with ‘an eerie silence’.
A few minutes later the ship plunged below the waves, with 20 children, seven women and four men still on board.
It had taken two hours from the ship striking the iceberg to its sinking. In that time it might have been possible to improvise a raft and save more souls, but the captain never attempted this.
The two boats were alone in the vast Atlantic, 250 miles from the Newfoundland coast.
It was obvious that the prospects of those in the jollyboat were infinitely better than those in the overcrowded longboat, carrying 32 passengers and nine crew. At the bottom of the boat was a plug, which somehow became dislodged in the night, causing water to flow in until it was ankle deep.
Holmes made a new plug with some wood, but water still seeped in and had to be bailed out constantly with buckets.
As light dawned, the First Mate, Francis Rhodes, put in charge of the longboat, begged the captain to take more people into the jollyboat. Though there was room, Captain Harris flatly refused.
Rhodes then told his captain that the longboat was unmanageable and that unless some of the passengers were transferred, ‘we will have to draw lots’.
‘I know what you mean,’ the Captain replied. ‘Don’t speak of that now. Let it be the last resort.’
The meaning behind that exchange would become grimly apparent within hours.
Having given Rhodes a compass and chart, Harris sailed off in the  jollyboat, with his crew and one  passenger, heading for Newfoundland, leaving the sail-less, rudder-less longboat alone. Abandoned by his captain, Rhodes seemed to lose hope.
That first day the passengers bailed as the crew rowed. As night fell and rain pelted down on the shivering passengers, Rhodes — fearing that waves would swamp the heavily laden boat — cried out in despair: ‘This won’t do. Help me, God. Men, go to work.’
What followed next was like something out of a horror movie.
Julie McCadden heard the crew tell Owen Riley, a young man who was migrating to Philadelphia to join his wife, to stand up.
They grabbed hold of him. Realising what was coming, Riley begged Margaret Edgar — a favourite of the crew — to help him.
Then Alexander Holmes came towards him. Riley must have thought that Holmes, who was well-liked by crew and passengers, was going to save him.
He was wrong. Holmes seized Riley and pitched him overboard into the icy water, still clawing frantically at Holmes’s sleeve and tearing it in the process.
No one knows how long it took Riley to die: perhaps as much as an hour, perhaps only ten minutes.
The other passengers fell into a  state of terror. They easily outnumbered the crew.
Had they collectively defied them, they could have halted the murderous spree that was unfolding. But, immobile with fear, they sat mute, trying to hide their faces with clothing to somehow make themselves invisible. 
It was futile. The next victim, Scot James Todd, was pitched overboard without protest. Sarah Carr described the next killing.
‘When they got hold of James MacAvoy, he asked them to give him five minutes to pray.
‘Some of them refused him, but Murray [the ship’s cook] said he should have it. He then said a prayer and they threw him out.’
Bridget McGee’s uncle, George Duffy, was flung, begging for his life, into the water.
The longboat was 38 stone lighter. If it had been in danger of sinking, it  certainly wasn’t then, as the prosecutors argued at the subsequent trial. 
But the sailors, seemingly driven by a murderous lust, carried on killing. They seized Frank Askins, travelling with his two sisters, Ellen and Mary. He pleaded desperately: ‘I have five sovereigns and I’ll give it for my life till morning, and when morning comes if God does not help us we will cast lots and I’ll go out like a man if it is my turn.’
Mary cried that if they threw her brother over, they should throw her over after him. The sailors, unmoved, hurled all three to their deaths.
Still the murders continued. Only two men were spared, at Holmes’s insistence, because they had their wives with them.
When dawn came, the crew discovered two men hiding in the stern. They were dragged out, numb with terror. One, Charles Conlin, a friend of Holmes, pleaded not to be thrown over.
But Holmes replied: ‘Yes Charley, you must go.’ His was the 16th death.
Only half an hour later, the survivors caught sight of a ship. They were spotted and hauled on board. Several days later, Captain Harris’s jollyboat was also rescued. They were all taken to France, where the rescuing ships were headed.
The French authorities showed no interest in prosecuting the crew, who scattered. But when the passengers reached America and recounted their horrific tale, the authorities, under pressure from the Irish expat community, had to act.
Alexander Holmes was the only sailor who could be found, so he was put on trial for murder, reduced to ‘manslaughter on the high seas’.
The case captivated the public in Britain and America. Would the crew have tried harder to save the passengers had they been wealthy, rather than mostly poor immigrants?
How could Holmes, who had risked his life to save young Isabella Edgar, have turned within hours into the ruthless murderer of so many?
Why did the slaughter continue for so long? And — the most terrible question of all — were the sailors justified in taking lives to save their own?
Holmes’s defence lawyer argued that it was better to save a few lives rather than let everyone perish.
The prosecution countered that the killings were neither necessary — the longboat would have stayed afloat anyway — nor just: ‘The law regards the life of one man as good and valuable as that of any other.’
Holmes was found guilty but given only a six-month sentence. No other members of the crew were tried for their role in the murderous affair, not even Captain Harris, who abandoned 31 helpless passengers, including 20 children, to an appalling death.
No Mercy: True Stories Of Disaster, Survival And Brutality by Eleanor Learmonth and Jenny Tabakoff (The Text Publishing Company, £12.99).
Document DAMONL0020140403ea430008k
