{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1027"}
____
  
News
YOU NEED TO GET OUT MORE, MILIBAND TOLD BY LABOUR RISING STAR
BY GERRI PEEV    
531 words
19 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
10
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
ED Miliband was told by one of his MPs to 'get out more' as his electoral strategy was condemned as suicidal.
The Labour leader was hit with bruising criticism by his party's rising star Simon Danczuk just days before local and European elections.
Polls show Labour's lead over the Conservatives has fallen to four points, down from six. On European voting intentions, Labour is on 24 per cent, languishing behind Ukip (35 per cent) but ahead of the Conservatives (20 per cent).
Mr Danczuk, the MP for Rochdale, said the election had to be about winning over Tory and Ukip voters. 'I think Ed needs to be less cautious. He should have probably debated with Farage along with Nick Clegg. That would probably have been a smart move in terms of putting Cameron on the back foot. I also think he needs to get out more,' he said.
He told BBC Radio 5Live's Pienaar's Politics: 'What we also need to do is occupy the centre ground and that is where we will get the breakthrough. So we need to be stronger on immigration; welfare. We need to be seen in a more positive way in relation to business.'
Mr Danczuk has criticised the strategy of Douglas Alexander, Mr Miliband's campaign co-ordinator, to rely on securing 35 per cent of the popular vote.
This would be enough to win the general election according to some strategists because constituency boundaries favour Labour.
But Mr Danczuk has said Labour should not rely on the Coalition's 'unpopularity' to win the 2015 contest.
'Now we need to up our game,' Mr Danczuk wrote in an article for the Mail on Sunday.
He added that 'continually reciting a mantra of misery is not the answer', and warned that the party will not win by relying on a 'core vote and a few disgruntled Liberals' - which he described as 'a suicidal strategy'.
Mr Miliband is being threatened with further open dissent if his party does not gain seats in Thursday's poll. A Labour candidate for one of the party's target seats condemned his leadership as 'dodgy and incoherent'.
Tristan Osborne, candidate for Chatham and Aylesford, was recorded making critical remarks about Mr Miliband's strategy. 'The machine is not functioning in any capacity,' Mr Osborne said at a £100-a-ticket Labour fundraising event held on Tuesday.
'We need to be appealing to the aspirational Southern voter.'
Mr Miliband dismissed as 'nonsense' suggestions that he had hired David Axelrod, Barack Obama's election guru, to give him a makeover.
Quizzed by Sky's Dermot Murnaghan, he said: 'This makeover stuff is nonsense...I can absolutely promise that I have never talked to David Axelrod about the colour of my tie.'
Mr Miliband also defended a Labour party TV ad which attacked David Cameron and Nick Clegg as out-of-touch posh boys. He insisted he was not waging class war based on which school the Prime Minister went to. 'It is about what he believes and what he does,' he said.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140518ea5j00014
