{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"752"}
____
TV&Showbiz
Marion Cotillard is ready for her close-up in stunning Forties-inspired interview shoot as she reveals how motherhood helped her career
JENNIFER PEARSON   
622 words
24 February 2014
21:34
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Marion Cotillard shows her fashion edge in the March issue of Interview Magazine.
The 38-year-old French beauty is featured on the cover wearing a blue satiny number with black ribbon tied seductively around her throat and displaying a timeless quality that's singularly hers.
Turning the pages, Marion can also be seen in an inside picture wearing a bronze lame dress with a slit down the skirt, sheer black stockings covering her legs and her hair styled in a glamourous 'do inspired by screen sirens of the 1940s.
A third image shows the star wearing a shiny black, floral number, along with those black stockings, while staring off to the distance.
Also generating interest is Marion's new film Blood Ties, in which she plays a woman who will do anything for her children.
Marion drew from her own experience as a mother to flesh out the role, as she told the magazine.
Marion also had the benefit of working with her real-life partner, Guillaume Canet, who directed and co-wrote the crime-drama about two brothers (Clive Owen, Billy Crudup) on opposite sides of the law who combat each other in 1970s Brooklyn, New York.
Describing her character Monica, an addict who turns tricks for a living, Marion said: 'It was actually one of my favorite characters. She really touched me.'
Like Monica, Marion is also a mother to her two-year-old son named Marcel with Canet.
'She does everything for her kids, even if she struggles with drugs,' the actress said. 'But this fight for her kids really moved me. And, of course, it's because I became a mom myself.'
In the interview, Marion goes on to say that wouldn't mind if her son Marcel follows her footsteps into acting.
'Ah, it's an amazing job, but my parents never told me anything about how hard the job would be,' Marion shared.
'My parents were actors too. I don't even know if when I wanted to be an actress, they went, "Oh, s**t." [laughs] I must ask them. 
'I mean, an actor has a huge failure in him... So it's kind of a struggle. I mean, if my son wants to be an actor, it's fine.'
Marion relished the opportunity of collaborating with her boyfriend on the project.
'I loved working with him,' Marion told the magazine of her on-set relationship with Canet on the film, which comes out in US theatres on March 21.
Marion will also play a prostitute in the forthcoming The Immigrant, in which she plays a Polish woman who arrives in Manhattan and falls prey to a charming yet wicked man (Joaquin Phoenix).
'He is a special actor and a very special human being,' Marion described her co-star Phoenix. 'His instinct is like the instinct of an animal. 
'There's a pureness about him. We lost this animal instinct that we used to have... Yeah, he's an animal. 
'That's how I describe him. To be in the same area with him, I took it as a privilege.'
In regards to playing a prostitute in two films this year, and in the music video for David Bowie's The Next Day, Marion laughed and said: 'Yeah, that's a question that I didn't really ask myself.
'I don't know why this year was all about that. Three prostitute roles in my life this year and last. I don't know why. Not that I don't want to do it, because why not?'
Document DAMONL0020140225ea2o000s6
