{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1310"}
____
  
Features
IF HE FAILS TO WOO WHITE VAN MAN, DAVE'S SET FOR A CRASH
BY SIMON HEFFER   
1,228 words
1 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
43
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Long before outspoken Tory backbencher Nadine Dorries accused her party's leadership of being 'posh boys', there were widespread concerns about whether David Cameron and his political circle understood the lives of typical voters.
A new poll, claiming that 70 per cent believe the Eton and Oxford-educated stockbroker's son PM is 'out of touch', suggests the problem is far from solved.
This week we learned that five of the six people drawing up the Tories' election manifesto are Old Etonians — the sixth is George Osborne, who slummed it at London's elite St Paul's (where annual fees are as much as £31,000).
Entering this debate is the thoughtful Tory backbencher Robert Halfon, who represents the Essex town of Harlow. He wants the Tory leadership to work much harder to win the support of aspirational, hard-working people. Otherwise, he fears, they have no hope of winning the election.
They are a similar group of voters to whom I had in mind nearly a quarter of a century ago when I coined the phrase Essex Man.
Back then, they were people liberated from Socialism by Margaret Thatcher — treated for the first time as aspirational and economically enfranchised by being able to buy their own council homes.
Mr Halfon describes such values today as 'white van' conservatism.
The principles that this white working-class espouses haven't changed much since Mrs Thatcher's day: the wish to own their own home, to send their children to university and to keep more of what they earn rather than pay high taxes to fund a bloated state.
ThAT is why incentives must be offered by the Conservatives if they are ever to win back these traditional Tory voters.
The challenge is made more difficult by the rival appeal of Ukip. It wants to control immigration, reclaim sovereignty from Europe, stop billions of pounds being squandered on overseas aid, create new grammar schools, cut taxes for low- earners, boost the Armed Forces and increase social mobility.
Once, most of these were Tory policies. But under Mr Cameron, priorities include giving taxpayers' hard-earned money to African despots as foreign aid and making same-sex marriages legal. The problem is so acute that one senior Tory MP told me this week that his constituency membership had 'evaporated' since last year, mainly out of anger over gay marriage.
Significantly, one of the party's former major donors, hedge fund manager Michael Hintze, has demanded repayment of a £2.5 million loan, because he is so unhappy with the same-sex marriage policy.
It is crucial that the Tories come up with a series of measures that appeal to millions of working-class people.
And that doesn't mean token patronising gestures, such as this week's suggestion to cut taxes on bingo.
One sensible way would be to offer voters an immediate referendum on Europe. Also, the Tories must do more (preferably through tax incentives) to encourage business start-ups and improve infrastructure in areas such as Tyneside and Lancashire.
And they should harness the entrepreneurial spirit and aspiration of the immigrant communities of Northern and Midland towns and cities, and appeal to their deep sense of family values.
This strategy would be helped, too, if the Tories counter their socially elite image by making sure the voices of Yorkshiremen William Hague and Eric Pickles, and plain-speaking Liverpudlian Nadine Dorries, are heard as well as those of the 'posh boys'.
The men in white vans and their families are not yet fatally lost. But if the Tories remain deaf to their needs, they very soon will be.
 
***
THE serious depletion of Britain's Armed Forces makes it much harder to run a foreign policy because potentially hostile countries know politicians don't have the force to back up their words.
America, too, this week announced a reduction in the size of its army to the smallest level since 1940. No wonder Russia is manoeuvring on Ukraine's borders and brandishing its fist.
The world is a dangerous place and what is happening in Ukraine should be a wake-up call.
***
 
EVEN many in the Labour Party are admitting that Ed Balls's unpopularity among voters is a reason why Ed Miliband might struggle to win the next election. Now Lord Mandelson, who as an acolyte of Tony Blair once feuded with Mr Balls, feels he ought to endorse him as a fine Shadow Chancellor. Given Lord Mandelson's innate bad judgment, I suggest Mr Balls ought to start looking for a job outside politics.
***
 
IT SHAMEFULLY mocks the rule of law that 187 suspected terrorists in Northern Ireland, some accused of the gravest crimes, should have been excused prosecution as part of the so-called peace process.
The public should have been told of this morally repugnant arrangement at the time.
This scandal further diminishes — if that is possible — the reputation of the Blair government, which seems to have wanted to present the 'triumph' of peace at any price, irrespective of what it involved.
Punishment beatings and knee-cappings continue to this day, and the gangsters have not gone away, concentrating now on drug-dealing.
The problems of Ulster, I fear, are not over, merely paused.
***
 
I FIND it deeply demoralising that Lib Dem MP David Laws should have been rehabilitated with a government job despite admitting to an eight-year expenses fiddle worth £40,000. But to make matters worse, in his post as education minister, he now says grammar schools should reserve places for children from the poorest homes.
This is absurd: such schools should select pupils according to brains, not parental income.
***
 
The Left's use of the phrase 'child poverty' is highly emotive and is often a false measure of a child's true well-being.
Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith is right to broaden the definition from meaning a household with an income of less than 60 per cent of the average.
He should also come up with an alternative and more objective term. Instead of talking about 'child poverty', we should speak about 'family deprivation', something that takes into account factors other than just income.
***
 
SCARCELY a day passes without the Scots being told what will happen if they vote for independence.
There will be no currency union with England, no automatic membership of the EU, no BBC — and possibly no Eurovision Song Contest entry! Leading businesses, such as Standard Life, also say they might have to move over the border. These are almost unanswerable arguments in favour of the Union.
So, why does Mr Cameron think he needs to engage in absurd stunts to win over the Scots, such as holding a Cabinet meeting in Aberdeen?
***
 
JUDGE Keith Cutler outraged public decency by suggesting a 20-second silence before conducting the inquest into the killing by police  of gun-toting criminal Mark Duggan.
This week, he appalled Britain by giving a derisory four-year jail sentence to a thug who killed a harmless man with a punch.
Though most judges are first-class, it is very hard to hold to account those who are out of touch with public opinion.
It is time to put them on five-year, renewable contracts.
***
 
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140228ea3100069
