{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"360"}
____
  
News
'Under the cosh Brits pick up the tab again'
718 words
1 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
30
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
Here we have it, the truth at last. i was right when i said it was us mugs paying double to keep em. i said ages ago immigrants didn't pay taxes but we were branded racist for speaking out. Hunter Coventry
so foreign workers pay little tax get benefits & get praised for working hard! What a load of bull. As a construction worker I've had to work alongside many of them in d past! trust me, most of them do a s*** job an us Brits get collered in to putting their work right. Piaggio
So Nigel Farage isn't standing for seat in by election claiming he's waiting for the EU vote. wat he means is he's running scared cos he knows he won't win. Tell the truth farage! krb
re sandy daily star 29th april: how do you know labour are getting in election? not been held yet. mark
Re Sandy: hope labour do not oust tories because it will be back to boom and bust. TonyB Mansfield
It's time for pupils 2 blow d whistle on the so called mates who show knives off. Yes 'SPLIT' ON YOUR MATES. Help create Safety in the Classroom. Dug d Thug
To the so called carers who ignored the 98 year old lady's repeated calls for help. i hope you rot in hell you vile scum. Neil
70 years since D Day and what were all those brave lives sacrificed for? Successive goverments to hand over all our rights to the EU. A sad waste. BJC
So Cheryl Cole says Lily Allen is a chick-with-a-dick and Lily says Cheryl has got balls! Am l living a sheltered life? Sid
What is it with girls walking around showing half of their bum cheeks? Get them covered up you clatty bunch. Farouk Crosshill
the queen and teaforthree. its not a stallion its a geldin. jump horses dont have nuts between their legs. boy would their eyes water jumping bechers brook. bobby boy
Actually, i think Gordon Ramsay's new haircut is great! he looks years younger. anon
Cheers daily star, used my free health lottery voucher on sat for a lucky dip, won £20. Kirky Hull
Scotland is a great country & the Scots are a fantastic race. I should know, I've lived there & married a scot, but I do wish they would stop whining about gas & oil. There is so much more to be proud of. As a proud Englishman I hope they do vote for independence, I wish England got the same consider ation. The Bear, south london
Please stop running SCOTLAND & its people down. Beautiful place & people friendly. Hope they vote to stay with us. Its all our mps not listening to people born in uk which annoys me. Lp
To ROSKO Yeadon. Thanks for the info. You are so right. I stand corrected. KC LEEDS
Another great day ruined by res pons ibility. Pub Breakfast
Hey leo, me old son, just wot u done? Upset some prat wif no sense of fun. He just mean an bein silly. pay no heed 2 B Billy. An no, i aint no kin. So come on leo, keep textin in! Swamp Duck
Nothing wrong with poor old leo fae leeds, he keeping you lot off my back for a change! ALAN SMALL, EDINBURGH
£1.7 million for winning Wimbledon? no wonder the bloody strawberrys are so expensive! MUNKY
who else keeps their takeaway menus in the top kitchen drawer? PUBLUNCH
summer's here great, time to dust off the R1 an tear up the countryside. Don't think any of my mates will b joinin me tho, they've all bought caravans. Sad innit. MZ Emblem
i was out last weekend all tarted up and told these two beautiful girls i was actually a lottery winner. what a fantastic night i had with them until i told them my lottery win was only £25. they both disappeared! grant hately
That survey where sex lasts for 2mins for millions of men: how do they last so long? Phil Kingswinford
TEXT OF THE DAY
Hooray, hooray,The First of May,Outdoor sexBegins today.G.G.
Document DAISTA0020140501ea510001m
