{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1200"}
____
  
Features
THE AWFULLY RACY CONFESSIONS OF MAGGIE'S MINISTER FOR RAGING LIBIDO
2,236 words
22 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
39
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
He fancied her rotten as they saved the Falklands. Now, in a new book, the uncontrollably outspoken John Nott admits to even naughtier fantasies
BY JANE FRYER
FORMER Defence Secretary Sir John Nott is on a roll.
In the last 20 minutes, we have touched upon the petulance of his former boss, the late Baroness Thatcher ('she behaved to me like a deserted wife'), the allure of Speaker's wife Sally Bercow ('I was definitely attracted to her'), the awfulness of Nick Clegg ('I have to be careful because he was a great friend of my son at Cambridge and his dad was my best friend') and the disappointing decline in his own libido ('I try to keep it up').
But right now, we're on Old Etonians, and his extraordinary proposal that they should be culled, which is set out in detail in his latest book.
'It is needed though, isn't it? They're everywhere! It's all right saying you'd cull them with the badgers — that's OK. But perhaps I went a bit overboard with the bit in the book about dealing with them with a travelling clinic from Dignitas. My sons went to Eton, you know. Maybe I was going too far?' he says cheerily.
And with that we move seamlessly on to fertility and immortality and how, if Sir John had his way, he'd donate his sperm to the Millennium Seed Bank at Kew Gardens (which, as far as I'm aware, currently deals with conserving plant life only).
'The virility of young men has declined by 30 per cent — partly because of the residue of the Pill in the water. There are great long queues for IVF. Maybe old men like me have some function left in life — we can help keep the human race going.'
Sir John's genes would certainly add a certain je ne sais quoi. He is a very clever man, in amazing shape, with very good skin and, despite that flagging libido (he is, after all, 82), an enviable spring in his step.
He also has an exemplary CV — Bradfield College, Trinity College Cambridge, politics (MP for St Ives, Cornwall from 1966 to 1983, and the Conservative Defence Secretary who got us though the Falklands War), chairman of Lazard's merchant bank, farmer, father, grandfather, very keen angler and, of late, something of a sexual provocateur.
Until ten years ago, he was perhaps best known for flouncing out of a 1982 live TV interview with Sir Robin Day who called him a 'here-today, gone-tomorrow politician.'
They were at a Tory Party conference and he recalls: 'I got more and more irritated and I just wanted to be at home on my farm in Cornwall. I always hated the Tory conference! Hateful. Worst day of the political year. And though Michael Heseltine is a good friend of mine, his speeches were just nauseating.'
But then in 2004, aged 73, he wrote an extraordinary memoir called Mr Wonderful Takes A Cruise, subtitled The Adventures Of An Old Age Pensioner, covering his preparations — dancing, swimming and bridge classes — for the holiday.
The book — which featured an astonishing number of references to sex, lap dancing, women's lingerie and his (then) ever-ready libido — was clearly designed to shock and scandalise, but was funny and clever.
'When I was a politician I had to choose my words carefully. Now I'm a geriatric staggering around Chelsea on a stick, I don't have to be constrained,' he said at the time.
Ten years on, he's written another epic: Mr Wonderful Seeks Immortality — The Diary Of A Restless Man, dedicated (in typically eccentric fashion) to the Atlantic salmon. This time, the publishers weren't quite so keen, so he self-published.
'Did you read it? What did you think? It's all right, isn't it? It's my book and I'm paying for it, so I'll jolly well have whatever I like in it. It's very bonkers, don't you think?' he says, all eager and bouncy.
Indeed, it is a sort of extended flight of fancy, with a little bit of politics, a touch of climate change and a lot of weird fantasy.
There is a chapter in which he envisages establishing a breeding commune consisting of him and a few select women — in particular Jordan (the model who now prefers to be known as Katie Price), the French politician Segolene Royale and Carla Bruni, spouse of the former French president Nicolas Sarkozy — to pass on the immortal seed of Sir John.
And there is a detailed description of a Thai massage in Bangkok in which the masseuse strips, squirts her client's naked body with washing-up liquid and then massages him with her body. Another fantasy, before you ask.
In another passage he 'imagines' being a guest at Jordan's 2005 wedding to Peter Andre, which is actually quite funny. 'My youngest son loved that bit.'
So what's it all about? Was he 'on' something when he wrote it? 'Oh, no, no! I like a drink, but I don't do anything else.
'My son-in-law's an MP [Hugo Swire, Conservative MP for East Devon], so there was great concern that I'd let the family down, but I said: "Bugger this, I'm 82. What does it matter what I say? Nobody's going to take a blind bit of notice anyway." So I rather persisted.
'I didn't dare show it to my family or anybody else. I knew if I started showing it to my wife and daughter they'd want me to take out all the juicy bits. Anyway, it's not nearly as juicy as the last one. My wife is reading it now.'
The same wife, Miloshka, 79, who popped her head round the sitting room door ten minutes ago with a: 'Good luck to you. Ha ha! I'm going to jump down to Peter Jones.'
When she's gone, I suggest to him that, what with all that sex and breasts and sperm talk, it might not be the most pleasant thing for her to read.
'It's very unfair to say there's lots of sex in the book!' he splutters. 'There's lust. Oh yes, and Carla Bruni and Jordan's breasts, I suppose. Is this raising your feminist hackles?'
We start near the beginning, with Mrs T. To whom in 1983, on resigning following a reshuffle, he famously wrote what many described a love letter, thanks to his flowery language and reference to her 'good looks, charm and bearing'.
'It wasn't a love letter,' he says crossly. 'It was a critical letter. That's the reason she never answered. The trouble with Margaret was that she used to gossip to her friends, such as Tim Bell, Gordon Rees and the late Lord McAlpine, and they used to go around repeating it all.
'But I did admire her — she saved the country. And I found her an attractive woman.'
Physically?
'Yes, physically! We used to fight like cats and dogs, but she loved to fight. And she was very warm, though she had no sense of humour at all. If you cracked a joke and she realised it was a joke, she used to smile, but she didn't get it, ever.'
He left politics suddenly, when he was 51 and at the top of his political game. 'I'd always promised Miloshka I'd be in politics for 15 years, and it was 17 already. I needed to make some money. But Margaret couldn't understand that. Politics was her whole life. She didn't forgive me.'
Which is perhaps why he never made it to the House of Lords.
'Sometimes it seemed I was the only one who wasn't there. But now I'm thankful I'm not. The idea of getting on the Underground to Westminster every day to vote. Ghastly! It's not as if I need the £300, which a lot of them do.'
Sir John is lucky. He and Miloshka, a very attractive blonde and once a refugee from communist Slovenia, live in a five-storey townhouse in Chelsea which he bought 30 years ago and must be worth millions today. They also have a farm in Cornwall and flats in the South of France and Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia.
They met at Cambridge in 1959. 'She was engaged to a rather nice man. Trinity professor. Anyway, I fell for her really and I was determined to get her. Shaming thing was, I met her at their engagement party. So I knew if I was going to marry her I had to move fast.'
Downstairs, a bit later, as she makes the coffee, Miloshka gives her side of the story.
'I had no choice. He was determined. He came to our engagement party. He arrived late, behaved badly, kept me talking at the door. And then after five minutes talking to me he said: "I'm going to marry you" and I thought: "What a cheek. What a presumptuous man."'
Four days later they were married.
'No one believed it would last,' he says. 'She often says she made a terrible mistake in marrying me!'
He perhaps isn't the easiest partner but 54 years later they have three
children: Julian — a film composer who 'has made a fortune' from writing the scores for Peppa Pig and the Wallace & Gromit animated films — William, who works in the oil industry, and MP's wife Sasha, and nine grandchildren.
His wife calls out: 'Do you like his trousers? Harris Tweed. They're good for old men. Keep them warm!'
And with that, she pops next door to watch her favourite Russian soap, and talk turns to Nigel Farage.
'I rather like people who achieve things in life, and his achievement is amazing. Singlehandedly he's threatening the oldest political party in the country. Though I don't like their immigration policy. The Poles have saved this country. If you want a plumber, you have to find a Pole. And you can't go anywhere in London without being served by a lovely Polish girl . . .
'I'm very aware of women. Of attractive women. Even unattractive women. In fact, just yesterday, I got chatting with a very attractive girl at the bus stop, an artist.'
And we're off again.
'I tell you what gives me a bit of a thrill — Swan Lake! I love the ballet! Sexually alert? Yes, I'm very sexually alert. Yes I am.' Why is he so obsessed? Is he having some kind of later life crisis? 'My wife says I'm in a continual state of menopause!'
It sounds more like he's pining for sex.
'Oh no! I've had plenty of sex. Look at the beautiful wife I've got.'
And has he always been faithful?
'Completely. Utterly! Yes, of course, I'm faithful. You've never heard of a husband who isn't, have you?'
When he's not appreciating attractive (and unattractive) women, Sir John still follows politics avidly and has some very firm views. Particularly when it comes to David Cameron.
'I'm sure he's very, very clever, but he's a man who drip-feeds the media with some PR stunt on a daily basis. Oh my God! That selfie! The one he put on Twitter — on the phone to Obama. Ghastly! How can a Prime Minister be so undignified?
'He must recapture his lost Tories, because actually it's been rather a good government — economic policy, education and particularly welfare reform.'
He discusses Boris Johnson as 'the only crown prince' and loathes the BBC ('dreadful'), their chairman Chris Patten ('an out-and-out liberal') and Nick Clegg.
The Lib Dem leader's father was not only his best friend at Cambridge but also his daughter's godfather. 'But I just hate the Liberals. I hate them. They're so bloody dishonest, that's the problem. They'll say anything for a vote.'
He is a huge royalist, and terribly worried about the crisis in the Crimea and fears that Putin will soon target the Balkans. In fact, he's a funny mixture. When he's on politics, travel and his salmon fishing, he is interesting, authoritative and good company.
He has no fear of dying ('It'll be a new experience — I've done everything else') and, under that vast dome, clearly has an enormous brain. If only he'd tone down all that sex and lust a bit.
But as we say our farewells at his front door, he mentions his new book yet again. 'I know you'll write mostly about sex and me being eccentric, but I just want you to say somewhere that the book is worth reading.'
I say it's extraordinary.
'That's fine. I hope you've enjoyed the interview. I found you very congenial.'
Which sadly, I rather suspect, coming from Sir John Nott is very faint praise indeed.
* Mr Wonderful Seeks Immortality: The Diary Of A Restless Man by John Nott is published by Silverwood Books at £10. To order a copy (p&p free), call 0844 472 4157.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140321ea3m0000q
