{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"2400"}
____
  
Features
'Jet threat to Russia is playing with fire'
677 words
15 April 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
37
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
So Britain has sent four Typhoon jets to the Ukraine! I bet the Russians are quaking in their boots? Don't mess with fire Cameron! nastycol
Cameron has deployed 4 fully armed jets to threaten the Russians, in AN0THER conflict that is f*** all to do with us! All hail BLAIR the WARMONGER, MARK II. Trevull
E-CIG Gran burnt in hospital well I'm not surprised, Foreign made goods all a load of crap a lot of cars and other foreign manufactured items been recalled as faulty, if you want rubbish buy forign. Cse
dont let the nice weather fool you people... Just because we are promised a hot few days doesnt mean we will get it... and if we get nice weather it wont last long. Its only April get excited in July its meant to snow next week. Teesside Girl
love to know who works in the met office and what are they on. last week they said easter could be snow now its hotter than italy. yeh rite. big ben donny
So Mo Farah missed out on his bid to win the London Marathon no surprise! Maybe if he stopped eating fungus instead of real meat he'll have a better chance in 2015? Veggies don't have the strength or stamina of real carnivores!!! FUNKY LEVEN
Mo farah might like all the praise and glory he gets from us but he makes his money here yet hes moved to become a tax exile sohe pays no income tax here what a hero. raghead
So Wayne Rooney & Co have a "quiet room" so they can have a snooze after training? Try being a nurse and do 3 twelve and a half hour shifts on the trot. Bunch of overpaid wimps. TEAM GINGE, E12
Fed up with people saying "how can you go for a pint at 7am" my god... i work nights and 7am is my dinner time just like yours when u fin work at 5pm! ALAN SMALL, EDINBURGH
congratulations to motd2, you made 20mins of 2 games make a 60 min prog by waffling 4 40 mins n we pay those prats to do it. newboii
Yvette Cooper says a Labour government would count every immigrant in and out, wrong they'd count immigrants in and British out because they'll never leave a free ride while we end up paying for labours legacy. Munkaree
to the bear in south london, the reason scotland want independence is because your cronies at westminister have lived off scotland's wealth for long enough its time for us to go it alone. FREEDOM
RE: The Bear, It's not England we Scots hate, It's Westminster. Tallywhacker Tee
Ciggy Shame. Shouldn't the police be investigating Leicestershire County Council Trading Standards for paying children to break the law? Alec Trician
i wish marine luck in appeal against his court martial they should be illegal as they are stacked against the defendant the outcome decided before the event. robtin
Nice to see Highways Agency av got thr priorities rite. Nvr mind pot holed roads lets dig up 60 miles of the M1 to fit a non-essential barrier and more Cameras to spy on ppl. Jz
Get that silly disgusting Off their Rockers off the tele .thats not the way old people behave. granny san
TMAN, NOTTINGHAM. Bring back Brooky! Yeah!! Jo x
TMAN. NOTTINGHAM. Your pal is right. They should bring back Family Affairs, I loved it. Also Brookie but not Crossroads, that was a bit naff! Rosko, Yeadon
How to solve the chewing gum mystery of Coronation Street. DNA the lot of them. SCOUSE
If Corrie does'nt exist then just what have i been watching all these years ? LEO F
My mate asked me. How long have u worked 4 that company? I said ever since they threatened 2 sack me! Momma Towel
TEXT OF THE DAY
Note to any pub quizzers out there,the Hindu god ofhair products isNOT Kondishna. Mullet
Document DAISTA0020140415ea4f0000r
