{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"753"}
____
News
Two cities the size of Leeds needed to house influx of new migrants as officials fear migration will drive up house prices
DAILY MAIL REPORTER  
615 words
24 February 2014
08:51
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved  
* In next decade, migrants 'will be responsible for 629,000 new households'
* Wave of people coming to the UK could drive up house prices
Two cities the size of Leeds will be needed to accommodate the influx of immigrants over the next decade, official figures suggest.
A study of figures has found that during the next ten years, migrants will be responsible for 629,000 new households, equivalent to one in three formed in England.
The wave of people coming to the UK has prompted fears that they will drive up house prices in an already overcrowded market.
The analysis by the House of Commons library will put further pressure on David Cameron to honour his promise to reduce levels of net migration to 'tens of thousands', the Daily Telegraph reported.
Senior Conservative ministers  have raised concerns in the past that uncontrolled migration will push up house prices.
 The House of Commons Library predicts that from 2011 until 2021 a further 1.4 million migrants will flow into Britain.
This has fuelled concerns that they will push up rental prices and create a buy-to-let market that will squeeze out first time buyers as there will be fewer houses to purchase.
The worrying figures over the housing squeeze came as England was revealed to be the most overcrowded major country in Europe in December.
Population growth is so rapid that four times as many people will soon be crammed in as France and twice as many as Germany.
England has overtaken the Netherlands to become second only to tiny Malta as the most densely populated nation in the EU.
Over the next 30 years the gap will widen because Germany, France and Holland will either decline or grow only slowly.
The House of Commons figures – based on data from the UK and EU statistical agencies – show the huge impact of Labour’s open-door immigration policy.
By 2046, an estimated 494 people will be squeezed into every square kilometre of England compared with 411 now and only 374 when Tony Blair took power in 1997.
The influx of migrants from Eastern Europe has fuelled a huge rise in the number of schoolchildren who do not speak English as a first language.
In five years between 2008 and 2013 the number of Eastern European pupils who don’t speak English at home almost tripled from just over 44,000 to more than 123,000.
Astonishingly, one in nine English schools now has a majority of pupils who do not speak English as a first language. The official figures lay bare the enormous strain mass migration has placed on our schools.
The number of pupils who speak Romanian as a first language has seen the steepest increase – rising 527 per cent in five years. The number using Bulgarian at home has risen by 255 per cent.
However, the Education Department figures – obtained by the Daily Mail under Freedom of Information laws – only cover the five years before labour market restrictions on both countries were lifted last month, meaning the trend looks set to continue.
Schools are already struggling to cope with the demand for places, with some having to teach pupils in temporary classrooms.
Official estimates suggest that more than one million extra places will be needed in Britain over the next decade, which will bring the total required to eight million by 2022, the highest for 40 years.
The Government is already having to spend £5billion by 2015 on increasing the number of places to help ease the crisis.
Document DAMONL0020140224ea2o00492
