{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2689"}
____
News
MRI technician grabs police officer's gun and shoots him dead while suffering 'mental breakdown'
JOHN HALL   
458 words
1 April 2014
19:19
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Officer David Smith, 43, was killed with his own gun during a 'disturbance'
* MRI technician James Clark, also 43, then fired weapon at a second officer
* Was shot and died in hospital during emergency surgery three hours later
* Officer Smith had served for 18 years and was married with one child
* Authorities say Clark appeared to be suffering from a 'mental breakdown'
An MRI technician grabbed a police officer's gun and shot him dead while suffering an apparent 'mental breakdown', authorities have said.
Officer David Smith, 43, was responding to reports of a disturbance at the Southern Tier Imaging MRI Centre in Johnson City, New York state, when James Clark, 43, grabbed him, stole his gun, then shot him dead.
Clark then fired the weapon about 15 times at a second officer, before being shot himself and dying in hospital during emergency surgery three hours later.
Scroll down for video
Binghamton Police Chief Joseph Zikuski said Officer Smith was called to a disturbance at the health care facility in Johnson City when he was attacked.
He said Clark, an MRI technician at Southern Tier Imaging, had struggled with Officer Smith before grabbing his gun and firing.
Officer Smith, an 18-year veteran of the force who was married with one child, was hit three times and died at the scene.
'He was a good officer. It's tragic,' Chief Zikuski said.
Describing Clark's attack, he added: 'He obviously had some sort of mental breakdown. We may never know.'
In a statement, New York Governer Andrew Cuomo said: 'I was deeply saddened to learn that Officer David Wayne Smith was killed in the line of duty today... We are deeply grateful for his service and extend our heartfelt condolences.'
Chief Zikuski said until the attack, Clark had been a 'model employee' with no known mental health problems or criminal history.
Police said that when Clark entered the Southern Tier Imaging building for work yesterday morning, he became engaged in a dispute with his colleagues.
Zikuski said that shortly after the dispute, Clark grabbed a co-worker, shook him and made threats indicating there was a bomb in the building - which led to Officer Smith being called to the scene.
Authorities are now searching Clark's home for clues to a motive for the attack.
Autopsies on both Officer Smith and Clark started yesterday and are expected to conclude today.
The shooting comes just three days before the fifth anniversary of a mass shooting in the area.
Jiverly Wong shot and killed 13 people before taking his own life at an immigrant center in nearby Binghamton on April 3, 2009.
Document DAMONL0020140401ea41000me
