{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1059"}
____
News
Heartbroken husband describes moment he and son watched as nail salon worker wife was shot dead by gunman trying to hit a man getting a pedicure
DAILY MAIL REPORTER   
471 words
7 May 2014
23:31
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Truc Thi Ly Nguyen, 43, was shot in the temple when a gunman opened fire at her Baltimore nail salon
* The shooter, Tremain Washington, was aiming for someone else
* Nguyen's husband, who watched the shooting, pinned Washington to the ground until police arrived
* The intended target was shot three times and is in critical condition
* Washington has confessed to the crime
A nail salon worker has been caught in the crossfire and shot dead while her husband and young son looked on in horror after a gunman burst into her Baltimore shop and started shooting at the man she was giving a pedicure to. 
Truc Thi Ly Nguyen, 43, was shot in the temple Monday as she was crouched at a foot basin. She died shortly after being taken to a local hospital.
Her horrified husband, Quang Tran, and his brother, who owns the salon, tackled gunman Tremaine Washington to the ground, wrestled the gun away and held him until police arrived.
Washington, 26, who has multiple drug-related arrests, begged Tran to let him go before the cops got there - saying he never meant to shoot Ms Nguyen - that he was aiming at her pedicure client sitting in the salon.
'She sat here,' Mr Tran told the Baltimore Sun, reliving the horror in the nail salon. 'She was innocent.'
Mr Tran told WJZ-TV that he was in the salon working on an electrical outlet when the gunman burst in. He had brought the couple's young son with him so that he could watch his parents work.
Mr Tran said Washington started arguing with the man in the pedicure chair. He then pulled out a handgun and started shooting.
Scroll down for video
Washington's target got up and ran. Ms Nguyen dropped to the floor with a gunshot to the head.
Washington pursued the man to the back of the store and shot him three times, including in the leg and the stomach. the man is in the hospital in critical condition.
Washington confessed to attacking the nail salon customer, but said he didn't mean to shoot Nguyen, police said.
Nguyen was a Vietnamese immigrant who was working hard to pick up English and wanted to learn to drive. She sent home much of what she earned to her family.
'She liked working here in the city because the people are friendly, doesn’t matter what country you are from. But still they respect everybody,' Mr Tran told WJZ.
Her family is now saddled with the expense of flying her sister to American so that her body can be taken back home for burial in Vietnam.
Document DAMONL0020140507ea57008kf
