{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"941"}
____
  
Features
THE SIMON HEFFER COLUMN
BY SIMON HEFFER   
1,439 words
3 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
41
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
HOW ED'S GETTING REDDER BY THE MINUTEA CEASELESS criticism of Ed Miliband is that he sometimes seems to be little more than a student union politician.And with his juvenile remarks this week that he wants to impose limits on increases in rents, he has shown once again that he values  a cheap headline over wise policy-making.For a man with a degree in politics, philosophy and economics from Oxford, the Labour leader displays an alarming lack of knowledge of how economics works in a free society, and how wealth is created.He doesn't seem, for example, to have studied history and considered whether there might be a  link between the shortage of rental properties in London in the  Fifties and the rent controls that then operated.Nor does he seem to ask why, despite London then being full of bomb-sites, run-down housing and with building restrictions loosened, few developers were willing to step in.The answer is simple: it was not financially worth anyone, apart from such people as the 
notorious  slum landlord Peter Rachman, renting out property.Mr Miliband also ignores two causes of the present housing crisis. One was the decision by the Labour government of which he was a member to allow unlimited immigration from the EU, which created huge extra demand for accommodation.The other was Gordon Brown's economic policy that brought Britain to its knees  in 2008, and reduced the  funds available for investment in property.The fact is that building to let or to sell is a commercial risk, and few were prepared to take that risk during great economic uncertainty.By saying a Labour government would limit rent rises, landlords will inevitably switch their investments away from property — which will simply exacerbate the problem. Also, Mr Miliband's idea of restricting the fees paid to estate agents for lettings will either make them shed staff or find other ways of squeezing money out of home-buyers and sellers.Indeed, having already  promised to cap energy prices and seize land from house-builders, what we are witnessing is a return to the wretched days of Seventies statism. I jest, but perhaps, next, Mr Miliband might suggest food prices should be frozen — after all, most farmers vote Tory.Shamefully, he is fixated by the belief that the State has the answer to everything. Yet once Soviet-style distortions are imposed on the laws of supply and demand, the effect on wealth creation and growth are usually devastating.The sort of economy Mr Miliband seems to want — in which governments order restrictions on the price of any commodity that people find expensive — is one that is heading for ruin.If you want evidence of this, just look at what is happening in France. There, the Socialist President, Francois Hollande (who is much admired by Mr Miliband) is running a tightly regulated, high-tax-and-spend economy that is now in crisis and from which many companies are relocating abroad.One of Mr Miliband's  colleagues has told me that, if he becomes PM, the Labour leader wants to operate a 'socialist' government.The trouble is that history shows that, invariably, socialist governments do not improve living standards or make life easier for poorer people, because they drive away the wealth creators that provide employment, and who pay the taxes that fund welfare safety nets.Equally worrying, state  controls of rents and energy prices — and any other similar new wheeze — are a brilliant way to destroy whatever economic recovery the country is now enjoying.--TOUGH-GUY POSTURING  THAT'LL ONLY BACKFIRE No ONE would accuse me of being a bleeding heart liberal when it comes to crime. Indeed, I want criminals jailed — as a deterrent to others and to protect fellow citizens. However, I believe prison should do more than just deprive offenders of their liberty. Above all, inmates should be helped to prevent them re-offending on release. For example, since many prisoners are illiterate, they should be put on adult literacy programmes.That's also why I deplore the restrictions placed on books and musical instruments for prisoners. Of course, it's important to confine certain privileges to prisoners who have earned them by good conduct. But it's also vital, as part of the prison's civilising process, to allow inmates to play music. It undoubtedly gives them self-respect, which might dissuade them from further criminality.I fear Justice Secretary Chris Grayling has introduced these restrictions in a shameless bid to try to prove he's a Tory hard man. Instead, his lack of subtlety is merely helping ensure more of our criminals end up back inside.--I DON'T mind if U.S. drugs giant Pfizer buys its British rival AstraZeneca. We thrive from living in a free market and Britain is the biggest foreign investor in the U.S. If we erect barriers to stop foreign firms bidding for our companies, then they will simply retaliate. The foreign currency from such a sale — an estimated $106?billion — would strengthen our economy. And if brilliant scientists at AstraZeneca don't want to work for Pfizer, they can take their skills elsewhere, or set up their own firms. The Pfizer takeover bid is the price of success.--HOW chilling to hear Michael McConville, whose mother was abducted and murdered by the IRA in 1972, say that he knows the identity of her killers but is  too afraid, despite years of 'peace', to give the information to the police.  This is proof that sectarian violence still simmers beneath the surface in Ulster. If the police pursued Republican and Loyalist gangsters with half the zeal they target British soldiers suspected of crimes, the men of violence would have been rooted out long ago.--PERFECT TICKET FOR GEORGEIt's rumoured George Osborne aspires to be Foreign Secretary after the next election. This is a trifle presumptuous, as the Tories have to win it first. If they don't, the ex-Chancellor is likely to be engaged in a bloody battle with Boris Johnson to succeed David Cameron.I don't share the growing acclaim for Mr Osborne. He could have expedited our recovery by cutting expenditure faster and further, and slashing taxes, too. I also fear the 'recovery' will wobble badly when interest rates go up. If he really wants to go to the FO, Dave should send him there now.--NIGEL FARAGE was right not to stand in the Newark by-election. His priority is to secure his party the best outcome in the euro elections. His enemies mock him for cowardice, but it seems that — as with daily accusations that Ukip is full of people who would have flourished in 1930s Germany — the more the other parties try to vilify Ukip, the higher it rises in the polls. ==A YEAR ago, I wrote of Tory-controlled Essex County Council's promise to pursue  its former leader, the convicted fraudster Lord Hanningfield, for more than £250,000 that he improperly spent when  in charge. It hasn't got very far.This week, the council said it is 'still exploring all avenues of recovering monies due to the Council from Lord Hanningfield in the most cost-effective way'. Why aren't bailiffs now being sent into Hanningfield Towers in the same way they pounce on taxpayers who owe the council money?--SINCE Boris Johnson is  incapable, so far, of stopping next week's four-day London Tube strike — which will cause huge inconvenience to millions and damage the country's  economy — how good would he be at running the country? His predecessor, Ken Livingstone, says a photo he saw of  Mr Johnson's desk showed its contents unmoved from his own time five years ago. He also accuses Mr Johnson of often working from home and leaving the serious business of governing to a team of deputies.The misguided Tory constituency parties allegedly queueing up to select Mr Johnson as their parliamentary candidate should take note.--CABLE'S BAD FOR BUSINESSThe controversy over the ludicrously cheap share price set for the Royal Mail when it was privatised  has centred upon the  inadequacy of Vince Cable, who led the sell-off. This is simply confirmation that the Lib Dem grandee has achieved nothing as Business Secretary. He has failed to stop small businesses being strangled by red tape and his attempts to manipulate university access by social engineering will be disastrous for our country. With a Cabinet reshuffle due, isn't it time this old fraud was moved on?
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140502ea530000p
