{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"3081"}
____
UKIP candidate suspended after claiming Muslims are 'animals' and Africans should get Aids
Jaymi McCann   
543 words
25 April 2014
13:40
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
A UKIP candidate has been suspended after expressing “extreme racist views”.
Andre Lampitt, who is on the party’s list of council candidates in Merton, was the star of the party’s first European election broadcast on Tuesday.
He complained about the impact of immigration from eastern Europe on his ability to get employment in the building trade.
He said in the broadcast: “‘Since the lads from Eastern Europe are prepared to work for a lot less than anybody else, I’ve found it a real struggle.”
But the builder from Zimbabwe – which he calls Rhodesia – has some shocking views: he welcomes the Aids outbreak in Africa, despises Oxfam and thinks Muslims are animals.
He took to Twitter on several occasions over recent months to spout his disgraceful views.
He wrote: “Inner peace will come when Aids does what it should and reduce African density”
And added: “Oh for Gods sake get over it slavery was an act of war you lost stop being so damn jealous and move forward".
Plus, he said: "Muslims are animals their faith is disgusting their prophet is pedophile” .
The party says they were unaware of his extreme views and have suspended him over the messages.
A Ukip spokesman said: “We are deeply shocked that Mr Lampitt has expressed such repellent views. “His membership of the party has been suspended immediately pending a full disciplinary process.”
Farage told the BBC: "I'm very disappointed that someone like this has been allowed to slip through the net.
"Someone somewhere has made a very, very major error.
"Something's gone wrong with our systems. This guy should have been weeded out and he wasn't."
This comes after a week of scandals for the UK Independence Party.
They’re controversial advertising campaign launched at the start of the week was condemned as “racist” by some.
Plus, a woman who appeared in a poster explaining why she would vote Ukip turned put to actually be Farage’s aide Lizzy Vaid.
And today it was claimed that a man portrayed in the adverts as a British builder who could not find work was actually an Irish immigrant actor.
Andre Lampitt’s tweets:
“Inner peace will come when Aids does what it should and reduce African density.
“All Muslims needs to leave Europe America and Oz,or denounce their pathetic Satanic religion."
“Oh for Gods sake get over it slavery was an act of war you lost stop being so damn jealous and move forward".
“Miliband is not a real Brit. I hope he never gets to be PM! He was only born here."
“Most Nigerians are generally bad people I grew up in Africa and dare anyone to prove me wrong.
“I believe in being British it is earned through generations of existence not through birth – just my opinion though”.
“Muslims are animals their faith is disgusting their prophet is pedophile”.
“I was born and grew up in Africa please leave Africa for the Africans lets them kill themselves off don’t go there”
“When I voted they did not tell me they would spend our tax money on Syrians I'm sorry but this is unfair”
Document DAICO00020140425ea4p001p6
