{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1686"}
____
TV&Showbiz
She's NAILed one part of her look! Billie Piper sports her trademark scruffy hair as she treats herself to a manicure
FAY STRANG   
374 words
18 April 2014
13:05
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Grooming has never been one of Billie Pipers top priorities – instead she’s been concentrating on her illustrious career and growing family.
But on Thursday the 31-year-old decided to break tradition and paid a visit to a nail salon, perhaps to inject a bit of glamour ahead of the Easter Weekend.
The actress did however did stick to most of her normal look – leaving her hair typically scruffy in her favourite bed-head style.
Billie, who is married to actor Laurence Fox, looked keen to show off her paint job as she left the salon and raised one of her fingers for waiting photographers.
The cool mother-of-two wore a three-quarter length black and white dress with floral print and a slight thigh-split.
Adding a rock vibe she chucked on a pair of studded ankle boots, leaving her bronzed legs bare.
The star was no doubt enjoying some ‘me’ time, as her children Eugene Pip and Winston did not accompany her for the trip.
The former singer's latest role is in the Showtime horror series Penny Dreadful.
The actress plays Brona Croft, an Irish immigrant seeking to escape her dark past in Victorian London; as the origin stories of such classic literary characters as Victor Frankenstein, Frankenstein's monster; Dorian Gray and Count Dracula are regaled in the Showtime TV show.
The eight-part series was written and executive produced by Skyfall duo John Logan and Sam Mendes in their first collaboration for television, with the ensemble cast including Josh Hartnett, Eva Green, Timothy Dalton, Harry Treadaway and Rory Kinnear.
Showtime's President of Entertainment, David Nevins, had nothing but praise for Logan and Mendes.
‘John Logan and Sam Mendes are two of the great storytellers of our time,’ Nevins said.
‘The visual spectacle combined with the psychological insight in their reimagining of these iconic literary characters seems totally mesmerising to me. This promises to be a wholly original television show.’
Billie has also been lined up to star in a new Sky Arts project with another Skyfall alumnus, Ben Whishaw.
Document DAMONL0020140418ea4i004k0
