{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3099"}
____
  
News
STAR OF UKIP'S ELECTION AD SAYS ISLAM IS EVIL AND AFRICANS SHOULD KILL THEMSELVES
BY JAMES CHAPMAN    
697 words
25 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
10
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
UKIP has suspended the star of its first European election TV broadcast after it emerged that he condemned Ed Miliband as 'not a real Brit', suggested Africans should 'kill themselves off' and said Islam was an evil religion with a paedophile prophet.
Andre Lampitt also said he loathed the charity Oxfam and welcomed Aids outbreaks in Africa, saying: 'Inner peace will come when Aids does what it should and reduce African density.'
Like party leader Nigel Farage, he said he admired Russian leader Vladimir Putin, adding: 'At least Putin loves his country. David Cameron does not love Britain, he loves the EU.'
Ukip said it was 'shocked' by his views, which will embarrass the party as it prepares for local elections next month - with Mr Lampitt standing as a councillor in Merton, South London.
The builder, who describes himself as 'born British in Rhodesia', was one of five supporters hand-picked to appear in a prime-time television campaign starting this week.
He was featured in the broadcast criticising immigration from the EU, saying: 'Since the lads from Eastern Europe are prepared to work for a lot less than anybody else, I've found it a real struggle.'
Yesterday, the party said it was suspending him after discovering he had expressed 'repellent' views in a series of potentially unlawful messages on Twitter over recent months.
In one tweet he claimed that Islam was not a religion and called it an 'evil organisation respecting a prophet who as a pedo.'[sic]
He added: 'All Muslims need to leave Europe... or denounce their pathetic satanic religion.'
Another message insisted: 'Most Nigerians are generally bad people... I grew up in Africa and dare anyone to prove me wrong.'
He suggested Africans should be 'left to 'kill themselves off' and suggested people should 'get over' slavery, which he said was an 'act of war'.
Condemning the Labour leader, he said: 'Miliband is not a real Brit. I hope he never gets to be PM! He was only born here.' In another message, he said Mr Miliband, whose father Ralph was born in Belgium to Polish parents, was 'Polish, not British'.
He also suggested examination of statistics on rape would reveal a racial bias among attackers, and in another message declared: 'Enoch Powell was right'.
A Ukip spokesman said: 'We are deeply shocked that Mr Lampitt has expressed such repellent views.
'His membership of the party has been suspended immediately pending a full disciplinary process.'
However, it was not clear whether Mr Lampitt can be removed from the party's list of council candidates in Merton, because nominations closed yesterday.
The timing of the row is unfortunate for Mr Farage, who has this week rejected claims from some Labour MPs that his party's latest election billboards on immigration are racist. Ukip had suggested its candidates would be put through more rigorous checks following a series of controversies over the views of some on race, gay marriage and other issues.
It faces questions about how it failed to check messages posted over several months and available for all to see on Mr Lampitt's Twitter page. Last night his account appeared to have been deleted and he could not be reached.
Lib Dem president Tim Farron said: 'I cannot believe Ukip did not check the comments of this man before they used him in their broadcast. His racist views might even make the BNP wince with embarrassment. A week after the French National Front opened their arms to Ukip, with comments like these it's easy to see why they did.
'Ukip might wrap themselves in the flag, but these comments are deeply offensive to anyone with decent British values.' Mr Farage promised to eliminate 'Walter Mittys' from his candidate list after Ukip defence spokesman Godfrey Bloom - one of his closest allies - quit following outbursts in which he described foreign nations as 'Bongo Bongo Land' and women as 'sluts'.
The Ukip leader said he would ensure only 'reliable, steady, solid people' could run for election.
j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140424ea4p0001t
