{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"915"}
____
Event
The Germans were terrified of the Daily Mail and Helena Bonham Carter's great-granddad ran the country: 100 amazing things you didn't know about World War I
EVENT REPORTER   
5,584 words
3 May 2014
23:01
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
It was the war to end all wars – and inspired some of the most stirring words and arresting images of the last 100 years
1. The nation was sworn to secrecy. The Defence of the Realm Act of 1914 forbade British citizens from talking about military or naval matters in public or buying binoculars. It also outlawed talking on the phone in a foreign language or hailing a cab at night, and proscribed the use of invisible ink when writing abroad.
2 Russia tried to go sober for the war... In August 1914, Tsar Nicholas outlawed vodka production, closing down 400 distilleries and 28,000 off-licences.
3...And George V got Britain on the wagon. On April 6, 1915, the King announced that he would abstain from alcohol for the duration of the war (elsewhere, alcoholic drinks were watered down and pubs closed at 9.30pm). But no wine, beer or spirits were served in Royal residences until November 11, 1918, when an 1815 cognac was opened – by Royal command.
4 The storm also raged in a teacup. The Lyons Corner House chain of teashops, founded by Jewish immigrants from Prussia in the 19th century, took out a high court injunction in 1914 to prevent rivals the Lipton Tea Company referring to them as German.
5 Crumbs! Our boys went to war in a biscuit barrel. The British Expeditionary Force was so short of transport in 1914 that many units went to France in lorries that were usually used for transporting biscuits.
6 British troops were clean fighters. In 1915 the Sunlight Soap Company declared the ‘British Tommy’ to be the ‘cleanest fighter in the world’. The Wirral-based company was so confident of the soap it sent to the trenches that it offered a £1,000 ‘guarantee of purity’ on every bar. 7 Not all the top ranks were posh... Of the 144,075 officers demobilised in May 1920, 1,016 had been coal miners before they were called up.
8...But British officers were definitely dandies. Burberry opened a new branch in Paris and fitting rooms in Flanders to accommodate servicemen wanting new uniforms.
9 All the classes did their duty. Despite the public perception, private schools suffered disproportionately heavy losses during the Great War – 20 per cent of public school boys who enlisted to fight in the war died, compared to 11 per cent of all those who served in the war. Eton’s Memorial to the fallen during the Great War lists 1,157 names.
10 It gave us Tiger Woods. So many top-class British golfers were killed during the war that the U.S. became dominant for the first time. American Walter Hagen won the British Open in 1922, 1924, 1928 and 1929, with compatriot Bobby Jones doing so in 1926, 1927 and 1930. No Bobby, no Jack Nicklaus; no Nicklaus, no Tiger Woods...
11 Eight million horses were killed on the Western Front. Around the same number as human casualties.
12 It marked the beginning of the end for buttons. When the American Expeditionary Force set sail for France in 1917, it was the first army ever to go into war with zip fasteners – thanks to Swedish– American inventor Gideon Sundback. British uniforms – which were popular with children back home who often wore faithful replicas – had more traditional fasteners.
13 Laid end to end, the WWI trenches would stretch around the Earth. There were 25,000 miles of trenches between the English Channel and Switzerland; many had nicknames like Bond Street or Death Valley.
14 Mickey Mouse turned up too late to fight. Walt Disney, then aged 17, trained to be an ambulance driver in 1918 alongside Ray Kroc, the man who turned McDonald’s into an international chain. Luckily for lovers of Mickey Mouse and Big Macs, they arrived in France after the Armistice.
15 Smoking and drinking became seriously hazardous pastimes. ‘Put that bloody cigarette out’ – the last words of humourist Saki before he was shot by a sniper on the Somme in 1916. The year before, Chancellor of the Exchequer Lloyd George said that Britain was ‘fighting Germans, Austrians and drink, and as far as I can see the greatest of these foes is drink’.
16 Mustard gas wasn’t all bad. It killed thousands on the battlefield but was later used as the basis for chemotherapy treatment, as its ability to stop blood production had a similar effect on cancer growths.
17 It gave birth to Bilbo Baggins and Gandalf. JRR Tolkien, author of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, served as a second lieutenant in the Lancashires on the Somme during the desperate summer of 1916. After all but one of his comrades had been killed, he was invalided out with trench fever and started writing about dead marshes and dark lords. Tolkien’s service revolver is exhibited at the Imperial War Museum North.
18 It gave women the sanitary towel. French nurses on the Western Front discovered that new cellulose bandages made effective sanitary towels. U.S. nurses took the discovery home and in 1921 Kotex launched the cellulose sanitary towel.
19 We joined the Japanese to battle for a beer. Japan and Britain were allies in the war and fought alongside each other in China, capturing the German colony of Tsingtao – where the locals had established the famous brewery – on November 6, 1914.
20 They shot spies at the Tower of London. The first execution of a German spy by firing squad took place on November 6, 1914, when Hans Carl Lody met his end at the Tower of London. His guard noted that Lody ‘walked as easily and unconcerned as if he were going to a tea party, instead of to his death.’ A further ten spies would be shot at the Tower by the end of the war.
21 Many Americans were pro-German. When the U.S. went to war in 1917, Germans were the biggest ethnic community in Baltimore, Pittsburgh, Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles and San Francisco, and the frankfurter had been the national snack for over 20 years.
22 It gave us pilotless drones 90 years before Afghanistan. In 1917 aviation designers Elmer Sperry and Peter Hewitt designed a pilotless plane for the U.S. Navy. The machine completed its first flight on Long Island on March, 1918. However, as the machine could go only in one direction and was not capable of coming back, the project was abandoned in 1925.
23 It started (and ended) in Africa. The first shot fired by a British soldier came from Alhaji Grunshi, a Ghanaian in the Gold Coast Regiment, on August 7, 1914, during the invasion of Togoland. The war also ended in Africa; the last German troops in the field, under the command of General Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, surrendered in present day Tanzania on November 25, 1918, 14 days after the armistice.
24 It was big business for the red-light districts. During 1915, brothels on just one street in Le Havre were visited by British and French soldiers 171,000 times. By 1917 there were 137 official brothels along the Western Front, segregated by coloured lamps – blue for officers and red for men.
25 Now you see it, now you don’t. On September 11, 1914 the lake in London’s St James’s Park was drained so that it could not be used as a marker for German bombing.
26 There were German bombs over the white cliffs of Dover. The first German bomb to land in Britain was dropped on Christmas Eve 1914 in Dover. It exploded in the garden of a Mr Thomas A Terson and knocked gardener James Banks out of a tree he was pruning.
27 Writhing in agony? Have a stiff drink, soldier. Morphine was used sparingly and only in extreme cases in hospital, so men had to suffer through the painful cleaning and irrigation of wounds. However, brandy, champagne and port were dispensed regularly to the sick and wounded.
28 Women got the vote. On February 6, 1918, the Representation of the People Act, giving the vote to women (aged over 30) for the first time, received Royal Assent.
29 While our boys were being shot at abroad, back home the bobbies went on strike. On August 31, 1918, the Metropolitan Police in London went on strike for better pay, pensions and conditions.
30 They burned the Buddhist casualties. Siam (now Thailand) declared war on Germany and Austria- Hungary on July 22, 1917, and sent a small force to serve on the Western Front in the last months of the war. The bodies of 19 officers who died in combat there were burned according to Buddhist rites.
31 The first tanks were called ‘landships’. They were renamed in an attempt to disguise them as water-storage tanks.
32 Big Bertha could fire a shell over nine miles. The 48-ton howitzer, used by the Germans, was named after the wife of its manufacturer, Gustav Krupp, and could fire a 2,050lb shell a distance of 9.3 miles. However, it took a crew of 200 men six hours or more to assemble. Germany had 13 of these ‘wonder weapons’.
33 The British made a pool of peace – with a massive bomb. The 40ftdeep Pool of Peace is a lake near Messines, Belgium, created in 1917 when the British detonated a mine containing 45 tons of explosive.
34 The war was a triumph for the Post Office. By 1918 the London Home Depot at Regent’s Park, connecting the UK with the Western Front, had handled 114 million parcels and two billion letters. At one point, five million letters a week were coming back from servicemen.
35 The snow was deadly in the Dolomites. Avalanches killed 10,000 Italian and Austrian troops fighting in the Dolomite mountain range in northern Italy on ‘White Friday’ (December 13, 1916).
36 Ten per cent of New Zealand’s population fought. Of the 124,000 Kiwis who went to war, 17,000
37 Corned beef saved the day. The German spring offensive of 1918 only slowed when hungry troops overran British food dumps and, according to one enemy officer, ‘totally gorged themselves on food and liquor’.
38 The Government decided to flash the cash. The first pound notes went into circulation in August 1914, and were nicknamed ‘Bradburys’ after Sir John Bradbury, Permanent Secretary to the Treasury.
39 The ref blew the final whistle in 1915. English football struggled on until April 24, 1915 when the last FA Cup final of the war was played at Old Trafford. Sheffield United beat Chelsea 3-0. In Scotland, Celtic won the 1914-15 league after favourites Heart of Midlothian encouraged 16 members of their squad to enlist. Seven died in the war.
40 London suffered an almighty blast. A large part of the East End was flattened on January 19, 1917, when a huge explosion tore through the Venesta munitions factory at Silvertown in West Ham, killing 73 and injuring 400 more. Over 60,000 properties were damaged and the explosion was heard as far away as Wiltshire.
41 David Cameron owes his second home to the war. The PM’s countryhouse weekends are thanks to Sir Arthur Lee, who gave his Chequers mansion and estate to the nation for use as the official country residence of Britain’s prime ministers in perpetuity on October 5, 1917.
42 Rain stopped play at Wimbledon (raining bullets, that is). The Championships were one of the early casualties of the conflict. On January 1, 1915, it was announced that play would be suspended for the duration of the war.
43 It gave us shiny cutlery. We have the Kaiser and Yorkshire parsimony to thank for the fact that our cutlery is shiny. In the lead up to hostilities, British military planners went in search of a new alloy for gun barrels. Early attempts by Brearley of Sheffield didn’t work, but rather than being dumped were kept on the factory yard, where it was noticed they didn’t rust. Stainless steel was born.
44 Eighty per cent of Tommies SURVIVED the trenches.
45 ‘Wait for me, Old Sport’. Future author of The Great Gatsby F Scott Fitzgerald was just about to sail to France in 1918 as an infantry lieutenant when the war ended. One of his training instructors at Camp Sheridan, Alabama, was future president Dwight D Eisenhower.
46 British Intelligence officers in 1915 suspected two cats of spying. The moggies had been observed repeatedly crossing the British trenches, and officers suspected the Germans might have been using them to relay messages.
47 Agatha Christie plotted mysteries on the battlefield. She dispensed drugs as a nurse, learning about the poisons she would later use in her murder-mysteries.
48 The Zeps scored their first goal. Lieutenant William Leefe Robinson of the Royal Flying Corps was awarded an immediate Victoria Cross after he shot down a German airship over Cuffley, Hertfordshire, on September 3, 1916. Today the village’s football team is nicknamed the Zeps in honour of his achievement – although the airship was actually a Schuette-Lanz – as The Schuettes didn’t sound quite as snappy.
49 Pigeons became a protected species. More than 100,000 pigeons were used by the British Army to carry messages. Homing pigeons were so important to the Army that a law was passed making it an offence to kill or wound them – punishable by six months in jail or a £100 fine.
50. Kate Moss’s coat started life in the trenches. Tailors Thresher & Glenny of the Strand launched the new ‘wind, wet and mud resisting’ trenchcoat in December 1914. By 1916, over 10,000 had been sold.
51 We can thank it for long summer evenings... On May 21, 1916, British Summer Time was introduced to save fuel for the war, following Germany’s example in April 1916.
52...And carrot cake. Invented by clever German cooks to get round the British navel blockade and called Kriegsbrot (war bread).
53 Fighting reached Wales – after the war. In March 1919, 15,000 frustrated Canadian troops still waiting to go home four months after the official fighting ended went on the rampage just outside Ryhl, North Wales. Five died, 23 more were wounded.
54 The French didn’t have radar, but they did have parrots... At the beginning of the war, the French experimented with the use of parrots on the Eiffel Tower as an early-warning system against enemy aircraft. A parrot could hear the sound of an aircraft engine 20 minutes before a human. Unfortunately, they could not differentiate between friendly and hostile engines, and so the scheme was scrapped.
55 Prince Albert showed his mettle. The future King George VI served in the Royal Navy and was on the battleship HMS Collingwood at the Battle of Jutland, May 31, 1916. Plucky or daft, depending on your point of view, he sat on the roof of his gun turret to watch German battleship SMS Derfflinger open fire.
56 Why aye, Monsieur. Hollywood’s favourite Frenchman, Maurice Chevalier, was captured by the Germans in August 1914 after shrapnel pierced his chest and entered his lung. In his prison camp he learned English from an officer in the Durham Light Infantry, hence the trace of a Geordie accent in such Englishlanguage hits as Thank Heavens For Little Girls.
57 De Gaulle made five dismal bids for freedom. Future French president Charles de Gaulle was taken prisoner during the World War I after fighting at Verdun. All of his escape attempts were unsuccessful.
58 Cuffs were killers. British officers’ rank was initially shown on their cuffs. Once German snipers worked this out, they were moved out of sight to their shoulders.
59 There were real dogs of war... Our four-legged friends were used extensively on the battlefield as sentries and messengers, and casualty or ‘Mercy’ dogs were also vital. These dogs were trained to find the wounded and dying on battlefields and were equipped with medical supplies. Soldiers who could help themselves would tend to their own wounds, while other more gravely wounded soldiers would seek the company of a Mercy dog to wait with them while they died.
60...And their work continued off the battlefield, too. The war’s high numbers of blinded soldiers led to rapid advances in the training and use of guide dogs. Germany opened the first guide dog training school in 1917.
61 Harry Houdini taught the troops how to escape their captors. The great magician took a year off performing to help sell war bonds – and teach U.S. soldiers how to slip out of German handcuffs.
62 The Germans were terrified of the Daily Mail. The paper’s owner, Lord Northcliffe, was such an effective pro-war propagandist that the German navy sent a warship to shell his home in Broadstairs, Kent, in February 1917. They missed Northcliffe but killed his gardener’s wife.
63 Artists sketching the countryside were often arrested as spies. Sir Stanley Spencer, Sir John Lavery and Charles Rennie Mackintosh were all detained under the Defence of the Realm Act.
64 It made the Royal Family change its name. The House of Windsor took that name in 1917 when the Royal Family changed their name from the morethan- slightly Germanic Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. 65 It was a very, very costly business. The war cost Britain £475 billion (converted to today’s money). We were the richest nation on Earth in 1914, by the end of the war we were bankrupt.
66 There was unrest in Afghanistan (shock). The country remained neutral, but after Turkey joined the war on Germany’s side in November 1914, there was unrest among the country’s predominantly Muslim population, calling upon Afghan ruler Habibullah Khan to attack the British in India. He refused and was later assassinated while hunting in 1919.
67 It sent Sherlock over the top. Actor Basil Rathbone called the war ‘unbelievably monstrous, irrational, pitiable, ugly and sordid’, and described himself as ‘pigeon-livered’. Nonetheless he joined up and won the Military Cross in September 1918 ‘for conspicuous resource and daring when on patrol’ after reconnoitering enemy trenches while disguised as a tree. Rathbone’s reckless bravery has been attributed to grief following the death of his brother, John, on the front line.
68 Britain’s West Indian colonies contributed around 15,000 soldiers. They served on the Western Front, in Egypt, Palestine and Italy. Two thirds came from Jamaica.
69 Lingerie design was never the same again. The military practicability of women’s undergarments in conflict came under close scrutiny. The Royal Worcester Corset Company rose to the challenge in August 1915 by introducing a ‘Kidfitting Corset with the New Military Curve – which gives the Erect Poise without any discomfort.’ And the nation fought on.
70 Rats in the trenches would eat a wounded man if he couldn’t defend , himself. They crawled over and often bit sleeping troops. In his book Goodbye to All That, Robert Graves described a new officer finding two rats on his blanket tussling for the possession of a severed hand.
71 Not even India was safe from attack. Madras in the south-east of the country was bombarded by a German light cruiser in 1914.
72 The first dog to become a Hollywood star, Rin Tin Tin, was found in a trench in France shortly before the end of the war. The German Shepherd pup was adopted by an American serviceman and returned to the United States, where he starred in more than 20 films during the Twenties.
73 Churchill quit the Government to fight. After being blamed for the disaster at Gallipoli while First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill resigned his government post on November 11, 1915, rejoined the Army and ended up on the Western Front.
74 It was responsible for veggie sausage. The same blockade that forced German bakers to come up with carrot cake caused terrible meat shortages for the wurst lovers of Cologne. They were rescued by mayor Konrad Adenauer, who saved the city from starvation by creating the ‘Peace Sausage’ from soya. Adenauer would go on to become chancellor of West Germany.
75 The truth was often a pack of lies. On November 7, 1916, Woodrow Wilson was re-elected President of the United States on the campaign slogan ‘He kept us out of War.’ Five months later, the USA declared war on Germany.
76 The show must not go on. The British Government ordered theatres and restaurants to close at 10pm throughout the war to conserve heating fuel.
77 Here’s shooting at you, kid. Movie legend Humphrey Bogart served with the United States Navy after America entered the war in April 1917.
78 For whom the siren sounds. An 18-year-old Ernest Hemingway was a volunteer ambulance driver on the Italian front. Although badly wounded he rescued others under fire and received Italy’s Silver Medal for Bravery.
79 Helena Bonham Carter’s great-granddad ran the country. On May 25, 1915, the last Liberal Government in Britain was replaced by a Coalition still lead by Liberal Prime Minister Herbert Asquith  – great grandfather of the Harry Potter star.
80 We called them Huns for a reason. Kaiser Wilhelm gave a speech in 1900 calling on German troops heading to China to take no prisoners, ‘just like the Huns under Attila’. He’d changed his tune by the end of the war. After fleeing to neutral Holland on November 9, 1918, he surprised his Dutch welcoming party by asking for ‘a nice cup of English tea.’
81 Bullets and bombs were dangerous; flu was deadly. The outbreak of Spanish Flu cost far more lives than the war itself. The pandemic peaked in Britain in October 1918, when 2,225 people died in London alone.
82 Swing when you’re winning. Britain’s hostilities officially ceased on August 31, 1921, when an Order in Council was issued declaring an end to the state of war that had been proclaimed in 1914. America remained officially at war with Germany until July 2, 1921, when President Warren Harding interrupted his game of golf on a New Jersey course to sign the necessary document.
83 The war gave us Beyoncé (sort of)... Afro-American marching bands arrived in France with the US Army in 1917. White French crowds went wild. The crossover success of all black music since – jazz, soul or R’n’B – starts here.
84...And heavy metal. On entering the war, U.S. authorities closed New Orleans’s Storyville red-light district. The resulting exodus of musicians north meant jazz met country & western and the blues to make rock ’n’ roll and, ultimately, heavy metal.
85 The start of peace ended in a riot. On July 19, 1919 Peace Day was celebrated throughout the United Kingdom. It didn’t prove immediately popular. In Luton, ex-servicemen, angered by the amount of money spent on civic ceremonies and functions, rioted.
86 It paved the way for the MP3 player. The Decca Dulcephone Portable Gramophone – which offered ‘Theatre, music hall and concert room in one’ and was ‘made to stand the hard knocks of Active Service use’ – made it possible for troops to take a reliable music player to the front line. Decca actually used one officer’s anguished complaint after a battle as an advertising slogan: ‘The Huns took my gramophone!’
87 The term ‘dogfight’ originated during WWI. The pilot had to briefly turn off the plane’s engine so it would not stall when he turned quickly. When a pilot restarted his engine midair, it sounded like dogs barking.
88 Home fires bombed. In the night of March 7, 1918, a 2,204lb bomb dropped by a German ‘Giant’ bomber demolished 61-67, Warrington Crescent, Maida Vale. It killed American-born Lena Guilbert Ford, the lyricist of Ivor Novello’s hugely popular hit Keep The Home Fires Burning.
89 It kick-started the sugar-free diet. Rationing began in London in February 1918 and spread to the rest of the country from July. It continued until November 29, 1920 when sugar finally came ‘off the ration’.
90 Hitler had a lucky escape. Britain’s future nemesis was present at the battles of Ypres and Passchendaele and was wounded in the left thigh at the Somme in 1916 when a shell exploded in his dugout. In 1918, he was temporarily blinded in a mustard-gas attack.
91 A baboon named Jackie served in the South African army on the Western Front. Initially a mascot, Jackie was later given messenger and watch duties – as well as his own uniform, paybook and rations. Jackie’s right leg was amputated after a shell blast in 1918. He was later promoted to corporal and given a medal for bravery.
92 You could boil water with a machine gun. Allied weapons became so hot during firing that the water in their cooling systems reached near boiling point. There were reports of some soldiers firing short bursts of machine-gun fire so they could heat water for their tea or soup.
93 The Germans couldn’t decipher messages from the Choctaw Code Talkers. The Germans were skilled at intercepting and solving Allied codes, but when a U.S. commander deployed Choctaw Indian tribe members, they used an extremely complex language that the Germans could not translate. The eight Choctaw men became known as the Choctaw Code Talkers.
94 There was blood on the tracks. A troop train taking soldiers heading for Gallipoli collided with a passenger service near Gretna Green, Scotland, on May 22, 1915; 230 died in the crash, still Britain’s worst rail disaster.
95 Cocaine was given to soldiers before they went over the top. And in London in 1916, Harrods sold a kit described as ‘A Welcome Present for Friends at the Front’ containing cocaine, morphine, syringes and needles.
96 The maps helped win the war. In January 1915, Ordnance Survey began a new survey of France to replace existing French maps, which were found to be inaccurate and too small in scale. Over the course of the war it printed at least 25 million battlefield maps for use by British troops. The Southampton company’s printing presses ran round the clock, supplying up to 20,000 maps a day.
97 It put tea in bags. Though there is some dispute over the exact moment the tea bag was born, it is undoubtedly true that World War I made the innovation popular – in particular the production by German company Teekanne of the ‘tea bomb’ in cotton bags. Hard to credit, perhaps, but it was the Germans who first mastered the individual cuppa.
98 Peace brought that loving feeling. The prospect of returning home became even more appealing for troops in March, 1918, when Dr Marie Stopes published her pioneering sex manual for couples, Married Love.
99 For some, war really was a death sentence. Over 3,000 men were sentenced to death in British Army courts during the war, but only 306 of these executions were carried out. Offences included desertion (by far the commonest crime), cowardice, murder, espionage, mutiny and striking a superior officer.
100 Aspirin was off limits. The popular painkiller was a German invention, leading Boots to promote British medicines that were ‘equal or superior to the German… to supersede entirely those enemy products’.
World War I had the highest body count of any war in British history, with more than ten million fatalities
By DAN SNOW
Did you know that the first British rifle shots in World War I didn’t echo across Flanders fields or northern France but West Africa?
Or that fighting spread to China, the Pacific, the Middle East and even the Italian Alps?
It is quite likely you didn’t, and why should you?
In our public imagination and national memory, World War I is about the Western Front.
The line of opposing trench systems divided by a shell-torn no-man’s-land that stretched from the Swiss border to the North Sea coast holds a central place in our minds, along with the many battles that were fought over that 1,000-mile-long strip of territory between 1914 and 1918.
Those battles are regarded as an appalling and brutal sacrifice, the supreme follies of a war we entered naively thinking it would be all over by Christmas, with no idea of the slaughter that lay ahead.
World War I had the highest body count of any war in British history, with more than ten million fatalities.
Quite rightly, then, it’s remembered as a tragedy and even as a failure. But in terms of the proportion of people affected, the toll was actually less than the 17th-century civil wars, when more people in Britain were killed and wounded as a percentage of the population.
And it is a mistake to presume that everyone thought the war would be all over by Christmas.
A lot of people in the Army knew this was going to be a new kind of conflict that would require massive industrial output as well as military skill.
Secretary of State for War Lord Kitchener predicted it would be a long campaign and that there would be terrible losses.
By building World War I into something that is uniquely terrible, to put it on its own pedestal of awfulness, we run the risk of both missing the real story and also underestimating the effect of war in the present day.
People who have fought in any conflict know well that they were awful, too.
Life for Britain’s soldiers, sailors and airmen in World War I could be absolutely appalling, but so was being trapped on HMS Sheffield in the Falklands War.
But what about tactics and strategy? We think of the war’s great battles, terrible events like the first day of the Somme, July 1, 1916, when there were almost 60,000 British casualties alone, as a series of appalling misjudgments by incompetent Allied generals.
But World War I was actually a time of military innovation. The British Armed Forces have probably never undergone such change in their history, and by the end of the war were arguably the best they have ever been.
And the Western Front was much more than two opposing lines. The trenches were big cities, with cinemas, post offices, bakeries, warehouses and brothels.
The effects of World War I were not just felt on the battlefield; the social effects at home were immense. For the first time, women went into the factories, taking the jobs the men left behind when they joined up.
The young men who went to war left behind an old world and entered a new one. If they survived for long enough they would see the birth of the war in the air, and battlefield communications revolutionised by radio.
They would go to war alongside horses, but by 1917 would be fighting with tanks. It was a conflict where the centuries-old warrior ethos of men going into battle with bagpipes was still used, but so was poison gas.
It was an incredible time of transition; a war that 100 years later continues to surprise me.
Timeline WW1 for iPad is available to download for FREE from the iTunes store. The free version allows you to see full content for the first two months of the war. The entire Timeline can be purchased via www.timelineww1.com and the iTunes store
How the Kaiser frightened the world into war
Over the course of a few months, Europe went from peace to all-out war. Professor Gary Sheffield, a leading military historian, explains how the world stumbled into disaster.
'The events that plunged Europe into war moved with dizzying speed.
On June 28, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Hungary was assassinated by a young Serb, Gavrilo Princip, who was quickly arrested.
A month later, Austria declared war on Serbia and by August 5 Europe was at war. Austria risked war with Russia to keep its influence in the Balkans, having a firm promise of support from ally Germany.
Russia, alarmed, mobilised forces, followed by Germany then France.
The German attack on Belgium on August 4 brought Britain into the war. Kaiser Wilhelm’s bellicose Weltpolitik (world policy) led to diplomatic encirclement, having thoroughly frightened Britain, France and Russia.
Many historians agree Germany used the situation in the Balkans, even at the risk of war.
Others argue that they desired and planned for war.
Russia, defeated by Japan in 1905, was rapidly rebuilding its military strength, and some of the German elite favoured a war to prevent it from re-emerging as a rival.
When article 231 of the 1919 Treaty of Versailles blamed Germany and its allies for the outbreak of the war, it encapsulated an essential truth.’
© Gary Sheffield, 2014. The First World War Remembered by Gary Sheffield is published by Andre Deutsch, priced £50. To order your copy at the special price of £40 with free p&p, please call The Event Bookstore on 0844 472 4157 or go to www.mailbookshop.co.uk.  
Document DAMONL0020140503ea53007ch
