{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3161"}
____
  
Features
THE TRUTH ABOUT OUR NHS - WARTS'N'ALL
BY RICHARD LITTLEJOHN   
1,652 words
11 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
17
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
We are constantly told by the BBC and the Labour Party that the NHS is facing a severe funding crisis, even though the Government has ring-fenced the health service budget.
Perhaps it wouldn't be so strapped for cash if managers hadn't frittered away £658 million stockpiling virtually useless anti-flu drugs.
Half a billion here, half a billion there and it soon adds up to serious money. Even the Guardian, normally a Gadarene advocate of drunken sailor public spending, thinks it's a front-page scandal.
An independent group of scientists has had to fight for four years to uncover just how much was wasted on stocks of Tamiflu and Relenza. In 2009, the last Labour government went on a panic-buying spree in response to a swine flu scare. Needless to say, the predicted pandemic failed to materialise.
Just as well ministers didn't react in the same way they did to the foot and mouth hysteria in 2001. Otherwise they'd have rounded up millions of perfectly healthy people at gunpoint and chucked them on bonfires, like medieval witches.
Not that these drugs would have been particularly effective at preventing the afflicted dropping like flies.
At best, these scientists say Tamiflu can shorten the symptoms of influenza by approximately half a day.
You'd have been better off taking a couple of aspirin, washed down with a honey and lemon hot toddy fortified with a large Glennhoddle.
Still, it's only taxpayers' money — which as far as the politicians and the suits who run the NHS are concerned means it's nobody's money in particular. If the NHS was run like a proper business, it would have filed for bankruptcy years ago and gone the way of other inefficient, loss-making state monoliths such as British Leyland and the National Coal Board.
Every incoming government enters office with a promise to rescue the health service. Remember Blair's absurd '24 hours to save the NHS'? But each reorganisation simply serves to make things worse.
The only beneficiaries of these rolling reforms are the box-tickers and form-fillers who work in the burgeoning NHS bureaucracy.
Managers and ministers wheel out statistics to 'prove' that services to patients are getting better. But I prefer to rely on anecdotal evidence, because it tells you what's going on in the real world. Thanks to the geniuses who decided that GPs should be paid more money for less work, we may soon have to wait four weeks to see a doctor.
It's bad enough already trying to get through the infuriating automated appointments system. Even then, the treatment you can expect to receive for minor ailments is made as complicated as possible.
This week, I've received two dispatches from the sharp end of Britain's cutting-edge, 21st-century healthcare system.
Reader Stuart Jodrell, from Pontefract, returned from a long-haul holiday with deafness brought on by the flight. He had an infection in one ear, solid wax in the other.
After treating the infection with drops and the wax with olive oil, he made an appointment at his local clinic to have his ears syringed.
Before this could take place, the nurse insisted on Stuart filling in a pointless elf'*'safety questionnaire.
When he asked why this was necessary, he was told the syringing couldn't be performed without a full risk assessment being carried out.
Standard procedure, sir. Since when? Stuart's had his ears syringed several times over the years without any bureaucratic malarkey.
When the nurse finally got round to inspecting his ears, she said that because the olive oil had shifted the wax she wasn't able to administer the treatment and he would have to make an appointment at a specialist Ear, Nose and Throat department. Unfortunately, the ENT clinic couldn't accommodate him for five weeks.
Stuart's experience would strike a chord with another reader, Sue Sloan, from Calne in Wiltshire.
Sue writes: 'Some years ago I had an unsightly wart near my ear (don't laugh) which my GP quickly removed with a quick blast of liquid nitrogen from a canister under his desk. Waiting time: zero. Cost: probably about 50p.'
Recently, Sue developed another painful wart on her little finger. This time her doctor referred her to a 'GP co-operative service'. Couldn't he just give her a blast of liquid nitrogen again?
He explained that wasn't possible because his 'cryo funding' (whatever that is) had been cut.
She would have to attend a surgery seven miles away in a different town, where she can't be seen until the end of May — a full three months after her original GP consultation.
All attempts to bring forward the appointment have proved fruitless. When her number does come up, Sue will have to take a day off work.
She says: 'So far, wart No 2 has involved five letters and four telephone conversations with four different admin staff, at goodness knows what cost.' All this for a procedure that used to take about five minutes.
Neither of these conditions is life-threatening and you might reasonably argue they could be treated by over-the-counter medicines. But such non-prescription products are notoriously expensive and usually pretty ineffective.
Stuart and Sue have paid taxes towards the NHS all their lives and are entitled to expect prompt treatment in return.
But this is the everyday reality of our 'world-class' health service, which thinks nothing of blowing £658 million on questionable flu medicine, but can't afford a few bob for a can of liquid nitrogen.
Whatever the politicians and propagandists tell you, that's the unvarnished truth about the NHS.
Warts '*' all.
 
***
The fall-out from the recent floods in the West Country continues to pose unexpected dangers.
Residents of Telford, Shropshire, reported an unpleasant fishy smell wafting into their homes.
Severn Trent Water officials investigated and discovered a sewer blocked by what appeared to be a flesh-eating piranha.
One of the workmen on the scene said: 'It scared us to death. We were told by a neighbour that someone had been flushing piranha down the toilet.'
As you do.
I've heard of snakes turning up in toilet bowls, but piranhas would appear to be a new phenomenon in Britain.
Further examination showed the fish in question was actually a harmless tilapia. But that's still puzzling, since tilapia are native to waters around Africa, not the River Severn.
Must be something to do with global warming.
Wait till the 'climate change' crowd get hold of this story. We'll be told that unless we embrace higher 'green' taxes, our lavatories will soon be crawling with alligators and piranhas.
It might be a good idea to keep a speargun in the loo, alongside the Toilet Duck.
 
NOW IT'S DAVE C, DOPEY, BEAKER, NICK & TITCH
Maria Miller has resigned and the Prime Minister says it's time to move on. Not so fast, chum.
Cameron adds that he looks forward to welcoming her back into Cabinet in due course. Why?
Is this a resignation or a brief sabbatical? And why should she get a £17,000 redundo payment, even if she is giving it to charity?
Miller still hasn't explained why she slapped an extra £150,000 on her mortgage after she was elected to Parliament and put the interest on her exes. What did she do with the money?
Looking at some of her expenses, it appears in one year she tried to claim over £700 for crockery. How much? Tesco will sell you a very respectable porcelain dinner set for £25.
Didn't she have any crockery before she became an MP? Did her family eat out of tins until then?
Miller had to go when Tory MPs reported that voters were furious. Nowhere more so than her own constituency of Basingstoke.
She didn't fleece Parliament, she fleeced taxpayers. So, as I wrote on Tuesday, if she had a shred of decency she would resign not only from Cabinet but as an MP, too.
The people of Basingstoke should decide her fate. But clearly decency isn't one of the many qualities Cameron so admires in his greedy ex-minister.
* Miller's departure is another setback for Call Me Dave's attempts to make the Cabinet look like the people it is supposed to represent.
He still has a 'woman problem'. Even after appointing his first British Asian male Cabinet member, no one would call the Coalition line-up especially diverse.
Looking at Cameron, Theresa May, Danny Alexander, Cleggy and now Sajid Javid sitting on the front bench, they remind me of that seminal Sixties pop group:
Dave C, Dopey, Beaker, Nick & Titch.
***
The sudden death of a young mother is always sad. But that doesn't explain the distasteful outpouring of vicarious grief over Peaches Geldof.
If people wish to pay their proper respects, may I remind them I still have a number of cut-price Portashrines left over from the Pray 4 Muamba circus.
***
Why hasn't the Nigerian illegal immigrant who shouted threats at police and soldiers in his attempt to break into Buckingham Palace been arrested and deported?
He's clearly disturbed and may well pose a danger to himself and the public. So why was he only offered 'words of advice' and sent on his way? He says he hates Britain and wants to go home. We should buy him a one-way ticket.
***
Pensioner Keith Ballantine developed a rare nervous condition called Guillain-Barre Syndrome after eating Liquorice Allsorts.
How long before elf'*'safety bans Bertie Bassett and insists that all sweets containing liquorice are either withdrawn from sale or sold in plain boxes with appropriate health warnings?
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140410ea4b0000f
