{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3751"}
____
News
You canopy parking there! Bright purple Ukip battlebus crashes into train station while trying to perform a U-TURN
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
468 words
28 April 2014
17:03
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Prang at Portsmouth and Southsea station fails to dent Farage's campaign
* Poll puts Ukip in the lead ahead of European Parliament elections
* Rows over fakery and racism have done nothing to harm Ukip support
The Ukip bandwagon has spent weeks building an apparently unstoppable momentum but today something managed to halt it in its tracks: Portsmouth railway station.
U-turns can be tricky for any political party but when Nigel Farage’s bright purple battlebus tried to perform a manoeuvre out of a car park it crunched into a canopy at the station.
But the double-decker’s prang failed to deter to the Ukip leader who has seen polls show he is on course to win next month’s European Parliament elections.
Mr Farage was in Portsmouth today as part of his nationwide tour to drum up support for People’s Army campaign.
He had hoped for a more straight forward few days after last week’s £1.5milllion poster campaign launch was dominated by rows over fakery and racism.
But when the purple Ukip bus arrived to welcome him to the Hampshire city, it clattered into the front of the station.
The bus, with only one passenger on board, arrived at Portsmouth and Southsea railway station to greet the party leader.
As the driver appeared to make a U-turn, to bus could not fit under the railway platform bridge at the exit of the car park.
The open-top bus appeared bent out of shape, although the train station canopy fared rather better.
It came as a YouGov poll for the Sunday Times gave Ukip an outright lead in the European election contest for the first time, with 31 per cent support compared with 28 per cent for Labour, and the Tories languishing in third on 19 per cent.
The backing for Ukip comes despite another dire week of publicity, with its £1.5million campaign derailed by rows over fakery and racism.
A voter from Devon in the party’s manifesto was revealed to be Lizzy Vaid, a Ukip official based at its London HQ.
Zimbabwean decorator Andre Lampitt appeared in a party political broadcast was suspended over tweets that Islam is ‘evil’ and branding the Prophet Mohammed a paedophile and later a builder in an anti-immigration poster was revealed to an actor from Ireland.
Would-be councillor William Henwood also suggested comedian Lenny Henry should emigrate to a ‘black country’.
Ukip’s deputy chairman, former Tory MP Neil Hamilton, said Mr Henwood’s  comments were being investigated by  the party.
He claimed that ‘every party’ had ‘unknown’ activists who ‘may have said something unpleasant on social media’.
Document DAMONL0020140428ea4s005sg
