{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3004"}
____
  
News
22 MIGRANTS ARE QUIZZED AS POLICE TARGET 'CHILD SEX RING'
BY CHRIS GREENWOOD CRIME CORRESPONDENT   
636 words
9 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
25
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
MORE than 20 men were being questioned last night on suspicion of running a sprawling nationwide child prostitution ring.
The leaders of the network are accused of smuggling girls as young as 12 into the country before selling them for sex.
Police are investigating offences including rape, violence, people trafficking, drug dealing and firearms offences. The gang was held as hundreds of officers swooped on addresses in Kent, the Midlands and West Yorkshire in the biggest operation of its kind.
According to police, all of the 16 victims identified so far and 22 suspects are Roma immigrants originally from Slovakia or the Czech Republic.
Many have been under investigation for more than six months as police worked to identify the true scale of the vile racket.
The raids are the latest to target sexual exploitation gangs which often prey on the most vulnerable young people.
Government ministers remain deeply concerned about the rise of predatory street grooming gangs in deprived areas. The focus of the latest early-morning raids was in the Margate, Folkestone, Dover and Gravesend areas of Kent. More than 320 officers from Kent Police raided a series of addresses, including several sea-front bedsits. Raids also took place in Leeds and Birmingham.
Police were accompanied by more than 100 colleagues from Slovakia, the National Crime Agency (NCA) and social workers.
As the suspects were rounded up, officers offered victims - many of whom do not speak any English - opportunities to go into the care of local authorities.
The girls involved, some of whom have suffered months of abuse while being moved between dingy flats, are aged between 12 and 18.
Kent Chief Constable Alan Pughsley said: 'This is one of the biggest operations of its kind in UK policing. There are over 500 people involved, including social services and the NCA, as well as more than 300 of my staff. We are committed to ensuring these victims can trust Kent Police to do our very best to stop this happening.'
The prostitution network is not the first to be uncovered which involves Roma immigrants, one of the UK's fastest growing ethnic minorities. In February, four members of a gang who raped and sexually abused young girls with severe learning difficulties were jailed at the Old Bailey.
The Peterborough gang of five men and youths, of Czech, Slovak Roma and Kurdish backgrounds, attacked five girls, the youngest aged just 12.
One victim was made pregnant by her attacker, while others were forced to have sex with men for money so the gang could buy drugs and alcohol. The judge criticised the men for failing to learn English and said they had done a 'disservice' to their fellow Roma who wanted to work and build a life for themselves.
The UK is believed to have one of Western Europe's largest Roma communities, with an estimated 200,000 people. Some expect the number to rise further after immigration bars were lifted for Romanians and Bulgarians in January.
Chief Supt Alison Roden, who is leading the inquiry, said the force was determined to do everything it could to protect young people.
She said: 'This investigation shows how child protection agencies can work together to protect vulnerable young people and bring those who seek to exploit children to justice.'
A Kent Police spokesman said the raids focused on an 'organised criminal network' preying on 'young girls from the Slovakian Roma community'.
'This is believed to be a unique investigation into child sexual exploitation within the UK due to the number of arrests, addresses searched and victims,' he added.
He said all 22 suspects remained in custody at different Kent Police stations last night.
c.greenwood@dailymail.co.uk
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140508ea590002m
