{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"643"}
____
  
News
'PATRIOT' CLEGG'S GUSHING LOVE LETTER TO BRITAIN; ... PRAISING FLIP-FLOPS AND TEA, SHIPPING FORECASTS AND PRINCE GEORGE (BUT HIS HEART BELONGS TO BRUSSELS!)
BY GERRI PEEV    
620 words
10 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
8
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
NICK Clegg spelt out the things he loved about Britain yesterday in a Love Actually-style overture to voters.
Praising everything from flip-flops in cold weather to the nightly shipping news, the Deputy Prime Minister tried to paint the Liberal Democrats as the guardians of Britain.
He said his party's members were true patriots for espousing values such as liberalism, openness and tolerance.
And, in an electoral gamble, he sought to present the Lib Dems as the only unashamedly pro-Europe and pro-immigration party.
His speech to the party conference in York also took a swipe at UKIP, warning of an 'ungenerous, backwards looking politics'. Although he did not name UKIP leader Nigel Farage, Mr Clegg said: 'The politics of blame have found an acceptable face: it wears a big smile and looks like someone you could have a pint with down the pub.'
He also ran through a cliched list of things he loved about Britain: 'I love that the shipping forecast is listened to by insomniacs of all ages, right across the country, miles from the sea.
'I love that we do respond to every problem no matter how big or small, with the same thing: a cup of tea.'
Playing a prime minister in Love Actually, Hugh Grant made a similarly patriotic appeal, describing Britain as the country of 'Shakespeare, Churchill, the Beatles, Sean Connery, Harry Potter and David Beckham's right foot.' Mr Clegg said his Spanish wife Miriam had pointed out the unique 'feeling of freedom you get in Britain'. But he said this was under threat: 'The forces of chauvinism, protectionism and xenophobia have been emboldened. The fight is now on for the future of our continent.'
In a dig at the monarchy, he said: 'I love that a country capable of extraordinary pomp and ceremony can still retain a spiky irreverance toward its establishment. A country where we line the streets waiving our Union Jacks wildly to welcome the arrival of Prince George and the next moment we're chuckling at Private Eye's front page: "Woman Has Baby".'
Mr Clegg insisted not all voters liked the anti-EU or anti-immigration message. 'There are plenty of people out there who don't want anger,' he said. 'They don't want bile. They want jobs. They want our country to have influence.'
Lib Dem activists voted for a policy to water down income thresholds for spouses of migrants - making it easier for those on low pay to bring their wives or husbands here. They backed plans for new grandparent 'super visas', which would allow elderly immigrants to come to Britain for up to two years. Plans to allow foreign students to stay on for three years after studying and compete with British graduates for jobs were also backed.
The Lib Dems have openly said they want to woo EU migrant voters in May's elections. They can vote in local and European elections.
Mr Clegg also said a pledge to spend 7p of every £10 of national income on foreign aid every year should be enshrined in law.
* Danny Alexander has become the latest senior politician to admit having a foreign cleaner.
The Lib Dem Chief Secretary to the Treasury stuttered when quizzed about the issue on BBC Radio 4 on Saturday. Asked whether he employed any foreigners at home, Mr Alexander said: 'Er, ar, er, er ... we use a brilliant British, er ... child minder and a, er... Portuguese lady occasionally comes in to clean our home.'
Comment - Page 14
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140309ea3a00019
