{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2865"}
____
RightMinds
SIMON HEFFER: What a fine mess the Two Eds are in
SIMON HEFFER   
1,236 words
29 March 2014
01:43
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
After his blundering Commons response to the Budget, serious questions are now being asked about the direction Ed Miliband is leading Labour.
The party’s economic policy is pitifully incoherent and seemingly depends mostly on the Tories failing to revive the economy. Labour is divided in other key policy areas, too.
Old divisions between Blairites and Brownites (whose desire for widespread re-nationalisation and the abolition of university tuition fees would make Tony Benn proud) have been exposed once again.
Under siege from both wings of his party, therefore, Red Ed finds himself in a terribly weak position.
Not surprisingly, a poll this week showed 41 per cent of voters see him as ‘weird’, a dangerous sign given that politics is largely about perception.
Meanwhile, backbench Labour MPs report a ‘bunker mentality’ around their leader, with a growing defensiveness in response not just to criticism, but to well-meant advice.
One of Mr Miliband’s biggest problems is that he was second choice among Labour MPs to be their leader. The majority wanted his older brother, David, but Ed was elected, thanks to the power of the union vote.
As every new day passes, these MPs feel the party made a major mistake.
Obviously it is too late to change leader before the election and so the alternative is to try to re-energise Labour with eye-catching policies.
Most suggestions seem to involve a further lurch to the left (such as imposing more regulations on business), with scant regard for the economic consequences of its parallel commitments to higher borrowing and more taxes.
On the other hand, the more sensible decision to back the Government’s £119.5bn annual cap on benefits spending — to try to prove Labour is not the party of welfare dependency — backfired because of a rebellion by backbenchers.
'Equally shameful is Mr Miliband’s refusal to offer a referendum on the EU — because he clearly doesn’t trust voters to deliver the verdict he wants'
This has left Labour appearing to be soft on scroungers and wasteful of public money.
On the NHS, it has also failed to address the real issues. Indeed, it still considers the health service, like the rest of the public sector, as a means of rewarding its core voters with jobs for life and refuses to consider ways of finding better ways to provide essential services.
As for the party’s reaction to George Osborne’s radical pension reforms, some Labour MPs exposed how out of touch they are when they insultingly suggested pensioners could not be trusted to use their retirement savings responsibly.
Equally shameful is Mr Miliband’s refusal to offer a referendum on the EU — because he clearly doesn’t trust voters to deliver the verdict he wants.
On education and immigration, Labour is also all at sea. The party has even upset its chums in the National Union of Teachers by demanding that teachers are regularly re-licensed.
And Mr Miliband has nothing credible to say about limiting the ever-rising number of immigrants, which is not surprising since he was part of a Labour government that scandalously adopted an open-borders policy.
Indeed, its failure over immigration has led to countless traditional Labour voters across England turning to Ukip.
What’s more, by refusing to join the TV debates with Nigel Farage and Nick Clegg, the Labour leader signposted to those natural Labour supporters who are moving to Ukip that he cannot be bothered to fight for their votes.
Indeed, it was noticeable how, in this week’s debate, Mr Farage largely tackled the concerns of traditional Labour voters — rather than wooing Tories. One of his main points was how unrestricted European immigration threatens their jobs.
With the Tories pulling rabbits regularly out of the hat — this week by promising a higher inheritance tax threshold — and Ukip seemingly on a roll, Mr Miliband is struggling to connect with voters.
His main problem is not a lack of political convictions but the fact that he realises he can’t express them because they are so red-bloodedly socialist they would frighten most voters.
It is not easy to see, in an improving economy, how Ed Miliband and Ed Balls can extricate themselves from this mess.
But if they think they can just sit back and wait for the Tories to lose, they are severely mistaken.
Boris's crowing tribute
I regret the death of rail union chief Bob Crow as I do that of any man.
But was it really necessary for commuters at London’s Tube stations to be greeted on the morning of his funeral with tribute posters bearing his picture and endorsed by Boris Johnson, the capital’s Tory mayor?
Rather than a sincere expression of condolence, I am convinced it was yet another cynical PR stunt by rampantly ambitious Boris.
I trust he paid for  this self-aggrandisement  out of his lavish earnings from journalism, not with public money.
Spivs and the rape of the Green Belt
It’s a disgrace that so many local authorities ignore brownfield sites (which have previously been developed) for new housing projects and plan, instead, to build, a predicted 200,000 houses in the Green Belt.
This country is filled with derelict urban land that could be transformed into housing estates, whereas our countryside is a finite resource that must not shrink further.
Is the reason for this stupidity the fact that the Tories are in bed with property spivs, who are potential party donors?
Communities Secretary Eric Pickles — who has approved 17 appeals by developers in the last year — may know the answer.
Give islands a vote, Alex
As I predicted, islanders in Orkney and the Shetlands have demanded referendums — separate from the one across Scotland as a whole — to say whether or not they wish to stay in the UK.
Until the 15th century, the islands belonged to Norway, so it could be fairly argued that the inhabitants have an historic right to self-determination.
Significantly, large amounts of untapped oil sit in Shetland’s territorial waters.
I trust Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond will put political consistency before money, and allow the islanders their own vote.
Why on earth is Sport England, a public body, giving away taxpayers’ money to invest in ‘grassroots participation’ of football?
If the game at lower levels needs money, it’s the duty of mega-rich Premier League clubs and their overpaid, millionaire players to offer finance.
After all, it is in their interests to nurture the players of the future.
Voters in France showed last Sunday what they think of Miliband’s fellow socialist Francois Hollande by inflicting a heavy defeat on his party’s candidates in the first round of the municipal elections.
The main beneficiary of the failure of Hollande and opposition conservatives is the anti-immigration, anti-Europe Front National. It’s not just  in England that the  ruling political elite is held in contempt.
I believe strongly in the principle that prisons should rehabilitate as well as punish criminals.
Thus I think Justice Secretary Chris Grayling’s decision to ban inmates from receiving books by post is insane.
His lame excuse is there aren’t enough staff to check the packages. Most prisoners are abysmally illiterate, so encouragement to read should be a top priority.
Document DAMONL0020140329ea3t00043
