{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3340"}
____
  
News
UKIP POSTER GIRL QUITS AND SAYS: IT'S BECOMING A RACIST PARTY
BY JOHN STEVENS POLITICAL REPORTER   
601 words
14 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
16
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A RISING star of Ukip has quit after deciding she cannot vote for the 'racist' and 'terrifying' party.
Sanya-Jeet Thandi, 21, had starred in an election broadcast and spoken at its annual conference - but has turned her back on Nigel Farage's party because it is 'deliberately attracting racist voters'.
The British-born Indian said the party had abandoned its core supporters and called on others to end their memberships and boycott the upcoming European elections.
Miss Thandi's dramatic U-turn comes just days after she appeared on Channel 4 News to defend the party. The university student said: 'The direction in which the party is going is terrifying. This week I decided to leave the party and I will abstain from voting in the upcoming European elections. I urge other Ukip supporters to do the same.
'Ukip is exploiting the stupidity of ignorant anti-immigrant voters for electoral gain.
'While the party deliberately attracts the racist vote, I refuse to be associated with them.'
Privately educated Miss Thandi, who was previously chairman of its youth wing in London, specifically attacked one of its campaign posters for next week's elections, which reads: '26million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?'
'The poster epitomises where the party is going wrong,' she wrote in a blog for the Guardian. 'This anti-immigrant campaign undermines Ukip's claim not to be a racist party.
'Having worked so hard to help Ukip rid themselves of their "racist" label and denying comparisons to the BNP, this direction of campaigning really isn't doing my former colleagues any favours.'
Miss Thandi's accusations come less than a week after Mr Farage appeared alongside black and ethnic minority candidates at a rally in London, in an attempt to shake off claims Ukip is racist.
The party has been hit by a string of embarrassments in recent weeks. One member who featured in the party's election broadcast was suspended after saying Ed Miliband was 'not a real Brit' and describing Islam as an 'evil organisation'.
Another party supporter said Lenny Henry should emigrate to a 'black country'.
Miss Thandi said when she joined the party aged 17, 'there was none of this "they took our jobs" business'. She added: 'Ukip is straying further and further from the policies that attracted so many of its original supporters, instead cynically pursuing ever more aggressive anti-immigrant rhetoric.
'Previously fundamental policies like taxation and promoting a small state are being ignored in favour of going after the votes of those who think Lenny Henry "should emigrate to a black country".'
The London School of Economics anthropology student, who was born to Punjabi parents and grew up in Kent, appeared in a Ukip party election broadcast last year and has twice spoken at its annual conference. Appearing in a YouTube video with Miss Thandi at one stage, Mr Farage said: 'Sanya, you're 18 years old and you're a rising star in the party. At the conference you were the most popular speaker so I'm going to have to watch my step, aren't I, as time goes on.'
÷ David Cameron has insisted his aim to get net migration to the UK to below 100,000 by May 2015 remains 'perfectly achievable'.
Net migration, the number of people coming to the UK for at least a year, minus the numbers leaving, rose to 212,000 in the year to September 2013.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140513ea5e00022
