{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"694"}
____
  
Features
THE RICHARD LITTLEJOHN COLUMN
BY RICHARD LITTLEJOHN   
1,436 words
11 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
17
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
'WHO CAN I SUE?' SAID THE DRUNKEN SAILORMy dad wasn't much of a drinker. He'd make a couple of large gin and tonics last all night. I never saw him drunk.He once explained to me how, as a young sailor in World War II, he'd gone on shore-leave in Casablanca, only to wake up back on board ship the next day with absolutely no memory of the night before.He had been carried back to his bunk after getting paralytic on dark rum. His apocalyptic hangover lasted for days and he vowed there and then never to get himself in such a state again.I tell this story simply to illustrate that sailors occasionally get legless. It is nobody's fault but their own.If my dad had fallen overboard, or seriously injured himself, he wouldn't have dreamed of blaming someone else, let alone suing for damages. How times have changed.
 Lieutenant Kirsty Wallace received £1?million in compensation from the Navy for injuries sustained while she was three sheets to the wind.Seven years ago, she hurt her back after falling off the top of a human pyramid during alcohol-fuelled high-jinks in the mess.Despite fears she would be paralysed for life, she managed to stand with splints after six weeks and walked up the aisle at her subsequent wedding in 2011. I'm not making light of her injuries. Lt Wallace was determined to rebuild her life and is now a paralympic basketball player.But why should she have been handed £1?million in damages? It wasn't the Navy's fault. They didn't get her drunk or force her to climb on top of a 30ft-tall human pyramid. She brought her misfortune on herself. Lt Walker has retrained and is still in the Navy, receiving her salary.While she is entitled to her medical treatment and rehab, there is absolutely no justification for giving her a Lottery-style pay-day at taxpayers' expense.Her seven-figure settlement is almost twice as much as the maximum £570,000 compensation to soldiers maimed on active service — such as paratrooper Ben Parkinson, who lost his legs to a mine in Afghanistan.Lt Walker deserves our sympathy. Many of us have done something daft after a few sherbets. But this was her own fault and she shouldn't be entitled to a single penny.Heaven knows what my late father's generation of sailors would make of it. They'd certainly have needed a stiff drink.--THERE AIN'T NO RUM OR RAISIN FOR ITWe haven't had any Proof of Identity madness recently. So here's a bumper double shot.Reader Lynne Taylor writes to tell me that her 35-year-old daughter was asked for ID in a local Co-op store in Daventry before they would sell her a rum'*'raisin yoghurt.And Sarah Brooks emails from Derby, where she took her 16-year-old daughter to Asda to buy some school supplies.When they got to the checkout, the assistant wouldn't sell them a pair of scissors because her daughter was under 18.The scissors were made of plastic and sold in a packet labelled: 'School scissors, suitable for age 4+'.--A headline in Saturday's Mail read: 'DDT found in salmon.' If it had been the other way round — Salmon in DDT — I'd have assumed it was a review of one of the signature dishes at Heston Blumenthal's new restaurant.--This week's edition of Mind How You Go comes from Newark, Notts. Irene Gaskill tells me that police were out in the town centre at the weekend, giving away little clips with bells on.They are designed to be attached to handbags to deter bag-snatchers. Since when did it become the police's job to hand out bells?Still, we've already had them giving away flip-flops to stop drunken dopey birds falling off their stilettos, so why not bells?As Irene, wife of the brilliant cartoonist Dave Gaskill, said: 'It sounded as if the Morris Men had come to town!' --One line in a Sunday newspaper stopped me dead. My eyes alighted on a sentence which said: 'Theresa May has a Brazilian .?.?.'Now there's a novelty, as Eric Morecambe used to say. Who'd have thought it?As I read on, I realised it actually said: 'Theresa May has a Brazilian-born cleaner' and was part of a story about ministers who employ foreign domestic staff.Stop giggling at the back. --IT'S SCREAMING LORD ELVIS .?.?.Things go from bad to worse for Clegg. The Lib Dem candidate in a council by-election in Nottinghamshire was beaten into fourth place by a man calling himself Lord Biro, from the Bus Pass Elvis Party. It's one thing getting trounced by Ukip, quite another being overtaken by a man in a Hunka Hunka Burning Love jumpsuit.And never mind Bus Pass Elvis, Cleggy's mob are so unpopular these days they'd probably lose to a bloke dressed up as Jimmy Savile. --A FEW OF CLEGGY'S FAVOURITE THINGSNick Clegg went into 'Love Actually' mode at the weekend, spouting an extraordinary, sentimental list of everything he adores about Britain.He told a Lib Dem gathering in London that he was unashamedly pro-EU and pro-immigration and his heart swelled with pride when he thought about the BBC, the NHS and the birth of Prince George.He also boasted about his admiration for the European Court of Human Rights and his commitment to spend billions of pounds every year on foreign aid to countries such as India and China.Clegg took a passing swipe at Ukip and said that when it came to the EU, he wanted the Lib Dems to be 'the party of IN'.Perhaps he should have set his speech to music. It would be an instant YouTube smash. Ladies and gentlemen, this column is proud to present Nick Clegg's 2014 remix of My Favourite Things?.?.?. Leading the Lib Dems into Coalition.Making all students pay for their  tuition.Waiting a fortnight to empty the bins.These are a few of my favourite things.Brussels and Strasbourg and EU directives,Relying on windmills to power our electrics,Turning a blind eye to Lord Rennard's flings,These are a few of my favourite things.When the polls close,When the vote's in, And I'm feeling sad,I simply remember my favourite thingsAnd then I don't feel so bad.Taking my place at the Cabinet table,Laughing as Cameron slaps down  Vince Cable,Blaming the Tories for everything,These are a few of my favourite things.Winning elections in places like Truro,Scrapping the pound and embracing the euro,Squeezing the pips of the rich till it stings,These are a few of my favourite things.When the polls close,When the vote's in, And I'm feeling sad,I simply remember my favourite thingsAnd then I don't feel so bad.Bashing the bankers and taxes on mansions,Raising fuel duty and raiding your pensions,Making the Lib Dems the party of IN,These are a few of my favourite things.Human rights lawyers and European judges,Meetings in Brussels and outrageous fudges,No referendum 'cos Ukip might win,These are a few of my favourite things.When the polls close,When the vote's in, And I'm feeling sad,I simply remember my favourite thingsAnd then I don't feel so bad.Reading the Guardian every morning,Putting up taxes to fight global warming,Shedding a tear over our future king,These are a few of my favourite things.Ending Press freedom after three hundred years,Silencing newspapers' insults and smears,Stitching up deals over pizza and wings,These are a few of my favourite things.When the polls close,When the vote's in, And I'm feeling sad,I simply remember my favourite thingsAnd then I don't feel so bad.Handing out billions to countries in Asia,Making it legal to perform euthanasia,Millions of immigrants, let them all in,These are a few of my favourite things.Cutting the money for Sheffield's foundries,Stopping the Tories redrawing the boundaries,Rigging the system so Miliband wins,These are a few of my favourite things.When the polls close,When the vote's in, And I'm feeling sad,I simply remember my favourite thingsWhich prove beyond doubt: I'm mad!
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140310ea3b0000l
