{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2746"}
____
News
Revealed: The essay that helped a Long Island student get into every Ivy League school
DAILY MAIL REPORTER   
671 words
2 April 2014
23:47
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Kwasi Enin, 17, is the son of immigrant nurses from Ghana and he got into all 12 schools that he applied to- including all 8 members of the Ivy League
* Wrote about his love of music and how it is 'my haven for solace'
* He was a senior at William Floyd High School in Mastic, N.Y, with an SAT score of 2,250 out of 2,400
* Brown, Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Harvard, Princeton, the University of Pennsylvania and Yale have all offered him places
* He was also accepted to Duke, Stony Brook University, SUNY Geneseo and Binghamton University
The admissions essay that help one Long Island boy get into 12 colleges including all eight Ivy League universities has been released.
Kwasi Enin's high SAT score of 2250 and his record of straight-A's undoubtedly helped, but now the world can also see how his eloquent explanation of his love of music apparently also sang to admissions officers.
In the biographical statement he submitted for the Common Application, he wrote about how music is 'the spark of my intellectual curiosity' and helped him connect to his community through plays.
'While onstage as Big Jule of Guys and Dolls during my favorite musical, I helped create a wonderful atmosphere in the school auditorium by singing and dancing,' the essay reads.
He goes on to tout his involvement in the local men's Doo Wop group as well as the chamber ensemble. 
'With improvement and balance comes success, and music taught me all of these virtues,' he wrote. 
'My haven for solace in and away from home is in the world of composers, harmonies and possibilities.'
In spite of his love of the arts, the honors student who registered in the 99th percentile on the SATs explains how he hopes to major in the sciences when he makes his final school pick.
MUSICAL MOMENTS IN THE ESSAY
'A wrong decision can be the beginning or end to a lifestyle. In the seventh grade, I nearly ended my music career by opting to select a simple course- Music in Our Lives- that met the state music requirement, But this decision would have left me empty.
'While onstage as Big Jule of Guys and Dolls during my favorite musical, I helped create a wonderful atmosphere in the school auditorium by singing and dancing.
'With improvement and balance comes success, and music taught me all of these virtues.
'Whenever I perform... I become immersed in the conversations between performers and the audience.' 
'The self-guided journey known as music in my life excites my mind every day. My heart sings every day because the journey is already wonderful. Although I hope that my future career is in medicine, I love that I still have much to learn about and from the world of music.'
The 17-year-old from Long Island, who had already been accepted early into Princeton, got into Brown. Columbia, Cornell, Yale and Dartmouth on March 27.
By 5pm, he had six Ivy League colleges offering him a place at their institutions, and then the toughest of them all, Harvard, sent the William Floyd High School student an email.
The university has an acceptance rate of only 5.9 per cent - meaning only 2,023 of the 34,295 applicants will get in - and they wanted Kwasi.
'I was like - this can't be happening!' Kwasi told Newsday.
He told The New York Post that much of his success is a result of his hovering 'helicopter parents', who both work as nurses after moving to America from Ghana in 1980.
'He's an amazing kid. He's very humble,' his father Ebenezer Enin said.
'He's been trained to be a high achiever right from when he was a kid.
'We have been encouraging him to be an all-around student. So far, he has proved himself.'
Kwasi Enin's college essay
Document DAMONL0020140402ea42006k6
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	22/02/2014 to 05/04/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or London Evening Standard Online Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,848
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 16:21
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
