{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3562"}
____
  
Features
DRINK, DRUGS AND THE BRITS 'ROLE MODELS'
BY AMANDA PLATELL   
1,532 words
22 February 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
21
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Coverage of our most prestigious pop music awards, the Brits, was beamed across the world on TV this week. Our equivalent of the Grammys in the U.S. offered a showcase of one of Britain's big export industries.
And what a shameful show they put on. What we were served up was not a celebration of the best in music but a sordid and self-indulgent orgy of booze and drugs.
No wonder former heroin addict Boy George described it as a 'chorus of snorting drugs'.
For my part, I asked myself whether the queues for the loos were simply the result of the vast amount of free alcohol on offer or the desire to take cocaine there.
Perhaps the most yobbishly behaved was Alex Turner, who is lead singer of the Arctic Monkeys.
He appeared almost paralytically drunk when he tried to give his acceptance speech after winning two awards, for Best British Group and Album of the Year.
Hosting this unseemly bacchanalia was cheeky-chappy actor James Corden. Typically, he graced the occasion with a full-on kiss on the lips with Radio 1 DJ Nick Grimshaw as well as making bad-taste jokes about flood victims and gay rape.
Is it any surprise that nearly two million fewer viewers watched this debauchery than tuned into last year's Brits ceremony?
But perhaps the most disturbing aspect was the behaviour of the female stars. They don't seem to realise that for many young, impressionable girls who envy their fabulous frocks, fame and big fortunes, they are role models.
Kate Moss — unrepentant after photographs a few years ago that seemed to show her snorting cocaine — strutted onto the stage to collect an award on behalf of Best British Male David Bowie.
Then she joined Best British Female Ellie Goulding (who staggered legless into the back of a taxi while making a V-sign) to go on elsewhere for some more hard partying.
This is the same Miss Goulding who is treated as part of the New Establishment, having been invited to sing at the wedding reception of Prince William and Kate Middleton.
Is it any wonder that countless towns across Britain are filled every weekend with girls out of their minds on drink and drugs who think it cool to ape their pop heroines?
* The Baftas had their lowest ever TV ratings — 4.6 million — thanks to the interminably boring and blundering host Stephen Fry. He fluffed his lines and made self-serving jokes that few outside of London's luvvieland could understand. If he's considered such a national treasure, perhaps he should be consigned to a museum?
 
***
For many Christians, it is deeply troubling to see church leaders queuing up to blame welfare 'cuts' for the rise in the use of food banks.
Of course, there are people who fall upon hard times and need food banks, but the churchmen's ill-informed comments appear to be a co-ordinated political attack.
Even the Trussell Trust charity, run by a Labour Party member, which provided 738,000 people with food last year, has conceded that only 15 per cent were in need as a result of cuts in their benefits.
The truth is that Britain offers some of the most generous state welfare in the world, and annual spending is due to increase in the current Parliament, from £200bn to £206bn.
I'm glad, though, that we are having this debate. For we should never forget it is those people in work who pay tax and fund the cost of those who don't. Indeed, there is something morally wrong with a system in which some hard-working people live on less money than some on benefits.
This is the argument being put forward by Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith in his drive to tackle the insidious culture of welfare dependency by guaranteeing that work always pays. Indeed, this is exactly the kind of moral behaviour our church leaders should be supporting.
***
***
Labour grandees Patricia Hewitt, Harriet Harman and her husband Jack Dromey refuse to apologise or explain their support of a notorious paedophile group in the Seventies. As the many court cases following the Jimmy Savile inquiry have proved, time is not, nor should be, a barrier to the investigation of child abuse.
***
 
The eternally youthful actress Sharon Stone, 55, tells us that the art of ageing well is not to succumb to a face-lift. She says we should all embrace the sensuality of our 'imperfections'. I trust she hasn't secretly had more work done to herself than was carried out during the restoration of the Sistine Chapel.
***
 
Hollie Gazzard, 20, was stabbed to death in her hairdressing salon by a man thought to have been her ex-boyfriend. Paramedics tried desperately to save her, but she died in their arms. Most shockingly, police had to ask bystanders who filmed her death on their mobiles not to post the footage online. What sort of society are we when people film such a thing, let alone 'share' it online?
***
In the same week we learned of the truly horrific story of a six-day-old baby being savaged to death by a dog bought in the local pub, there was another tale to restore our faith in man's best friend.
Bull terrier Charlie was so distraught when his diabetic owner John Hockaday collapsed that he howled until John's son heard the noise and called an ambulance. Just five minutes longer and John would have died.
Yes, dogs can be dangerous and should never be left alone with a baby, but how many of us owe much of our happiness to a pet such as Charlie?
***
One of the co-founders of the mobile messaging service WhatsApp, which Facebook bought for £11.4 billion this week, was an immigrant to the U.S. from the Communist Soviet Union.
At first, Jan Koum survived by sweeping floors. This is an object lesson for all those British youngsters who say menial jobs are beneath them.
I bet many of the workaholic Eastern Europeans who are willing to start off by doing the most unpleasant jobs will become the billionaire entrepreneurs of the future.
***
* Conscious that girls are reluctant to take part in sport for fear of getting sweaty and looking 'unfeminine', sports minister Helen Grant says they should be encouraged to take up more fashionable activities — such as cheerleading and roller-skating.
What an idiotic suggestion! Our latest sporting successes include the bronze-winning female Olympic curling team, captained by Eve Muirhead (pictured).
With their perfectly manicured nails and more eyeliner than the Middletons, they lost out on silver after a rogue hair slowed the path of one stone. I fear it fell out of one of their hair extensions.
* Britain's biggest energy supplier warns that 'the lights could go out' in 2016 if Labour wins the next election and Ed Miliband keeps his promise to freeze fuel prices.
It gives a whole new meaning to the famous headline in The Sun before the 1992 election: 'Will the last person to leave Britain please turn out the lights?'
If Red Ed wins, there won't be any lights to turn off.
***
As the new champion of elephant conservation (despite his family's love of hunting other wildlife), Prince William says that he would like all the ivory in the Royal Family's collections to be destroyed.
It's a well-meaning gesture, but as experts pointed out, the idea is 'bonkers'. Not only would it risk fuelling the illegal trade in ivory (the less ivory there is, the greater the value to poachers of the tusks of the elephants that remain), but the royal ivory is not even his to destroy. The Royal Collection is held in trust for the nation.
With such poor judgment, I wasn't surprised that the Prince oafishly high-fived a rapper at last week's Baftas.
***
LECTURING CHURCHMEN SHOULD EAT THEIR WORDS
Having anchored the BBC's TV coverage of eight general elections, David Dimbleby will work on his last next year. Even his decision to have a trendy scorpion tattoo has not enabled him to fight off the march of time. As with distinguished female TV presenters, there's always someone younger waiting to take over.
Dimbleby, 75, is lucky, however. Lugubrious Huw Edwards, who hosted the BBC's controversial coverage of the Diamond Jubilee, is 23 years his junior but manages to look older than him.
£500K FOR A SORE KNEE?
A woman has won more than £500,000 in compensation after having to wait 17 minutes for an ambulance after dislocating her knee.
The money was paid out because she was said to be suffering from 'post- traumatic stress disorder'.
Compare her experience with that of our soldiers who have returned from Afghanistan or Iraq with terrible injuries and debilitating stress, having witnessed unimaginable atrocities in battle.
A dislocated knee?
These Services men and women, some of them multiple amputees, can but dream of a half-a- million-pound pay-out.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140221ea2m00066
