{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2382"}
____
  
News
NOW ANOTHER UN MEDDLER BLASTS BRITAIN ... TO CALL US MOST SEXIST COUNTRY IN WORLD
BY JACK DOYLE AND LOUISE ECCLES   
758 words
16 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
4
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A UNITED Nations inspector was described as 'barmy' last night after she claimed that Britain had a worse culture of sexism than any other country.
Rashida Manjoo, a South African feminist academic, said a 'boys' club sexist culture' in the UK was more widespread than she had seen anywhere else.
She pointed to Page 3 models, men who wolf-whistle at women in the street and scantily-clad models in advertisements. Such images were more 'in your face' in Britain, Miss Manjoo said.
It is the second controversial intervention by a UN inspector in recent months. Last September Brazilian Raquel Rolnik produced what was condemned as a 'misleading Marxist diatribe' about government housing and welfare reforms.
It later emerged that she dabbled in witchcraft and had previously offered an animal sacrifice to Karl Marx.
Tory MPs said Miss Manjoo's criticism of Britain would take the spotlight away from those countries where there were serious problems with violence against women.
Priti Patel called the remarks offensive and outrageous, while fellow Conservative Stewart Jackson said: 'We don't need unelected barmy lefties from the UN to lecture us.'
And a source close to Theresa May said the Home Secretary was left surprised after meeting the UN inspector by how little Miss Manjoo knew about violence against women.
Miss Manjoo, the UN special rapporteur on violence against women, has previously visited countries including Bangladesh, Somalia, Algeria, Jordan, the US and Italy to see how women are treated.
Yesterday she was presenting her initial findings at the end of a two-week visit to the UK that took her to London, Bristol, Leicester, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Cardiff, Belfast and Cookstown in Northern Ireland.
In that time, she said, she had concluded that the 'visible presence of sexist portrayals of women' was most pervasive in the UK.
She also pointed to harassment of women on the Tube as evidence of this country's sexist culture, attacked cuts to benefits and legal aid, and called for compulsory lessons for all schoolgirls on 'bullying, harassment and sexual violence'. Miss Manjoo, speaking in London, added: 'What is clear from these indications of portrayals of women and girls is that there is a boys' club sexist culture that exists and it does lead to perceptions about women and girls in this country.
'I haven't seen that so pervasively in other countries. I'm sure it exists but it wasn't so much and so pervasive.'
Miss Manjoo called for fewer women to be sent to prison and claimed the criminal justice system was failing to prosecute violent husbands.
She also warned that cuts to funding for women's refuges were harming black and minority ethnic communities, lesbians and the disabled.
Bizzarely, she also questioned whether it was appropriate for police and prosecutors to try to arrest and charge those guilty of female genital mutilation or forced marriage.
She suggested the issues - which have been championed by David Cameron - were being raised for electoral reasons.
Miss Manjoo criticised Mrs May after she was blocked from visiting Yarl's Wood immigration detention centre in Bedfordshire. Astonishingly, she claimed the Home Secretary had something 'to hide' and raised the possibility that ministers were covering up conditions there.
The source close to Mrs May questioned why Miss Manjoo wanted to spend her time looking at asylum or immigration policy, adding: 'Doesn't she think that violence against women is a really serious issue in its own right? As someone who has always campaigned hard for women, it left a bitter taste in Theresa's mouth.'
Priti Patel, Conservative MP for Witham in Essex, said: 'It's outrageous that someone from such a leftist and highly biased perspective comes to Britain and makes such offensive remarks about this country.
'Ours is a highly diverse, very plural society which gives women a good opportunity to succeed and many women will rightly read those remarks and see them as a very false portrayal of Britain.
'There are parts of the world where there are serious problems with violence against women and all she is doing is taking the spotlight away from them.'
Colleague Mr Jackson said: 'I suggest Miss Manjoo takes a good look at her own country and comments on things she actually knows something about.'
But Labour's Yvette Cooper said the UN inspector had exposed the Government's 'blindspot' over women.
j.doyle@dailymail.co.uk
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140415ea4g00019
