{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"128"}
____
  
News
CLEGG CRUSHED
BY JAMES CHAPMAN AND JASON GROVES   
781 words
3 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
12
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
THE European Union will end in violence unless it is broken up, Nigel Farage claimed last night, as he was declared the emphatic winner of his second TV clash with Nick Clegg.
The Ukip leader courted controversy by suggesting the EU was thwarting democracy and triggering the rise of extremist parties, warning it would end 'unpleasantly' with uprisings on the streets.
Again making immigration central to his arguments, Mr Farage also claimed foreign incomers undercutting wages had made the 'white working class' in Britain an 'underclass'.
He urged people to join what he called 'a People's Army' and 'topple the political establishment that led us into this mess'.
Critics accused Mr Farage of using the language of the BNP, and even Eurosceptic Tories who are sympathetic to many of Ukip's arguments expressed dismay at his rhetoric. But two snap polls suggested viewers saw the Ukip leader as the overwhelming winner of the BBC debate.
A YouGov survey found 68 per cent thought Mr Farage had come out on top, with Mr Clegg backed by just 20 per cent.
An ICM poll for the Guardian showed that 69 per cent gave it to Mr Farage, and 31 per cent the Deputy Prime Minister. That was a significantly wider margin than the Ukip leader won by last week, in the first of two debates on Europe.
Devastatingly for the Lib Dems, of people who voted for them in 2010, 55 per cent preferred Mr Farage, according to ICM.
The confrontation between the two leaders was far more bitter than last week's exchange, with each man branding the other liars and fantasists.
Mr Clegg's best moments came as he attacked Mr Farage for 'indefensible' comments in which he suggested he admired Russian president Vladimir Putin for outwitting the EU and Western leaders over Syria and Ukraine.
The Ukip leader was forced on to the back foot over what the Deputy Prime Minister said were his 'dangerous' views on foreign policy, which included a claim that Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad had not used chemical weapons. Mr Clegg said 200 people were being killed in Syria every day, yet 'Mr Farage said he admired Mr Putin, Assad's chief protector, as if it is a game'.
'This isn't some sort of pub bar discussion, this is a serious issue about how we stop the slaughter, the displacement of millions of people, women and children being sexually abused, terrible violence on an unimaginable scale and all Nigel Farage can say is that he (Putin) has played it brilliantly,' the Deputy Prime Minister said.
Mr Clegg also brandished what he said was a disgraceful Ukip leaflet featuring a Native American which stated: 'I used to ignore immigration. Now I live on a reservation.'
Mr Farage said he did not recognise the pamphlet, though it has been highlighted for several years by Ukip's critics. Condemning the Ukip leader as a fantasist, Mr Clegg said: 'I wouldn't be surprised if Nigel Farage soon tells us that the Moon landing was a fake, that Barack Obama is not American, that Elvis is not dead.'
But Mr Clegg's performance was marred by clunking pre-prepared jibes, including saying the Lib Dems were 'the party of in' in terms of the EU, while Ukip was the 'party of Put-in'. Mr Farage said the Lib Dem leader was 'lying' about how many laws were imposed on the UK by the EU.
He said. 'By saying 7 per cent of our laws are made in Brussels, you are wilfully lying to the British people about the extent to which we have given away control of our country and our democracy.'
The Ukip leader added: 'I want the EU to end, but I want it to end democratically. If it doesn't end democratically, I'm afraid it will end very unpleasantly.
'If you take away from people their ability through the ballot box to change their future because they have given away control of everything to somebody else, I'm afraid they tend to resort to unpleasant means.'
Former Tory deputy chairman Lord Ashcroft, now a leading pollster, asked: 'Why oh why did Clegg agree to debate Farage?' Former Tory minister John Redwood, an arch-Eurosceptic, said of Mr Farage's reference to immigration creating a 'white?.?.?. underclass': 'It is not the kind of language I would be using.'
Former foreign secretary Sir Malcolm Rifkind said: 'While others might have sought a successor to Winston Churchill or Nelson Mandela, Farage fawns over an autocrat who has made Russia the least free country in Europe.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140402ea430001u
