{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1101"}
____
  
Features
DOOMED BY THIS POISONED CHALICE
BY STEPHEN GLOVER   
1,095 words
7 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
9
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
When Christopher Patten looks back on his long and often distinguished career as a public servant, it is unlikely that he will remember his three-year stint as Chairman of the BBC Trust with much fondness.
Nor is it probable that he will be particularly upset that major heart surgery has led him to stand down from his job with immediate effect a year earlier than he had intended.
To be fair to him, he was passed a chalice when he accepted the post that was more dripping with poison than he or most reasonable observers could have possibly guessed.
The outgoing director-general, Mark Thompson, had fostered a culture in which sometimes mediocre BBC employees received enormous pay-offs. Bureaucracy had mushroomed wildly, and so had the pay of senior executives and 'stars'.
The hope was that with his vast political experience at the highest level - after leaving Westminster politics in 1992 he had been the last Governor of Hong Kong, as well as a European Commissioner - Lord Patten would be able to knock heads together, and take charge of a bloated and self-satisfied organisation.
In the event he must be judged to have failed. He was never able to grasp the Corporation's deep-seated difficulties with the acuity he had shown in previous roles, and he showed a surprising lack of sure-footedness in coping with unforeseen problems, of which the Jimmy Savile scandal was undoubtedly the greatest.
For a time, though, things went smoothly enough. Lord Patten was evidently more than happy to see the back of Mark Thompson, and engineered the appointment of George Entwistle, an apparently competent BBC insider, as his replacement. He was partly attracted to Mr Entwistle because he believed he could control him.
The high point of Lord Patten's reign was the BBC's outstanding coverage of the Olympics in the summer of 2012. Though the Chairman of the BBC Trust could hardly claim personal credit, he could legitimately bask in the Corporation's triumph.
But the plot began to unravel in the autumn of 2012 after an ITV programme alleged that Jimmy Savile, whose long career had been nurtured by the BBC, had been a serial sexual abuser on a scarcely credible scale, with some of his assaults taking place on BBC premises.
Allegations surfaced that, almost a year earlier, in December 2011, Mark Thompson had been told about the stories concerning Savile a few weeks before the BBC aired a saccharine Christmas tribute to the monster. A BBC2 Newsnight exposure of him had also been suspiciously canned.
As criticism of the Corporation mounted, and some of its executives traded blows, Lord Patten might have seemed the ideal person to stamp his authority on the scandal. In fact he was notably slow off the blocks, though eventually a report by Nick Pollard, a former Sky TV executive, was commissioned.
Things went from bad to worse in November 2012. Mr Entwistle was forced to resign as director-general of the BBC after only 54 days in the job when it emerged that Newsnight had falsely implicated the former Tory Party Treasurer Lord McAlpine in a North Wales child abuse scandal.
The best that could be said about this affair is that Mr Entwistle was skewered in a coruscating interview by the BBC's own John Humphrys on the Today programme. One of the Corporation's best journalists betrayed a keener sense of its failures than any of its executives.
Having backed a horse that had ridden through the first fence, Lord Patten did not endear himself to the growing band of critics by taking it upon himself to crown as his successor Lord Hall, a former BBC employee who over a decade earlier had not been considered director-general material.
The question remains why someone considered such a safe pair of hands should have proved less than adept. I suspect that the answer is that, with the BBC in the state that it was, it needed a full-time chairman to help sort it out.
But Lord Patten had other irons in the fire. He is Chancellor of Oxford University, and has been a paid adviser or non-executive director to a clutch of companies, including BP. All inevitably made demands on him, leaving him less time for the BBC than was desirable, especially when it was in crisis.
Lord Patten didn't succeed in ending the culture of huge pay-offs and excessive executive pay as quickly as he should have done. It was not until last September that he admitted, at a hearing of the Public Accounts Committee, that pay-offs to senior executives had been 'eye watering', adding that he had failed to protect the interests of the licence-fee payer by clamping down on the issue earlier.
Needless to say, he always acquitted himself with great aplomb on these occasions, brushing aside MPs' concerns with marvellous insouciance. Accusations that he has not always been as transparent as he might have been were revived last December when he refused to release documents to MPs about the BBC's madly extravagant and aborted Digital Media Initiative, which cost the licence payer £100 million. He said that publishing them would inhibit 'free and frank exchanges between BBC staff.'
Such lordly condescension may have gone down well when Lord Patten was the Governor General of Hong Kong or a European Commissioner. It may possibly impress the dons of Oxford University. But it has not suited, or helped, the BBC.
What progress Lord Patten was making in producing the BBC's case for its next Charter Review in 2016 - when its future role in our national life will be examined - is not clear. But the Corporation needs a more vigorous defence than Lord Patten seemed likely to give.
The BBC has to convince ordinary licence payers that it has not grown too big, that its bureaucracy is still not too large, and that its executives and stars are not overpaid. It has to confront charges of bias, especially in its reporting of Europe and immigration.
In fact, a thorough going review of the future of the BBC is required. Lord Patten was not the man for that task, any more than he has been the right person to steer it through its recent tribulations.
A fresher and more self-critical broom is needed than Christopher Patten could ever supply. That said, his announcement does signal the end of a remarkable career in public life.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140506ea570000h
