{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3160"}
____
  
Features
MINISTERS' OUTRAGEOUS SECRECY OVER HS2
BY DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
566 words
11 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
WHAT can be so damning in the Government's own cost-benefit analysis of the planned HS2 high-speed rail link that ministers would go to such extraordinary lengths to suppress it?
When campaigners first requested access to this innocent-sounding civil service document under Freedom of Information laws, they were flatly refused.
Then a demand for its release by the Information Commissioner was vetoed under powers last used to stop publication of Cabinet papers covering the Iraq war.
Now the Commissioner - in an unprecedented move - plans to challenge the veto in the High Court, and it looks as if Transport Secretary Patrick McLoughlin will fight it all the way.
He argues - in this paper's view spuriously - that the civil servants who prepared the report must enjoy confidentiality to protect their careers under different political masters.
What we do know about the analysis is that it rates the prospects of the HS2 project as 'amber-red', which means 'successful delivery is in doubt' because of 'major risks or issues in key areas'.
One thing is certain, such Government secrecy in 2014 is frankly outrageous.
Before any final decision is made to plough £50billion of taxpayers' money into this scheme, doesn't the public have a right to know what those risks are?
CPS in the dock
THE acquittal of Commons deputy speaker Nigel Evans on charges of sexually assaulting seven young men is another blow to the crumbling credibility of the Crown Prosecution Service.
While the behaviour Mr Evans admitted to in court - including lurid details of sexual encounters in his constituency home - will be regarded by most as unsavoury, the criminal case against him was deeply flawed.
Of the seven alleged victims, two didn't want to testify, three more hadn't complained to police, one temporarily retracted his accusation, and the seventh admitted he had embellished his account.
The Mail doesn't condone louche behaviour by either heterosexual or gay men but the fact remains that an innocent man has had his reputation trashed in the courts by prosecutors who remain utterly unrepentant. But then, it's only taxpayers' money they're wasting.
Following the high-profile acquittals of Coronation Street stars William Roache and Michael Le Vell, perhaps it's time for an inquiry into the culture, practice and ethics of the CPS.
Migration hypocrisy
THE Office for National Statistics announced yesterday that border authorities underestimated the number of migrants who came to Britain between 2001 and 2010 by a staggering 346,000, enough to fill a city the size of Bradford.
Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper failed to mention this stunning lapse in a speech on immigration yesterday, preferring instead to berate the Tories for failing to control migrant numbers, while conveniently ignoring her own party's lamentable record.
With hypocrisy and incompetence like this, will any of our politicians ever get to grips with migration?
A lesson in candour
WITH refreshing candour, new Culture Secretary Sajid Javid - the Muslim son of a bus driver - says he plans to send his children to private school.
'My father gave me everything I have, I'll give my own four children everything I have,' he said.
What welcome honesty and what a change from all those other cringeing politicians so terrified of doing anything which could see them labelled as elitist.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140410ea4b0000h
