{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"976"}
____
News
For the royal who talks to plants... a chance to chat with a banana and carrot: Surreal 'organic' encounter for Prince Charles as he and Camilla begin whistlestop tour of Canada
REBECCA ENGLISH ROYAL CORRESPONDENT IN HALIFAX, CANADA   
1,852 words
19 May 2014
23:04
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Couple's three-and-a-half-day tour takes in six towns and cities - and a staggering 41 public engagements
* Charles and Camilla arrived on a Canadian Air Force Jet in Halifax last night; and today met people dressed as fruit and veg at Military Families Resource Centre, where healthy eating is promoted
* Carrot John Marc Morel cheekily told the environmentally minded prince: 'I'm all organic you know!'
* Prince was afforded full military honours by the Canadian Armed Forces in Grand Parade today
* He honoured Canadian military service by laying a wreath at cenotaph to mark 100th anniversary of Great War and 75th anniversary of World War II
* Charles earlier took part in swearing-in ceremony after being made a member of the Canadian Privy Council
Prince Charles once famously admitted he enjoyed talking to his plants - and today, he also had the chance to chat with a banana and a carrot.
As part of their whirlwind tour of Canada, the prince and the Duchess of Cornwall visited a Military Families Resources Centre in Halifax, Nova Scotia, where they encountered one of the most unusual line-ups of their royal careers - a group of fruit and veg.
The royal couple were introduced to volunteers dressed up as a banana, a carrot and a bunch of grapes in order to promote healthy eating among children.
Scroll down for video
Camilla burst into laughter as she was introduced to banana Matthew Hunt, saying 'what have they made you do?'.
Carrot John Marc Morel cheekily told the environmentally minded prince: 'I'm all organic you know!'
'I am in the navy and he told me that I should take it on board with me.'
The pair also met a puppet called Jason who is used to help children talk through any issues they may suffer from, as a result of having parents in the military.
His operator, Melissa Connell, said: 'The prince said he looked a little scary but the children love him and find him easy to confide in.'
Later, The Prince planted a tree at Halifax Public Gardens, near to the spot where his grandfather, King George VI, did in June 1939.
'It's already been planted,' Charles joked as he saw the tree was already in the ground.
He threw soil on the plant before raising his spade above his head, prompting cheers from the hundreds of people watching.
The Prince then called at Halifax Seaport Farmers' Market where he met a British family selling Cornish pasties.
Leah Jones, 53, and her daughters Amber, 20, and Chloe, 29, moved from Reigate, Surrey, to Canada six years ago.
'The Prince asked what kind of pasties we had and then said, "Oh you've got chicken curry." Leah Jones said.
Charles was joined by Camilla as they were introduced to Hilda, an Indian Runner duck.
'He knew what breed it was straight away,' said 19-year-old Andrew Green, who has looked after the duck as part of youth organisation 4H.
The couple were shown some of Nova Scotia's local wines, with the Duchess sampling a white wine called Tidal Bay.
During a visit to a butcher's stall, the Prince asked how long they hang there meat for.
When told the meat was hanged every week, the Prince joked; 'That's not long enough,' before holding up five fingers.
The couple then attended Pictou County to celebrate Celtic heritage in Nova Scotia - with Prince Charles revealing he needs 'a few whiskies' to speak Gaelic'.
Charles watched a group of women perform milling songs in Gaelic and was asked if he spoke the language. 'I don't,' he replied.
'The only way I can manage it is after a few whiskies.'
During a walk through the town, the Prince was shown a photograph of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge which an author said she had received from the couple.
Sarah Bronson said she sent William and Kate a book that she and her husband Robert wrote telling the true story of a deer she raised, called Lucky: A Farmer and Fawn.
The royal couple responded by sending a photograph of the pair holding Prince George when he was first shown to the media outside hospital, she said.
'The Prince asked my name and said 'yes, I recall that,' Ms Bronson said.
Charles and Camilla are set to arrive in Charlottetown in Prince Edward Island later where they will continue their tour of Canada
Earlier today, standing in a bone-chilling drizzle, Charles and Camilla formally launched their visit.
They have left the sunshine of the UK behind for a three-and-a-half-day tour of the country, taking in six towns and cities and undertaking a staggering 41 public engagements.
The couple arrived in Halifax on Sunday night and conducted several duties afterwards, including a ceremony in which Charles was officially sworn in as a member of the Canadian Privy Council, an honour last afforded to a royal in 1957 to his father, the Duke of Edinburgh.
Today, however, saw their official welcome to the country – and to Nova Scotia, a first for the Duchess, who was wearing a kingfisher blue suit and hat with a tartan scarf.
The ceremony took place in the Grand Parade, a historic military parade square dating from the founding of Halifax in 1749.
At the north end of the Grand Parade is the Halifax City Hall, the seat of municipal government in Nova Scotia’s Halifax Regional Municipality.
The clock on the northern face of City Hall is fixed at four minutes past nine to commemorate the Halifax Explosion of 1917 - a disaster which saw the death of 1,900 people following a massive explosion when two ships collided in the harbour (see box below).
Charles watched as he was afforded full military honours by the Canadian Armed Forces.
This included a composite 100-person Guard of Honour, the Royal Canadian Air Force Band, and a 21-gun Royal Salute.
The prince also honoured Canadian military service by laying a wreath at the cenotaph to mark the 100th anniversary of the Great War and 75th anniversary of World War II.
The cenotaph is constructed of local Tangier granite. The bronze sculpture depicts victorious but grieving Britannia representing Nova Scotian motherhood.
There are also three ceremonial wreaths, the names of First and Second World War Battles honours, a dedication and the coat of arms of both Nova Scotia and Canada, as well as a Victory Cross.
The Duchess today also undertook a solo visit to Northbrook Community Centre to learn more about the work of Alice Housing, which offers support for women and children who have suffered from domestic violence.
Camilla chatted at length with one survivor, Darla MacPhee, who has gone on to get a job and speaks publicly about her ordeal to highlight the charity's work.
'We need more people like you,' she said, patting Darla's arm.
'It's speaking out about this issue - having the courage to do so - that's important. It's not something that should be swept under the carpet.'
THE HALIFAX EXPLOSION
On the morning of December 16, 1917, a French cargo ship, Mont Blanc, carrying wartime explosives, collided with a Norwegian relief vessel in Halifax Harbour.
The port was used as a WWI base by the Canadian Navy at the time, and was teeming with troops and ships.
As crowds gathered to watch the drama, the munitions ship drifted towards the pier.
The crew and captain fled in lifeboats, desperately trying to warn those on shore to run.
Twenty minutes later, the ship exploded, causing extensive damage over a one-mile radius. Much of Halifax was destroyed, including 1,600 buildings and 12,000 homes.
Fires quickly spread around the city and a tsunami flooded the streets.
More than 1,900 people were killed; 9,000 were injured.
This week's tour to Canada is Charles's 17th to the country where his mother, the Queen, is still head of state.
Although it has welcomed four official visits by the Royal Family in four years - the Queen in 2010, then-newlyweds Prince William and Kate in 2011, and Charles and Camilla in 2012 - the Canadian secretary to the Queen says there is still a deep fascination with the royal family.
'There's a great deal of excitement and expectation about this royal tour,' says Kevin MacLeod, who has worked on some 20 royal tours since 1987.
Later at the city's Public Gardens, Charles will plant an English oak tree - a tradition started 75 years ago by his grandfather, King George VI.
At historic Pier 21 and the Canadian Museum of Immigration, the couple will also meet with war brides and veterans of the Second World War.
They will also travel to the community of Pictou where they will learn about the province's Celtic roots, visit street stalls and watch a musical performance at Hector Quay.
This evening the couple will fly on to Prince Edward Island for a Victoria Day fireworks display.
Tuesday sees them spend the morning in Charlottetown, visiting the Legislative Chamber and attending a youth parliament debate.
The Prince of Wales will also be honoured with a medal recognising his contributions to Canada and deliver his second speech of the tour.
Charles and Camilla will tour the city's arts centre guided by an actress playing the region's most famous export -  Anne of Green Gables - before flying to Winnipeg.
On Wednesday, their last day in the country, the couple will undertake a staggering 16 engagements between them.
The highlight is set to be Charles feeding a polar bear named Hudson at the local zoo and learning about another famous regional bear - Winnie the Pooh.
The original Winnie was a female black bear who was bought as a small cub for $20 in Onatario by a Lt Harry Colebourn of The Fort Garry Horse, a Canadian Cavalry Regiment, en route to the Western Front during the First World War.
The bear was smuggled into Britain as the regiment's unofficial mascot with veterinarian Lt Colebourn naming her after his home city of Winnipeg.
Before leaving for France he decided to leave her at London Zoo where she become something of a local star and much admired, among others, by AA Milne's son, Christopher Robin.
Christopher subsequently changed the name of his own teddy from Edward Bear to Winnie the Pooh, providing the inspiration for his father's much-loved books.
Charles and Camilla will leave Canada on Wednesday evening and fly back to the UK overnight.
Robert Finch, chairman of the Monarchist League of Canada, said he believed Charles still spoke to Canadians, both young and old.
'Things like the environment, bridging the gap between different religions, these are things that Canadians -- even young Canadians -- really gravitate toward, ' he said.
Document DAMONL0020140519ea5j006so
