{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"369"}
____
News
Rockets to have lift-off from the UK spaceport within five years (once the government has found somewhere 'remote')
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
569 words
1 May 2014
14:26
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* UK Space Agency needs to find a site away from homes and businesses
* Ministers say it is key to protecting the UK from threats from space
* British astronaut Tim Peake will have to take off from foreign country
Rockets could take off from a spaceport in Britain within five years after ministers launched a search for a suitable site.
The UK Space Agency has been tasked with opening a site by 2018, with the first flights having lift-off within a year.
A remote site, away from homes and businesses, will be required in the plan to better prepare the UK to deal with threats from space – and offer trips to space tourists.
Space minister David Willetts said the Government wanted to make sure Britain was more resilient to risks to space services and capabilities and enhance national security interests in space.
Experts from the defence and space industries will now work with transport agenies and business groups to draw up a list of potential sites for the spaceport.
Mr Willetts said: ‘We want an area where there is not much civil airspace, where it is not very busy,” said Mr Willetts.
‘It might be smaller airports, it might be underused or disused RAF airfields.
‘We’re starting to look at relatively remote parts of the country,’ he told the Telegraph.
‘We’re rediscovering our great tradition of developing space vehicles and having a spaceport where we can launch will be part of that long term plan.’
He is working with Europe Minister David Lidington, Defence Equipment Minister Philip Dunne and Immigration Minister James Brokenshire in a cross-Whitehall effort to draw up the UK's first ever National Space Security Policy.
Virgin boss Sir Richard Branson want to find a Europe base for his Virgin Galatctic space tourism enterprise.
Launches will begin in New Mexico in the US, but Sir Richard is looking for a site closer to home.
Sites in Scotland, Cornwall and Wales have previously been suggested to become Britain’s answer to Cape Canaveral.
Next year British astronaught Tim Peake will go into space to join the International Space Station next year.
But he will have to take off from Kazahkstan or French Guiana. The cross-government group looking for a site is expected to report back by July.
Mr Willetts highlighted close relationships with the United States, France and Germany and pledged the Government would continue to work on ‘transparency and confidence-building measures’ at the United Nations.
Mr Willetts said: ‘The policy also sets out how we intend to monitor and prepare against threats and hazards which might harm these interests, and our wider national security.
‘It identifies potential threats from state-sponsored and criminal attacks against satellite capabilities and services, and hazards such as severe solar storms and growing debris in space and how these might be prevented or the impact mitigated.
‘Through the National Space Security Policy, the Government will foster a closer space security partnership with industry and science that would allow more pooling of space security expertise and better sharing of information on space security risks, and on ways and opportunities to mitigate these.
‘We recognise that maintaining and enhancing co-operation with our international partners is also fundamental to our space security objectives.’
Document DAMONL0020140501ea51004bq
