{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"2136"}
____
Asylum seekers enjoying 4-star luxury hotel leave G4S red-faced once again
Sophie Alexander   
483 words
17 May 2014
01:05
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
ASYLUM seekers were living the life of luxury in a four star hotel because bungling security company G4S ran out of low-cost accommodation.
Barnsley Central MP Dan Jarvis
G4S booked 405 rooms on half-board – 356 at the Ramada Encore and 49 at the nearby four-star Holiday Inn, both in Barnsley, South Yorks – between mid-March and late April, it has been claimed.
Asylum seekers would normally stay at the 250-bed Angel Lodge hostel in nearby Wakefield, West Yorks, but it was apparently short on space.
According to the Holiday Inn website, a room with bed, breakfast and an evening meal can be as much as £100. Guests enjoy satellite TV, broadband and use of the onsite Bannatyne's health club.
G4S have a contract with the Home Office to provide accommodation for asylum seekers until their applications to stay in the UK are determined.
As a condition of the contract, G4S are supposed to alert both the local council and police when temporary accommodation is being used – something they failed to do in this instance.
Barnsley Central MP Dan Jarvis said: "I will be raising urgent questions in Parliament about why Barnsley Council was apparently not informed that asylum seekers were being accommodated in hotels locally and why the correct procedures have not been followed.
"I will also raise the question of how much money has been spent on accommodating asylum seekers in hotels as I do not believe my constituents will think this is an effective way of spending valuable taxpayers' money."
A Home Office spokesman said he was aware that G4S had used a hotel in Barnsley for temporary accommodation for "a short period of time" but this had now ended.
He added: "The UK has a proud history of granting asylum to those who need it and providing safe and secure accommodation while applications are being considered.
"We continue to consult with our providers and local authorities to monitor existing agreements and ensure that performance levels are sustained, and community cohesion issues addressed."
A spokesman for G4S admitted incidents like these had happened before.
When the Home Office outsourced asylum seeker accommodation to G4S, the private company had no previous experience of running any such centres.
G4S was meant to get its residences up and running between March and May of 2012, but none were ready.
Due to a lack of expertise G4S were not fully operational until a full 10 months after the transition period began.
In January of this year G4S and Serco were fined £3m for consistently poor performances.
Related articles Oops! Ukip accused of using immigrants to hand out anti-EU leaflets Outrage as immigrants pay as little as £1 a week in tax Jobless UK migrants are racking up £10m costs to the taxpayer EACH year
Document DAICO00020140516ea5g0025t
