{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2302"}
____
News
EXCLUSIVE - Donald Sterling stripped bare: Disgraced Clippers boss is a violent bully who paraded NAKED in front of kids and their friends, calls Christians STUPID and whipped son with a belt and told him to stop eating 'like a n***er'
CHRIS WHITE IN LOS ANGELES   
3,013 words
20 May 2014
17:38
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Former longtime family friends claim what they say is the naked truth about disgraced LA Clippers owner's personal life
* Donald Sterling repeatedly beat his son Scott with a belt on his backside from the time he was four until his teen years - and the billionaire was IN THE BUFF when he did it, reveals Scott's best friend Phillip Scheid
* Sterling berated his son for taking too much food and using his hands. 'Stop being a little n***er', he yelled
* Born of Jewish parents, Sterling changed his last name. Christians, were on his hate list too: 'They're stupid and don't know how to make money'
* Scott, who died of a drug overdose last year, shot Phillip twelve times after a huge row and Phillip's sister Cheryl Bogart claims Scott caused her to fall out of a third-storey window. Both blame cold-hearted Sterling
* Cheryl was just 15 when she found herself alone with Sterling at his pool. He asked her to take off her bikini. She was mortified.
* He was served the same meal - lamb chop, noodles and salad - by the cook every day and he ate in the kitchen, also in the nude
Donald Sterling paraded around his mansions naked, threw around racist remarks to his kids and their friends, claimed Christians are stupid and beat his own son, according to long-time former family friends.
Phillip Scheid and his sister Cheryl Bogart have known the Sterling family for thirty years and today edescribe the LA Clippers boss as a violent bully who used to whip his son Scott. They blame Sterling’s cold-hearted indifference for Scott's troubles. Scott turned to drugs  - and died from an overdose last year age 31.
Scroll down for video
'His racism has been going on for years, everyone knew about it,’ says Phillip. ‘Just look at his house, it’s like an old colonial house just like a white master would have in the Deep South. On his dining room table, he had a buzzer he could push with his foot so the servant could come out every time he pressed it.'
His servants were usually Hispanic.
‘One day he told Scott off for taking too much food at the dinner table and using his hands. He said: '"Stop being a little n***er and use the cutlery”. I’m not a racist and to hear those words shocked me, I was brought up to think everyone was equal.’
Phillip also describes an incident where Sterling berated him for dressing like a ‘negro.’
‘He said: "What are you wearing this cr** for? Why are you wearing these clothes, you’re a white man? I don’t want you wearing that. Why are you wearing the Negro suit?"'
                                             - Phillip Scheid
'One day I’m wearing this camouflage jumpsuit, I was like 17 or 18, and it was made by the rapper Master P.
‘He said: “What are you wearing this cr** for? Why are you wearing these clothes, you’re a white man? I don’t want you wearing that. Why are you wearing the Negro suit?”
‘He didn’t want me in his house with that outfit on,’ says Phillip.
Cheryl adds: ‘It wasn’t just black people. He’d always say: “Christian people are stupid and don’t know how to make money.”
Sterling was born to Jewish immigrant parents Susan and Mickey Tokowitz. As an adult, he legally added Sterling to his last name.
‘The past is coming to haunt him. Obama and all the black people in the world are upset. He can’t buy himself out of this.’
Sterling would often host parties at his Malibu mansion and invite LA Clippers cheerleaders to them.
'He’d have Clipper girls at these parties. Don’s wife Shelly would be there, but she didn’t like fact they would be over, and stayed indoors.
‘I loved it and I’d be there every weekend and all through the summer,’ says Phillip.
‘But he would control everyone, anything he said went. And all friends and family were white.
‘They would attend his party every year on the Fourth of July and Don would pay for a barge to fire off fireworks by his house. I never saw him hang around with anyone apart from white people.
‘The Clippers players were never at the party. The players were just his entertainment.’
Phillip, now 34, was Scott’s best friend ever since they attended kindergarten together in Beverly Hills.
'He’s the reason why his son is dead, why I’m disabled and my sister is in a wheelchair. Donald is a scary, nasty human being. He whipped his kids. He was a savage man'
Scott would often stay with the Scheids to escape his father’s whippings. Both Phillip and his sister Cheryl claim they have seen firsthand the strange and vicious behavior of Sterling over the decades, which they say has ultimately destroyed their own lives.
Phillip was shot 12 times by wayward Scott, who turned to drugs to cope with his loveless childhood.
Meanwhile, Cheryl was also a victim when she was drugged and fell out of a window at a party where Scott was dealing narcotics.
Cheryl, 37, says: ‘I think Donald is embarrassing and disgusting. He’s not a human being, I don’t think that he has a heart, or even a soul, I don’t think he has anything inside him, I don’t think he has feelings for anything. I don’t think he has any remorse for me or his son.
‘I think he gets his high from power, that’s his drug. He has no regard for human life. We don’t need someone like Donald Sterling in this life.’
Phillip adds: ‘He’s the reason why his son is dead, why I’m disabled and my sister is in a wheelchair. Donald is a scary, nasty human being. He whipped his kids. He was a savage man.
See more of Scheid's interview on Inside Edition, Thursday on CBS
‘To tell you the truth, you can only fly under the radar for so long and now he’s finally got picked up, that’s my assessment. He’s got caught in his own garbage. Everyone who knew him, knew he was racist. He’s evil.’
Donald was a powerful businessman who was buying up property in the Beverly Hills area while Phillip’s parents, Phillip Sr and Terri, were successful realtors. Cheryl is Philip’s half-sisterr, but lived with Phillip Sr from the age of two.
Phillip would often stay at the Sterling homes in Beverly Hills and Malibu from the age of four until he was a teenager. He says he saw some truly frightening things during that time.
‘Scott and I were best friends since Hawthorne Elementary School. We all lived in Beverly Hills. We just lived down the block.
‘Donald was always strict, stern, never friendly. He was always violent. If Scott didn’t walk home with the housekeeper and, instead walked home with me, he’d get whipped. And he’d even make Scott get the belt.
'Scott would show me the lashes on his ass and he’d say: “Look at what he did, and all just because I didn’t go with the housekeeper.” He took pleasure in beating his son. He took out all the anger on his son’s behind.
‘He would be sitting at top of the stairs waiting, and he’d go: “Scotty, go get the belt.” Scot would be terrified and say: “Phillip, can you do something?” But Donald would tell me to go away.
‘And he’d do other things to punish us. He even made us sit at opposite ends of the pool for hours while he’d be socializing in the Jacuzzi.
‘He’d always be telling us both off. He’d tell us when we’d go to bed even if it was ridiculously early like in the afternoon, then we’d be checked on every hour.
‘One time I slept on Don’s bed, it was hard as a rock, like it had springs sticking out. It was a nightmare, I thought it would be luxury.’
Cheryl adds: ‘Scott would often be with us for days or weeks at a time to get away from his dad. It was then he told us Donald was whipping him and beating him.
‘He’d come over with slashes on his back, my mum would cry and we’d hide him in the closet if his father came looking for him. One time, Donald came banging on the door and pulled him out by his hair and dragged him into the car.’
Phillip says that Sterling would always dole out his violence completely naked and rarely wore clothes - even in front of guests.
Such was the depth of disdain for Scott, Sterling’s wife Shelly even ‘offered him’ to Phillip’s mom Terri to live with the Scheids.
‘The cook would make the same meal every single day for Don – lamb chop, salad, noodles. It was always served in the same bowl and he’d always be naked. She would keep serving it and he’d be naked in the kitchen sitting in the chair while watching TV’
‘Shelly would offer my mom money to look after him. She even offered to switch me for Scott and she wasn’t kidding.  She was deadly serious, as I was a normal kid, and he was so out there and crazy, but is it any wonder?
‘He lived with us on and off, then get pulled back to the house
‘Scott would tear things up. When he came to our house, he would eat his shirts, and literally climb the walls. He was on medication his whole life for his behavioral problems. I know Shelly loved him, but Donald couldn’t give a s**t.
‘He never showed love, he just implemented punishment whether it was due or not due. It was just negative. He was taking everything on Scott that happened in his business life, whipping his backside every chance he got,’ says Phillip.
‘The other two kids, Chris and Joanna, were older than Scott and moved out as soon as they could. They didn’t get half the treatment Scott did, we never really saw them.
‘Scott hid all the time from his dad. There were two secret closets in his Beverly Hills mansion, Don knew of them, the ones where you push the wall and they’d open. But Scott would still hide, hoping he wouldn’t get caught.
‘But he’d get caught and Scott would scream and scream. I’d hear him from the other room.
‘When we’d be staying in his Malibu home, he’d be on his deck butt naked while people were walking by. I guessed he wanted to tan his whole body. He was naked all the time.'
When he would ask for the belt to whip Scott, says Philip, Sterling would be naked - even though Scott was in his teens.
'He did everything naked.’
‘The cook would make the same meal every single day for Don – lamb chop, salad, noodles. It was always served in the same bowl and he’d always be naked. She would keep serving it and he’d be naked in the kitchen sitting in the chair while watching TV.’
Cheryl also visited the Malibu mansion and says that Sterling made inappropriate sexual remarks to her even though she was underage. 
'I'll never forget that at the age of 15, with no one else around, Sterling told me that I could go in the pool without my bikini on if I wanted to. I was repulsed'
                                            - Cheryl Bogart
She says: ‘We’d go to their Malibu home and there were so many crazy things said by Donald, it used to wash over you. But I’ll never forget that at the age of 15, with no one else around, he told me that I could go in the pool without my bikini on if I wanted to. I was repulsed.’
Their friendship with Scott ended tragically for all three kids. By the time Scott was 19, he was out of control, had never held down a job and was living on his trust fund, according to Phillip.
He says that Scott became increasingly disillusioned with his own life and started to resent Phillip’s loving family. So much so, that the pair came to blows in 1999 as Scott opened fire on Phillip with a Mossberg 500C 20-gauge shotgun.
‘I showed up at his house like I did most days,’ Phiilip recalls. ‘I even had a key. He was outside the back gate, and he came at me in a sideways direction. He said: “Come with me”, and ushered me into his backyard, then started pushing me. It got into a full on fight and I guess I won and said: “OK, we’re done.”
‘I didn’t push him any further and walked away. That’s when he pulled a gun and I kept getting shot from behind. I was getting peppered. I thought he was going to finish me off, so ran outside the property. The doctors still don’t know how I managed to run.
The Sterlings were not at home at the time.
‘I hid behind a car and crouched down so he couldn’t see me. Thankfully, a girl came along in a car, I jumped in and she drove me to hospital. I had gun shot wounds in both legs, four holes in the left, eight holes in the right. I’ve still got two bullets in my leg and I’m disabled now.
‘It was caused by Scott’s jealousy of my family and nobody gives a damn about him. He was even jealous of my friends.’ 
At the time, it was reported that the fight was over young Saved by the Bell actress Lindsay McKeon, then 17, a friend of both the boys. McKeon has broken off relations with Scott, it was said, but he still had strong feelings for her. She had arrived at Scott’s house to deliver a letter and when Phillip walked up to them jealous Scott went ballistic.
But Phillip maintains the fight had nothing to do with her. ‘It was to do with his upbringing, ‘ he says.
Unbelievably,  the pair remained friends.  Phillip was reluctant to press charges and Scott was never criminally prosecuted.
Phillip says: ‘The police wanted to prosecute, but got shot down. I wasn’t that cooperative because he was my friend. I just wanted to forget about it myself. I didn’t want him to go to jail.
‘I won the civil suit and got some money out of it. I only did that after pressure from my own family. I even asked Scott what I should do and he said try to get some money out of it. I would have dropped it if he’d have asked me to.’
But their friendship was left in tatters in October 2005 when Phillip’s his sister Cheryl fell out of a three-storey high window at a party in Beverly Hills.
The Scheid family are convinced that Scott was to blame for her accident, which left her paralyzed.
‘It was the first time I’d seen him for ten years,’ Cheryl says.  ‘I was at a friend’s house and I saw Scott. He was dealing drugs to everyone and I was drugged. I don’t know how, that’s all I remember.
‘His parents weren’t giving him money apart from his trust fund, so Scott dealt drugs. I don’t know how I fell out.
‘I had a major spinal chord injury. If the ambulance hadn’t have picked me up in fifteen minutes, I’d have died of internal bleeding. If the surgeon hadn’t have operated within forty-five minutes, I wouldn’t be here.
‘I’m now in a wheelchair for the rest of my life.’
Cheryl says that police never investigated the case. She tried to file a lawsuit, but it was dismissed by the judge.
‘I have to live my life every day in a wheelchair. I fought for five years against the Sterling family and then had the lawsuit dismissed. They didn’t even let me have a trial. Donald Sterling couldn’t care less about my family, my future. He didn’t give a cripple girl a dime.
‘There was no witnesses to it, but Scott was there and it was Don’s money and influence on his son that led to me being in a wheelchair.’
Scott’s life never got any better, say the brothers and sister, and he turned increasingly to drugs, which he succumbed to in January last year when he died of an overdose.
When Scott died, it was reported that Shelly Sterling  felt like her husband was more concerned with his mistress - the woman who helped bring him down - V. Stiviano, than grieving with the family.
Phillip and Cheryl don’t ever blame Scott for all this, but his father. They’re slowly rebuilding their lives and still live in Los Angeles. It’s because of her experience that Cheryl is writing a book on her life in Beverly Hills and the dark underbelly that no one ever sees
Phillip says: ‘Poor Scott, he was always one to venture out, try to do things, but he’s past now, he’s paid his price. Who do you blame for his death? His dad. Scott got no love, so he had to fill a void. It’s just so sad.’
Document DAMONL0020140520ea5k0076k
