{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"796"}
____
News
Hundreds of wealthy Russians get UK visas for promising to bankroll £1million of the national debt
JAMES SLACK   
710 words
25 February 2014
14:33
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Britain has been handing visas to hundreds of wealthy Russian oligarchs in return for them agreeing to bankroll at least £1million of our £1.2trillion national debt.
Russian and Chinese businessmen have been allowed to jump to the front of the immigration queue by each ‘investing’ a seven-figure sum in Government gilts.
Immigration advisers say that the Russians and their families are the big ‘winners’ as it allows them to settle in a country which has the ‘rule of law’ and good schools.
Indeed, because they receive interest on the Treasury bonds, the Government is effectively paying the rich migrants to come and live here – where they can then snap up expensive houses.
But the British public get ‘very little out of’ the deal, according to the Home Office’s Migration Advisory Committee.
The advisers are now calling for Home Secretary Theresa May to order a major shake-up to the scheme to try to get greater benefit for the UK taxpayer.
Under proposed new rules, the minimum amount a non-EU national would have to invest in return for a visa would be doubled to £2million.
Instead of going into government bonds, advisers suggest the money could be ploughed into big infrastructure projects.
More controversially, the committee wants around 100 visas to be ‘auctioned’ off to the highest bidder every year.
The foreigners would make ‘sealed bids’ in an envelope with a minimum starting price of £2.5million - £2million for investment and at least £500,000 going to ‘good causes’.
The ‘winners’ would get accelerated settlement in the UK - after two years rather than the five it is with the other investment routes.
The move has been criticised by immigration lawyers. Nick Rollason, head of business immigration at Kingsley Napley, said it would create an ‘eBay culture’ and leave a bad taste with the British public.
But MAC chairman Sir David Metcalf accused the lawyers of defending the vested interest of wealthy clients who currently get a very good deal without having to donate to charity.
Sir David said the immigration lawyers had made their comments before seeing his committee's report and he compared them to the Leeds United football team of the 1970s, who he said would ‘kick people in the tunnel’ before the start of the game.
Arguing the lawyers were only interested in the ‘fat fees’ they received from their foreign clients, he added: ‘Why don't they have the same concern for British citizens? Why are they hostile to a good causes fund?’
The so-called ‘investor visas’ have been quietly offered to rich businessmen for 20 years.
Since 2008 433 have gone to Russians and 419 to the Chinese  - followed by US citizens, on 93, Egyptians , 46, Indian, 44, Kazakhstanis, 41, Iranians 38, Pakistanis, 38, Australians, 36 and Canadians, 36, out of a total of 1,647.
Migrants who invest £1m, £5m or £10m get permission to apply for permanent residence in the UK after living there for five, three or two years respectively. They do not need to speak English and can bring their spouses and dependants.
Sir David said that because most applicants were buying gilts to qualify, they were effectively loaning the government money, rather than investing in the UK.
Supporters of the investor visas say the main benefit to UK residents is from the stamp duty paid on property purchases.
But Sir David said this had been greatly exaggerated because ‘someone else would buy the house if the investor did not’.
He argued claims investors were helping to pay off the deficit did not hold water either as their contribution was tiny compared with the £300m of gilts sold every day by the British government.
But the migrants and their families benefited from Britain's property rights, schools, capital markets and legal system.
Sir David said: ‘The Brits get very little out of this at the moment. The migrants get a huge amount.’
He said the proposed scheme was not about ‘selling off British passports’ as investors would still have to have lived in the UK for a minimum of five years before they could apply for full citizenship.
Document DAMONL0020140225ea2p0061d
