{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"37"}
____
News
A picture of desperation: Moment night vision camera captures illegal immigrants clinging to lorry axles in Calais car park
JOHN STEVENS   
460 words
25 March 2014
01:40
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* The two men were captured on a night vision camera at the French port
* Fortunately the lorry was stopped before they were hurt
* Calais has become a magnet for migrants bound for UK
Perched perilously on a lorry axle, two migrants make a desperate attempt to get into Britain.
The pair were filmed by hidden night-vision cameras as they clung to the underside of the Dover-bound lorry in Calais.
French Channel ports are seeing a surge in asylum seekers trying to make it to the UK, with hundreds of Syrian refugees among those living in squalid camps awaiting their chance.
BBC cameras captured the moment the two migrants clambered on to a British lorry under cover of darkness. Migrants often wait for a truck to stop at a junction before climbing underneath. Gangs can be seen on the road leading to the port as lorries approach.
This truck was stopped for the migrants’ safety once they were picked up on camera, and French police were called. Its driver Clive Mills said: ‘I would never have known they were on there. I didn’t see them get on. I was looking in the mirror, looking down the road to pull out – it’s just frightening. Something somewhere has to change because you can kill people.’
The men were asked if they realised the danger they were exposing themselves to, and one replied: ‘Yes, but I have to go there. This country is not good to live in, we have to go to England.’ French charity workers say four migrants died in one week earlier this month as they attempted to get to Dover.
Calais, which became a magnet for UK-bound refugees in the mid-90s following the war in Kosovo, is again attracting hundreds of migrants who want to cross the Channel. Many are Syrians, some of the estimated 2.1million who have fled fighting in the country. Britain is the preferred destination for many because of its global language and generous benefits.
Immigration Minister James Brokenshire said yesterday: ‘There have been indications of an increase in the number of people trying to get to the UK through the Channel ports. That in part is because of ongoing conflict in the Middle East and North Africa.’
The resurgence of the Calais problem follows closure of the huge Sangatte refugee camp in 2002 and the removal of a massive squat near the ferry terminal in 2009.
The deputy mayor of Calais warned last year that Britain was a target for Syrian refugees, with gangs charging migrants more than £10,000 each to smuggle them to the UK.
Document DAMONL0020140324ea3o004sh
