{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3279"}
____
News
Ukip warnings over Romanian and Bulgarian influx 'nonsense' says minister as number with jobs in UK falls after work curbs lifted
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR, TOM MCTAGUE, MAIL ONLINE DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR, IAN DRURY and JACK DOYLE   
1,145 words
15 May 2014
02:21
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Anna Soubry says Ukip made 'wild, rather offensive' migrant predictions
* But admits Cameron unlikely to honour pledge to slash net migration
* There were 140,000 Romanians and Bulgarians in work in January-March 
* Down from 144,000 at the end of 2013, but up 28,000 year-on-year
* More than 30.4 million people are now in work, a new record high
* More than 280,000 find work in three months, biggest increase ever 
UKIP were accused of scaremongering by a Home Office minister yesterday after the number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in Britain fell slightly.
Those in jobs from the two countries dropped by 4,000 in the three months after employment restrictions were lifted on January 1 compared to the three months before.
But despite the surprise dip the total number working here was up by 29,000 – nearly 26 per cent – in the first quarter of this year compared to the equivalent period in 2013.
The Office for National Statistics said there were 140,000 people from the two eastern European countries in jobs in the UK between January and March this year.
That was down from 144,000 in the three months to December, before Romanians and Bulgarians gained the same rights to work in Britain as other EU citizens.
The figures do not include dependent family members of immigrant workers or the unemployed.
Before employment restrictions were lifted ministers repeatedly refused to estimate how many Romanians and Bulgarians would arrive in the UK, leading Ukip to raise concerns that a ‘massive influx’ would place extra demands on public services and depress wages.
Amid growing worries the Government introduced measures to  prevent EU migrants from claiming unemployment benefits for their  first three months here, while those found begging or sleeping rough could be deported.
Yesterday, after the figures were published, Tory Police Minister Damian Green hit out at the rhetoric from Nigel Farage’s party.
He said: ‘They started scaremongering in the run-up to January 1.
They have been proved wrong and they have decided to carry on scaremongering.’
Tory minister Anna Soubry said: ‘These figures just show that Ukip preys on people’s fears, it preys on prejudices in many people. And they make these wild, actually rather offensive claims, and hey, what happens? It was all a load of nonsense.’
Lib Dem Business Secretary Vince Cable added: ‘This idea of waiting for tens of thousands of people pouring off the planes from the Balkans was just a scare story.’
Labour MP Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons Home Affairs Select Committee, said: ‘Those, including Ukip, who promised the end of the world on January 1, now owe the public and those from Romania and Bulgaria a full apology.’ 
But critics pointed out that the number of workers from Romania and Bulgaria had increased by 43,000 – or 44 per cent – since the first three months of 2012.
They also suggested that the December peak meant many arrived in the UK in time for the lifting of employment restrictions.
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of MigrationWatch, said: ‘The latest annual figures show an increase of 29,000, in a period when restrictions were in place for nine months. We believe they are consistent with our estimate of a 50,000 population increase from Romania and Bulgaria for each of the next five years.’
Dr Carlos Vargas-Silva, senior researcher at the Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford, said: ‘Until we have complete data for 2014 it is impossible to achieve any definite conclusions about the impact of the end of restrictions.’ 
Ukip head of policy Tim Aker said: ‘We never said it would just be about Romania and Bulgaria. We are looking at the massive influx from the EU.’
RECORD RISE IN THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN WORK TO 30.4MILLION 
Unemployment has fallen by more than 300,000 over the past year, giving jobless rates of 7 per cent for men and 6.4 per cent for women.
The number of people in a job rose 283,000 in the last three months - the largest quarterly increase in 43 years. 
The number of unemployed young people has been falling for the last eight months.
Employment minister Esther McVey said: 'As the recovery takes hold, more people are able to get a job or set up their own business and become the employers of tomorrow.
'Each and every person who has made a new start or hired someone new is helping to make Britain a more prosperous and confident place to be.
'We will continue to support those in and out of work who want to get on and fulfil their ambitions for a more secure future.'
The number of people claiming jobseeker's allowance last month fell by 25,100 to 1.12 million. 
Danny Alexander, Lib Dem Chief Secretary to the Tresury, said: ‘This further big rise in employment shows again that our jobs rich recovery is becoming firmly established. 
'It follows strengthening economic growth figures and positive news on inflation. 
The very modest numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians coming to work in Britain this year is in stark contrast to the inflammatory rhetoric of earlier this year. 
'Overall today's figures are good news for the people of Britain, and bad news for those who would threaten our recovery by turning the clock back.'
Mr Cameron yesterday insisted his promise to get immigration below 100,000 a year is still 'achievable'.
But Mr Cameron insisted: 'The target remains. I think it is absolutely achievable'. Appearing before the House of Commons Liaison Committee, he declined to discuss the figures for Romanians and Bulgarians before their publication, but said that his administration had brought net migration down by one-fifth since coming to office.
He also wants to stop millions of pounds being sent abroad each year in child benefit for children who live elsewhere in the EU.
There are around 24,000 families claiming for 40,000 children, with two-thirds of the children based in Poland.
Mr Cameron said he had not made 'anybody who thinks that is sensible' but admitted that under existing EU rules 'it seems impossible to change that'.
He told BBC One's Marr Show: 'We are very clear about what we want to achieve. Let's end benefit tourism, let's make sure the single market is properly safeguarded.
'Let's make sure that Parliaments can get together and block unwelcome proposals from the European Commission.
'Let's make a series of changes to make Europe more flexible, more competitive. Those are the sorts of things I want to see.'
Document DAMONL0020140514ea5e003xt
