{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1702"}
____
  
Features
LIFE'S TOO SHORT TO MEASURE A GOLDFISH; COLUMN
BY RICHARD LITTLEJOHN   
1,619 words
18 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
17
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
This Easter holiday weekend, thousands of fathers will spend a small fortune trying to hit a cardboard target with a pellet from a wonky air rifle. If they succeed, their lucky children will return home from the funfair clutching a goldfish in a plastic bag.
By Tuesday night, the goldfish will either be swimming around in a bowl modelled on one of those Hanna Barbera cartoon space helmets or will have been flushed down the toilet.
Goldfish are as much a part of the traditional British Easter experience as Cadbury's Creme Eggs and chocolate bunny rabbits.
I've no idea who came up with the concept of goldfish as fairground prizes, but kids seem to like them. Rag and bone men used to tour the streets on horse-drawn carts touting 'old clothes for fish'.
Boys and girls would willingly swap their dad's best Sunday suit for a manky goldfish with the life expectancy of, well, a goldfish.
When it comes to pets, give me a labrador any day of the week. As a hobby, keeping fish is right up there with cultivating mould.
If you want to gawp at brainless pond life with slack mouths staring out from behind a plate-glass screen, there's always daytime television.
What I hadn't realised until now was that buying a goldfish is fraught with as much difficulty as obtaining a shotgun licence.
Brian Heard has written to me about his recent experience at the Pets At Home store in Hove. He took his grandchildren there to buy them a couple of goldfish for their aquarium. They were approached by an assistant in a green uniform, clutching an iPad, who proceeded to ask Brian a series of questions.
Why did he want the goldfish? Did he have any fish already? Yes, four.As this impertinent interrogation unfolded, the assistant earnestly tapped the answers into the iPad.
How big was the tank in which the goldfish were to be kept? About the same as that one, Brian replied, pointing to a display tank on a nearby shelf.
In which case, the assistant said, Brian wouldn't be allowed to buy any more goldfish.
Pardon? That's a 20-litre model, and fish require a minimum of one litre of water per centimetre of length. And since goldfish can grow to 5cm, another two would exceed the maximum capacity of the tank.
Hang on a minute, Brian said, the identical tank in the shop contained dozens of fish. Ah, the assistant said, but that's for commercial not domestic use.
When Brian protested, the assistant said: 'Fish have rights, you know.' Brian left the shop empty handed, with two disappointed grandchildren in tow.
He thought I'd be interested in this story since I regularly bring you reports of shops refusing to sell stuff to people on elf'*'safety or 'proof of identity' grounds. This is certainly a new one on me. I've never heard of anyone being required to complete a questionnaire before they could buy a goldfish.
Initially, I assumed this was an isolated incident, just another example of an officious jobsworth proving my golden rule that if you give someone any kind of authority they will always, always abuse it.
But out of curiosity, I thought I'd investigate further. Turns out Brian isn't alone. There's even an online forum for people refused goldfish.
I bring you one example, verbatim, except for some deleted expletives, from a frustrated chap who calls himself 'Cornish Seagull'. It is a minor classic.
'Looking after Daughter's goldfish, one dies and decide to replace it. Go to Pets At Home and experience the bloody "Spanish inquisition"! Some bloody jobsworth asked me size of tank, what filter system did I have and wait for it . . . what experience did I have of fish?
'Explained very slowly that I was just looking after Daughter's fish and one died and NO, tank didn't have filter system but I planned to transfer fish to pond.
'Told it was company policy not to sell fish to customers without filter systems! Got asked to leave store when wife pointed out that most of their fish had fin rot and how could they moralise when their fish were in such a poor state!
'I'm 56, have had a successful career, raised two kids, had two cats (died at 15 & 16) still have two dogs and make very good jam but I can't buy a goldfish!!
'Has the world gone mad or am I missing something?' In reply to another contributor, who has had a similar problem, Cornish Seagull writes: 'I suggest you return to the shop with a club hammer and demand they sell you a goldfish or their tanks get it!'
What kind of mad world is it in which the simple business of buying a goldfish can provoke people to the point of violence? Apparently, all this stems from the 2006 Animal Welfare Act, after which the RSPCA issued strict guidelines about keeping fish: 'The general rule is to allow 2.5cm (1in) of fish to 4.5 litres (1 gallon) of water, with a minimum of 45 litres (10 gallons).'
I'm sure this is sensible advice, but who has got the time to measure a goldfish? For a start, they keep flapping about if you take them out of water.
On their website, Pets At Home boast of their 'responsible retailing' credentials. They'll even sell you a 'Beware of the Goldfish' sticker. They just won't sell you a goldfish.
Still, there's always the funfair, but for how long? A number of MPs, including Jack Straw and man-of-the-moment Nigel Evans, have signed a petition calling for the law to be changed to ban goldfish being given away as prizes.
Happy Easter.
 
 JAMAICA? NOT OF HIS OWN ACCORDLast time out it was a convicted Italian mafioso, holed up in Uxbridge, who we couldn't send home to serve his sentence because Italian jail conditions breached his 'human rights'.Now we learn that an illegal Jamaican immigrant who stabbed a schoolboy to death over a drugs deal can't be deported because he's decided to announce he's gay, something he forgot to mention until now.I can't decide what's worse: the pernicious European convention which makes us a safe haven for gangsters, terrorists and killers.Or the fact that this murderer we were told was allegedly jailed for 'life' at his original trial subsequently had his sentence cut to just six years and two months.My old mate Sean McDermott has become something of a London landmark over the years. Working as a doorman at a succession of smart restaurants in all weathers, wearing his bowler hat, he's photographed by tourists almost as often as guardsmen in bearskins.You may have seen him lurking in the background during coverage of the bust-up between Nigella Lawson and Charles Saatchi. Tomorrow he reaches a landmark of his own and turns 60. Happy birthday, Sean.We've only just got over the horse-meat scandal when along comes another food scare. Two new surveys of takeaway meals, by the Food Standards Agency and Which? magazine, discovered dishes sold as lamb containing other kinds of meat. Some lamb curries were made entirely from beef, while the meat in several dishes could not be identified. As slobbish Oscar Madison says to his card school chums in Neil Simon's magnificent play The Odd Couple: 'I got brown sandwiches and green sandwiches.''What's the green?''It's either very new cheese or very old meat.'One report claims some doner kebabs contain dead rat. Chilli sauce with that, sir? Meanwhile, a kebab shop owner in Midhurst, Sussex, has just been prosecuted for what local council officers describe as one of the worst breaches of food hygiene laws they have ever seen.He answers to the name of Mustafa Dogdu. I hate to think what's in his kebabs. Scientists are proposing to put cows on a diet  to cut the amount of saturated fat in dairy products. What do they have in mind? Lean Cuisine? Cows eat grass — and it doesn't get more low-fat than that. This week's Good Health section featured a pair of shoes fitted with wheels, which are alleged to stop old people falling over.Call me old-fashioned, but aren't they what used to be known as roller-skates? And won't they have the exact opposite of the intended effect? Whenever I went out on roller-skates, I always ended up flat on my backside. If this idea catches on, there could be carnage on pension day.JOIN ME FOR LUNCHThe great joy of my job is the feedback I get from readers. This column really wouldn't be the same without you, as today's main piece illustrates.On Monday, May 12, I'll have the pleasure of meeting many of you in person at the Daily Mail's Literary Lunch at London's Royal Lancaster Hotel.I've a new book out next month, Littlejohn's Lost World, about growing up in the Fifties and Sixties and how life has changed since.From Muffin The Mule to Jimi Hendrix at the Isle of Wight pop festival, it's a story of sweet shops, school dentists, Saturday morning pictures and innocent childhood freedom which has gone for ever.Tickets are available from dailymail.co.uk/books or see Page 60 today. I do hope you can join me.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140417ea4i0000l
