{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3276"}
____
  
News
JITTERY LABOUR WOULD PREFER MINORITY RULE TO FORMING A COALITION
BY TAMARA COHEN    
536 words
15 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
19
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
LABOUR is preparing for a minority government similar to that formed in 1974 if they fail to win the next election but emerge as the largest party.
Senior figures have warned Ed Miliband it would be too 'damaging' to form a coalition with the Liberal Democrats.
The move comes amid deepening concerns about Labour's direction as the Tories move ahead in the polls.
Yesterday, in what has been seen as a swipe at his leader, shadow chancellor Ed Balls suggested Labour is regarded as 'anti-business'.
Meanwhile, members of the shadow cabinet are urging against another coalition next year.
One said: 'Under no circumstances would we want the Liberal Democrats in a formal coalition with us. It would be incredibly damaging to us.'
Another shadow minister told the New Statesman magazine it would be too 'difficult' to form a coalition if there is no overall winner, after Labour's 'relentless' attacks on the party.
A widely-derided party political broadcast last week attacked Mr Clegg as 'the Un-Credible Shrinking Man', in a parody of the classic film.
The frontbencher added senior figures in the party are coming to the opinion that if there is another hung parliament next year, Labour could govern alone for the whole parliament. One MP who backed talks with the Lib Dems in 2010 said: 'Sitting in government for five years with a bunch of bloody timid compromisers is not what we should be about. The reality is we could form a minority government and we could know we'd be in power for five years.'
Sources added Lib Dem claims that ruling as a minority would be undemocratic and weak were simply evidence of them being 'power hungry'. Mr Miliband is understood not to have made up his mind and there have been no formal talks between senior Labour and Lib Dem figures.
Any party governing as a minority for longer than a few months would be unprecedented. The last time was after the February 1974 general election.
Meanwhile Mr Balls is the most senior figure to criticise Labour's direction, following attacks on energy firms, the rental market and rail operators. He told the Financial Times: 'I don't think Labour will win the next election as an anti-business party'.
Mr Balls said the leadership should 'make more noise to say we'll take tough decisions on the deficit' and speak out on immigration, welfare abuse and reform of the EU. He added voters needed reassurance Labour would 'make the sums add up' on the economy.
Mr Balls also admitted Labour's poster showing David Cameron and Nick Clegg as 'two peas in a pod' was misjudged. He told LBC radio: 'I think I might have chosen a different picture.'
However Labour's transport spokesman Mary Creagh said Mr Miliband has the 'charisma' to be prime minister.
She told the BBC: 'What I know is that Ed Miliband's leadership has inspired thousands to join the Labour party...and we have thousands of activists out every week talking to people on the doorstep about the issues that matter to their lives.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140514ea5f00028
