{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1309"}
____
  
Features
SUSANNA'S PAID PRICE FOR PUTTING FAME FIRST
BY AMANDA PLATELL   
1,479 words
1 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
21
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Susanna Reid seemed to have it all. The glamorous BBC Breakfast presenter (now moving to front ITV's new morning show for a big fat fee) was one of TV's rising female stars.
That was thanks in no small part to her flirty performances on Strictly Come Dancing.
She had three young sons and, just as fortunate, a long-term partner, Dominic Cotton, who we were told was happy shouldering the burden of caring for the little ones while Susanah was busy chasing the limelight.
Now we learn life was not as blessed as it seemed. Reid's 16-year relationship appears to be over after Cotton advertised online for a new partner, informing perspective dates that he is 'currently separated' and that his 'best feature' is his 'bum'.
While I feel great sympathy for Susanna and her boys, I fear it's no surprise that her partner has sought companionship elsewhere.
To present BBC Breakfast, she travelled from London to Salford three days a week, leaving her family each evening, getting up at 3.30 am to do the show, then returning home in the afternoon — no doubt exhausted.
Add in the hours she devoted to training for Strictly and her appearances in the touring stage version of the show, and frankly there could have been little time left to be a mother — let alone be a loving partner.
Now it seems it's Mr Cotton who's had enough.
It is a salutary lesson for all women that, however unfair, most men do not feel at ease living in a woman's shadow, least of all when she's so often absent. Precious few 'house husbands' are truly comfortable in the role.
Even in our post-feminist, progressive age, it is hard-wired into most men's DNA that even if they are not the primary earner, they do not relish being the primary childcarer.
It may not be right or fair, but it is human nature.
The result is that women face an impossible struggle to get the work-life balance right: to hold down fulfilling jobs, to care for their children and love their men.
Those who say they have found the perfect formula are usually deluding others — or themselves.
Susanna once paid tribute to her partner, saying 'he's unrivalled as a parent. I can't even come close'.
No doubt. But however brilliant Daddy may be, he wants the mother of his children to be around, too. And as Susanna has found, there is a heavy price if you put fame before family.
 
***
As the debate rages about getting more women into politics, consider the case of Northern Ireland Secretary Theresa Villiers.
Her pathetic handling of the 'comfort letters' to IRA terrorists and her mauling by John Humphrys on the Today programme yesterday was proof — if it were needed — that politicians should be promoted for ability, not their gender.
* David Cameron said he would slash net immigration, yet figures show it has soared, with a staggering 40 per cent increase in migrants from the EU.
The poisonous Lib Dem Vince Cable says this is a 'good thing'.
Since 76 per cent of people supported Cameron's pledge to reduce immigration, I can only assume Vince means it's a good thing because it makes the PM look incompetent. Or perhaps he's lost what remains of his marbles.
* In a week that saw ten of his flagship academy schools taken over after failing Ofsted tests, you'd think Michael Gove would have more things to worry about than female genital mutilation.
Yet he has agreed to ensure all schools educate girls in awareness of the issue.
Given this hideous practice is restricted to a minority population, surely the majority of schoolchildren would be far better concentrating on learning the three Rs than FGM.
* SCOTLAND will lose the BBC if it goes independent, warns Culture Secretary Maria Miller.
So be it. But please can we let them have Jim Naughtie back?
 
***
How curious that Channel 4 News should choose Steve Coogan as their preferred guest to discuss the Paedophile Information Exchange scandal. Is he a campaigner against child abuse or an expert on paedophilia? No. Coogan's expertise lies in drug-fuelled sex and lap dancers. Oh, and a hatred of newspapers that seek to expose uncomfortable truths. He is fast becoming even more of a joke figure than his alter-ego, Alan Partridge.
***
 
 
***
On Tuesday I was at an event for the Coming Home charity, which adapts houses for seriously wounded soldiers.
Ed Addington, who served with 2 Rifles, moved me to tears as he spoke about the need to give returning soldiers like him a home and a chance of a new life. Visit their website and buy one of their scented candles. It will make your home sweeter to come home to, and theirs: www.coming-home.org. uk and click on to the shop link for the aromatherapy candles.
***
 
The mother of the 30-year-old Polish former sausage factory worker who is dating £148 million Lottery winner Adrian Bayford insists her daughter (right) is not a gold-digger, but is simply working as his bodyguard.
Of course she is. But then I fear the one thing the barrel-chested multi-millionaire needs protecting from is his own gullibility.
***
Happily married Claudia Schiffer says she turned down a £1 million indecent proposal to sleep with an Arab prince.
Yet she reveals 'some other supermodel took it'. Proving that Schiffer's not only held onto her magnificent looks, but also to her catwalk cattiness, as the hunt is on to find out which of her former rivals DID accept the offer.
Who's your money on?
***
 
Poor old Fergie just never stops trying. The former face of WeightWatchers has just spent 12 weeks in a boot camp in the Swiss Alps, running each day and sticking to a diet of blended foods to lose weight.
'I may have lost 30lb, but I want to help combat global obesity,' she said.
Strange how she's so reluctant to shed that great lump of lard she's still attached to — otherwise known as Prince Andrew.
***
 
Freebie-LOVING Cherie Blair was an honoured guest of the Archbishop of Westminster, Vincent Nichols, as he was installed as a Cardinal at the Vatican. Pictures of the event revealed Cherie had a large Louis Vuitton bag suspiciously stuffed to the gills at her feet. I trust it wasn't full of purloined holy water and rosary beads.
***
 
Pippa Middleton says she's been hurt by accusations that she has cashed in on her royal connections. Well, the truth can be painful.
Does she really think she'd have been paid a £400,000 advance for her silly party book if she was just an ordinary Home Counties girl helping out at the family firm? A source from her former publishers said: 'Pippa's sales are nothing to celebrate.
'She was a superstar after the wedding, but even Sarah Ferguson sold more when  she started her writing career.' Ouch, now that really must hurt.
***
 
After days of silence, Patricia Hewitt finally apologised for how the National Council for Civil Liberties allowed itself to be linked to a paedophile organisation seeking to lower the age of consent to ten and to legalise incest.
We still await an apology from Labour's Deputy Leader, Harriet Harman, who has obfuscated, dodged and dissembled over her role in this whole murky affair.
Her position is increasingly untenable, but what is even more bewildering is the continued unconditional backing she's received from Labour Leader Ed Miliband.
As they say, a fish rots from the head down.
***
 
* So the romance between Shane Warne and Liz Hurley is over after he was spotted heading off to the hotel suite of lingerie entrepreneur Michelle Mone.
Warne insisted that the story was 'ridiculous and laughable' — before promptly jetting out of the country.
No doubt Liz didn't find it quite so hilarious.
* LUCKILY, when Victoria Beckham took time out of her catwalk schedule to visit children suffering with Aids in South Africa, she took along world-famous celebrity snapper Annie Leibovitz to capture her every move.
Well intended, I'm sure, but I can't be the only one cynically thinking a baby clothing line is on the way.
***
 
I never thought I'd say this, but what a pity Susanna Reid did not follow in the footsteps of Natasha Kaplinsky, winner of the first Strictly. Say what you will about Spangles (and I have), but when the former primetime TV presenter became a mother, she cut down on her work schedule and put her family first. The result? Two children and a happy marriage. There's a lesson there somewhere.
***
 
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140228ea3100064
