{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1665"}
____
News
White Christmas for White Dee? Channel 4 bosses plan a one-off festive special of hit show Benefits Street
EMILY KENT SMITH   
593 words
19 April 2014
11:32
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Channel Four series began in January 2014 and ended in February 2014
* Christmas special now 'in the bag', according to television executive
* Depicted life on Birmingham street where 90 per cent of residents are said to claim benefits
* Criticised as 'poverty porn' and labelled 'profoundly wrong' by local MP
White Dee was once just another resident on James Turner Street in Winston Green, Birmingham, where 90 per cent of residents are reported to live off benefits.
Dee, whose real name is Deirdre Kelly now become the face of Benefits Street, the television series which pulled in more than five million but also shocked viewers across Britain - attracting more than a thousand complaints.
And now Channel Four has revealed that the series, which ended in February after five episodes, is set to make a Christmas comeback.
In the same week as the producer of Benefits Street, Love Productions, confirmed that work is underway for a new series on immigrants in Britain, tipped to be titled Immigration Street, a television executive told The Daily Star that a Christmas special is 'in the bag'.
The episode, which will be a one-off screening, will reveal what has happened to the residents of James Turner Street since the final episode.
Yet the executive admitted that the production company was 'struggling' to cast characters for a second series.
The confession comes after stars from the series told of how they believed they had been victims of a 'manipulative' stitch-up.
Mark Thomas and Becky Howe, who featured in the series, said they were outraged with the way they had been portrayed.
Mrs Howe said: 'They've just tried to make us look like slums. Everyone on the street is fuming about it.
'Our faces are everywhere. Half of my family and friends have already disowned me because of it - I've had to take them off Facebook. Some want me to change my name on Deed Poll.'
One Birmingham MP told The Birmingham Post that she believed the programme was 'profoundly wrong'.
Labour MP Shabana Mahmood said: 'I found it shocking that Channel 4 or any other organisation would present poverty as entertainment. It was profoundly wrong.'
Other critics have labelled the programme 'poverty porn'.
White Dee, a single mother-of two, has since began a career as a rapper and will soon release her single titled 'Your (sic) to blame'.
Her agent Barry Tomes said that she had turned down deals worth £100,000 in order to remain on benefits of around £200 a week. She has not worked since 2002.
The number of viewers of Benefits Street was the highest for the channel since the paralympics was aired on Channel 4 in 2012.
Early episodes from the series included confessions from residents that they had fraudulently claimed benefits.
Another resident Danny Smith showed the cameras his shoplifting techniques which included removing safety tags without damaging clothes and how to dodge alarms. 
After the episode, 200 complains were made raising concerns that the television was providing criminals with techniques to follow which launched a police investigation.
In the series, James Clarke, known as Fungi, admitted to spending his hand-out on alcohol. In the first episode of the series he also pretends to be an official Big Issue salesman in order to earn extra cash.
Fungi, 44, has now said that he was made homeless after the series and has since been sleeping rough.
Document DAMONL0020140419ea4j003jv
