{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2348"}
____
News
Parents' despair at squeeze on places: Up to four in ten children denied their first choice primary school
LAURA CLARK   
633 words
17 April 2014
01:29
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Popular schools in wealthiest areas most in demand by parents
* One mother complains she was not offered any of her top three choices
* Appeals against refusal to grant a school place 'more than double' over past five years
* Department of Education claims more funding available to open new school places
The growing crisis in primary places saw up to four in ten children denied admission to their chosen schools yesterday.
A surge in appeals is expected as families fight their allocation to  second, third or even their sixth  choice primaries.
Many parts of the country saw fewer parents than last year offered the schools they wanted for their children, amid a shortage of places driven by immigration and the last decade’s baby boom.
Hundreds of youngsters are yet to be allocated any school at all, while many face travelling several miles a day.
Parents yesterday inundated online forums to complain about their placements and seek advice.
One mother from Yorkshire wrote on the Netmums site: ‘Can’t stop crying. We were not offered any of the three we put down. We have been offered the worst school ever and it is the 19th furthest away from us. I feel sick.’
Another wrote on Mumsnet that her son had been offered a different school to his sister. ‘I’m having palpitations at the idea of two kids at different schools.
‘The logistics don’t bear thinking about,’ she said.
There was also anger that the national ‘offer day’ for over 600,000 children was scheduled just before Easter weekend, meaning families will have to wait several days to discuss their options with local councils.
Figures obtained by the Mail show that most parts of the country have seen an increase in the number of applications this year.
More than half of local authorities also report a rise in the number of pupils denied their first-choice schools. Parts of the South were worst hit. Kensington and Chelsea came bottom of the table with 38 per cent of four-year-olds missing out – up from 35 per cent last year.  Twenty-three per cent were rejected from three primaries.
In nearby Hammersmith and Fulham just over 25 per cent missed out on their first choice, and in Lambeth 21 per cent.
Other areas unable to offer as many first-choice places as last year include Kent, Essex,  Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, Brighton, East Sussex, Poole, Milton Keynes and Wiltshire.
The news comes despite the Government earmarking £5billion to provide more primary places, with more than 230,000 created between 2010 and 2013.
But teachers’ leaders warned of gaps in planning for shortages. Dr Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers union, said: ‘We know there is a growing crisis in primary school places.
‘For all the money they are throwing at the problem, [the Government] simply haven’t got the mechanism to plan increased provision where it’s needed.’
The number of appeals more than doubled to 31,150 between 2007 and 2011 – the last year for which figures are available.
Matt Richards, a partner at School Appeals Services, said: ‘The interesting thing will be the number of people having to travel further to get to school. There will be parents who have to put their children aged four-and-a-half in a cab with a cab driver. It will be interesting to see how appeals panels react.’
A spokesman for the Department for Education said: ‘We are increasing the number of good school places by tackling underperformance and opening new free schools and academies. ]
‘We have also more than doubled the funding available to councils to create new places.’
Document DAMONL0020140417ea4h00008
