{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3770"}
____
  
Features
MERE ABUSE WON'T STOP VOTERS BACKING UKIP
BY DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
618 words
28 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
 
THIS paper holds no brief for Ukip, whose leaders we would shrink from trusting with the levers of power. The party also appears to attract more than its fair share of candidates with eccentric and, in some cases, obnoxious views.
But when polls show Nigel Farage's supporters streaking ahead of Labour and the Conservatives, while trampling the Lib Dems into dust, isn't it time for the mainstream parties to wake up to what's happening in modern politics?
To date, their sole line of attack has been to seek out and heap abuse on mavericks in Ukip's ranks.
Indeed, this was the approach adopted yesterday by Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt, a normally mildly-spoken Cameron ally, who condemned the offensive views of a local council candidate as 'absolutely disgusting', 'divisive' and 'un-British'.
But if the idea is to tarnish Mr Farage's whole party with guilt by association, it clearly isn't working.
With 31 per cent now saying they'll vote Ukip in the euro-elections - against 28 per cent for Labour, 19 per cent for the Tories and 9 per cent for the Lib Dems - it seems that the more the party is insulted, the stronger its support grows.
Are Mr Hunt and Co trying to suggest that almost a third of the population are disgusting, divisive and un-British?
On the contrary, the overwhelming majority of Ukip supporters are decent people, heartily fed up with having their views ignored by the political class.
If they want to regain lost ground, the mainstream parties should try heeding voters' wishes on such issues as uncontrolled immigration, human rights madness and the relentless surrender of our sovereignty to Brussels.
Abuse alone, however merited in individual cases, just sounds like panic.
Fifi strikes again
FOR the living, breathing embodiment of everything voters find distasteful about the political class, look no further than Westminster's Madame Fifi, Nick Clegg.
With a monstrous sense of entitlement, the Lib Dem leader says he will demand to stay in office as his price for supporting the next government in another hung parliament. Otherwise he will force a costly election replay.
As for whether he would prefer to bed down with Labour or the Tories, he appears not to care (though with a flirtatious hitch of his skirt, he describes Ed Miliband as 'a very civilised guy').
Indeed, all that seems to matter to Mr Clegg is that he should clock up ten years as Deputy Prime Minister, in what he arrogantly describes as the 'fascinating laboratory' of coalition politics.
Don't you have to pinch yourself to remember that here speaks a man whose party commands a paltry nine per cent support in the polls - only one point ahead of the cranky fringe Greens?
Since 2010, this country has had experience enough of the unprincipled Mr Clegg abusing his disproportionate say in government, whether by blocking reform of human rights law and constituency boundaries or imposing a chaotic free meals policy on primary schools.
To quote a former Tory aide, who had to deal with him: 'Nick Clegg is the worst kind of modern MP. He is self-obsessed, sanctimonious and so dishonest he finds the words truth and lies have ceased to have any objective meaning. He treats taxpayers' money with contempt.'
God spare Britain another hung parliament and more of the same.
Despair for justice
ANYONE who still has faith in British justice should turn to our report of the compensation awarded to machine-gun triple-killer Kevan Thakrar, who stabbed three prison officers with a broken bottle. Read it, and despair.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140427ea4s00008
