{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"2118"}
____
Home Office drops attempt to send Dunblane creep back home to the US
Lee Sorrell   
556 words
18 May 2014
01:00
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
A CONMAN who duped the families of Dunblane victims can stay in Britain despite facing fraud charges.
William Bernson approached parents after the 1996 school massacre and persuaded them to give him photos of their kids for an anti-guns poster.
One couple even let him sleep in their dead daughter’s bed.
But a month later Bernson, 53, skipped the country after being exposed as a bankrupt con artist with convictions for fraud. He is wanted in the US for stealing the identity of a dead teenager.
He also provided false statements to obtain a passport.
Bernson could be jailed if found guilty but a British court has dismissed US requests to extradite him.
The Daily Star Sunday has now learned the Home Office has given up trying to make him leave.
Sixteen children and their teacher died at Dunblane when gun nut Thomas Hamilton went on a shooting rampage.
The 43-year-old loner ran amok at the Scottish primary school where Wimbledon champ Andy Murray was a pupil.
Just weeks after the killings, Bernson arrived in town posing as a Dr Tobias Bernstein and befriended the victims’ grieving families.
He fled after his real identity was exposed but Bernson slipped back into Britain in 2000 using the name of US teen Greg Lloyd Smith, who died in a 1979 crash.
US passport officials were alerted to the fraud after they checked his application to renew his papers in 2006.
Slippery Bernson was eventually tracked down in 2010 by UK Border Agency officers acting on a tip-off from US investigators.
He was living at a house he shared with his Greek-born wife and three children in Pontypridd, South Wales.
In June 2010, Bernson was jailed for 16 months at Merthyr Tydfil Crown Court. He was convicted of two offences of possessing false identity documents and one of obtaining leave to enter or remain in the UK by deception.
Bernson was due to be deported at the end of his sentence. But in July 2012, 18 months after his release, this newspaper found him running a takeaway in Blackpool.
He was still using the same fake identity he had used to get into the country.
The Home Office told us at the time it was “considering the next steps in his immigration case”.
In September 2013, the US government asked for Bernson to be sent home and he was arrested. But a judge in London rejected his extradition last June after ruling that Bernson, who has changed his name by deed poll to Greg Smith, had already been convicted in the UK.
The UK authorities have now dropped their bid to deport him because of his family ties to Britain.
A Home Office spokesman said last night: “We can’t comment on his immigration case.”
Bernson runs an online news service in Britain and claims on his website that he is “entitled to work anywhere throughout Europe or the United States”.
Despite the setbacks, US authorities are still trying to prosecute him.
A court recently rejected Bernson’s attempts to have his arrest warrant cancelled but he is appealing against the decision.
Alfred Rubega, assistant district attorney in New Hampshire, who is leading the prosecution, declined to comment.
Document DAICO00020140518ea5i0000q
