{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3563"}
____
  
Features
MINISTERS WHO PUT THEIR JOBS BEFORE THEIR COUNTRY
BY SIMON HEFFER   
1,290 words
22 February 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
43
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
As PART of a deeply disturbing healthcare rationing policy, it emerged this week that ministers want to make younger people a higher priority for treatment than the elderly because they are deemed more economically useful to society.
It is no surprise that the news was greeted by widespread outrage. But the fact is that it is estimated the number of over-80s in Britain will double in the next 25 years.
If the NHS has a problem now with an ageing population, just imagine how bad it will become in the future.
The tragedy is that, like ostriches, politicians are putting their heads in the sand and ignoring the issue. Indeed, there is a similar refusal to face up to a host of other potential crises.
This shameful absence of strategic thinking across Whitehall includes such crucial areas as pensions, transport, energy and defence policies.
'You know why we duck out of tackling these big issues?' a senior Tory told me this week. 'It's because the problems are so huge that if we admitted their scale, people would panic and we would never be re-elected.'
But it is the key responsibility of every government to address the country's needs in 20 years' time — and not just tackle issues of the day.
Of course, ministers claim they are thinking strategically — citing for example plans for a new high-speed railway between London and the North of England.
But I am yet to be convinced that this fatuous project would bring enough benefits to justify the estimated £70 billion cost.
Ministers have certainly been reluctant to address our future energy needs, simply relying on risibly inadequate wind turbines and solar panels rather than investing in a new generation of nuclear reactors.
And although there has been a major inquiry into the care of the elderly, its conclusions, too, have been kicked into the long grass.
There are countless other examples of how politicians are abjectly failing to prepare for the future.
Our road system is utterly unsatisfactory. And, having allowed uncontrolled immigration for years, we have no sensible housing policy — simply letting the Home Counties be concreted over while parts of the North become wastelands.
Admittedly, Michael Gove's vision for education is admirably long-term, but it is vulnerable to being destroyed by a capricious successor as education secretary. However, I see no evidence of serious thought being given to the future of our universities. This is because of the idiotic decision for them to be put under the malign control of Vince Cable's business department.
Decisions, too, are being fudged on London's airport capacity, with potentially devastating consequences for the country's future economic health.
If Amsterdam, Paris or Frankfurt replace Heathrow as Europe's main air hub, Britain risks losing billions of pounds every year.
Meanwhile, the catastrophic running down of our Armed Forces — with money diverted to help China fund its space programme — leaves us vulnerable to aggressive states.
Putting their collective head in the sand should not be an option for politicians.
One answer would be to ensure there is a minister in every department charged with thinking solely about the country's future needs.
Sadly, though, it is a truism of politics that ministers put their own survival at Westminster before their efforts to address their country's long-term needs.
This is a disgraceful dereliction of duty. For one thing is certain: Britain will face many more life-or-death crises in the coming years than slow trains, traffic gridlock and short-term power black-outs.
***
The EU has ordered sanctions against senior Ukrainian politicians in an attempt to stop the violence and prevent a civil war in that benighted nation. Yet this is mere tokenism. The only effective sanctions would be against the Kiev regime's puppet-masters in Moscow. We should freeze Russian assets and forbid travel in the EU by Vladimir Putin and his henchmen. London has a key role to play since I'm convinced that many high-end property sales are being paid for with money laundered by Russian gangsters (some of them close personal friends of Putin).
***
Nick Clegg, desperate to cling to office beyond the next election, is cynically wooing Labour by saying the party has 'changed' since 2010 and hints he could do a deal with Ed Miliband.
The idea of a Labour government might frighten many, but I fear it would cause less damage to Britain than a Lib/Lab coalition. My reasoning? However much Miliband has moved Labour leftwards, it's still not as Left-wing as the Lib Dems.
***
It's most unwise of Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond and his finance minister, John Swinney, to threaten that an independent Scotland would default on its share of the national debt in retaliation for being excluded from a currency union with England. Such a default would cause the financial markets, from which Scotland would need to borrow huge sums, unfairly to charge other countries a huge premium on their loans.
***
Forgive me if I don't yet join the cult that worships Mark Carney, the Governor of the Bank of England, as the saviour of our economy.
Mr Carney has already been wrong-footed by having to retreat from a plan for the Bank to raise interest rates in 2016 when he predicted that unemployment levels would fall to 7 per cent of the workforce. For the figure has almost reached that level now.
Also, Mr Carney claimed it was not in his power to control rocketing house prices, whose bubble will eventually burst. But he can — by raising interest rates.
***
The former head of Scotland Yard's anti-paedophile unit suggests an apology is due from Labour politicians Patricia Hewitt, Harriet Harman and Jack Dromey for their 'mistake' in associating the National Council for Civil Liberties — for which they once worked — with the campaign to legalise paedophilia. Meanwhile, a Tory MP has announced plans to resign after it was revealed he had attended a Nazi-themed stag party.
Most people would argue that encouraging child molesters is a much, much more serious 'mistake' than attending a stupid and offensive party.
***
There is, rightly, shock that more than 200 pregnant British women soldiers have been repatriated from Iraq or Afghanistan. The warnings from senior officers that women in the front line would cause discipline problems have been proved terrifyingly right. But surely even the most diehard feminist can't think it is a mark of a civilised country to send pregnant women to face bullets and land-mines?
 
***
 
Culture Secretary Maria Miller (pictured) is widely regarded as ineffectual, clinging to her job only because of David Cameron's embarrassing shortage of women on his front bench.
She is also embarrassed by an expenses irregularity in which she claimed £90,000 for a house in which her parents were living.
Some MPs have gone to jail for less. There are other Tories who would make superb Culture Secretaries — even if they do happen to be men.
***
 
Of course ministers deserve a certain amount of time off. But Lib Dem Energy Secretary Ed Davey was most foolish to remain on paternity leave (that very modern concept) when 100,000 homes were left without power after the recent storms. This was typical Lib Dem behaviour. For Davey's boss, Nick Clegg, regularly goes home early to help his formidable wife look after their children. I have a suggestion: since the Coalition has run out of legislative steam, why doesn't every minister go on permanent leave while a general election is called? The country would be much better off.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140221ea2m0006b
