{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"2907"}
____
Nigel Farage is coming at EU, Nick Clegg
Gary Bushell   
435 words
30 March 2014
00:30
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE fight of the week wasn’t Keno v Kaovichit or even Bloor v Elliott “Goodnight” Wright on TOWIE.
It was Nigel “Crazy Frog” Farage v Nick “The Android” Clegg on the LBC Leaders’ Debate.
The hour-long catch-weight bout, shown in full on Sky News, was a two-man Question Time with Nick Ferrari refereeing and the audience firing loaded questions.
There was no purse but both men had everything to play for.
Clegg’s Lib Dems are on the ropes, staring electoral wipe-out in the face; UKIP’s Farage was having his shot at the big time.
The leader of a party with no MPs was getting in the ring with the Deputy Prime Minister.
It was the political equivalent of Rocky, except Apollo Creed had bottled it and sent his sparring partner instead.
Clegg is an old hand at these things, having out-boxed Gordon Brown and Cameron in 2010.
At times, his experience showed.
He stuck to stats and landed big blows by questioning Farage’s figures and his scare tactic immigration claims.
Nige soaked up the punishment and counter-punched, bringing up Clegg’s broken referendum promise – Nick said we should have read the “small print”, making him sound like a slippery insurance salesman.
Clegg’s own scare tactic was to assert, without a shred of evidence, that three million jobs depended on Britain staying in the EU.
If Farage courted controversy over Ukraine, Clegg seemed economically naïve.
At the bell, both men were still standing.
Farage looked sweaty but had clearly been arguing from the heart.
Clegg stayed calm – androids don’t perspire – and gained momentum as the debate went on.
But his peculiar body language made him seem as stiff as a showroom dummy.
He also drank water the way Farage knocks back pints at last orders, prompting opponents to note that his bladder must be significantly stronger than his backbone.
It went to points and the judges – viewers polled by YouGov – gave it to Farage 57 to 36.
The underdog had truly arrived.
How long can Miliband’s glass jaw stay untested?
THAT big debate in a nutshell
Farage: close the borders, open the pubs.
Clegg: make this a Greater Britain by, umm, giving up.
Related articles Nigel Farage comes out on top after live head-to-head debate with Nick Clegg Ukip boss Nigel Farage 'paid ex-lover with public money' Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg defends Vince Cable over teachers comment Nick Clegg: "Flood victims should NOT receive any of foreign aid budget"
Document DAICO00020140330ea3u00042
