{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"876"}
____
TV&Showbiz
Stick to crime, Vera! The shag-pile carpet's a job for Kirstie Allsopp: CHRISTOPHER STEVENS REVIEWS LAST WEEKEND'S TV
CHRISTOPHER STEVENS   
793 words
5 May 2014
02:30
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Half the programmes in the TV schedules these days seem to be about property.
We’re so used to them that everything starts to look like some sort of renovation, makeover or house-hunting show.
If you’re actually watching a crime drama, the effect can be disorientating.
The cameraman in Vera (ITV) made such a fuss about the decor at one murder suspect’s luxury pad that it suddenly stopped being a detective story and turned into a house-and-home show instead.
Brenda Blethyn, as the police inspector in her floppy hat and tweed overcoat, looked like a bemused farmer asked to stand in for Kirstie Allsopp.
The picture panned over a vast, studded-leather sofa, that stretched round three sides of a room the size of a tennis court.
The walls were panelled in fake oak or clad in equally fake stone; the floor was ankle-deep in pale camel Axminster carpet, and there was a glass-topped coffee table bigger than most people’s kitchens.
The camera kept swooping up to the ceiling, just so all these magnificently tacky furnishings could be fitted in one frame.
Blethyn, as DCI Vera Stanhope, asked a lot of questions in her clucky, mother hen way, but the one we were all waiting for never came: ‘How much is this place on the market for, pet?’
It would have been no surprise to discover during the adverts that Vera was produced in association with Allied Sofa Planet or some such retailer, one of those ‘everything must go, sale ends Bank Holiday Monday’ merchants.
There was plenty of other product placement. Over and over we were told that one of the suspects drove a ‘Qashqai’, which looks like a four-wheeled spelling mistake but is apparently a Japanese car.
Vera followed the ‘Qashqai’ around town, she looked on CCTV at the ‘Qashqai’ and then, in a real tongue-twister, she found the ‘Qashqai car keys’. Gone are the days of The Sweeney, when every car was just ‘a motor’ and that was that.
It’s a shame that Vera makes such blunders, because the plotting and the characters are among the best of current detective dramas. The pace is superb — this story, about a seafront killing in Whitby Bay, delivered the crime, a round-up of the suspects, some flirting in the autopsy room, a tense CID briefing, a funeral and the first arrest, all before the first advert break.
The usual stereotypes are wittily upended: the Glaswegian hardman on Vera’s team is not corrupt or bulletproof, as he would be in any other crime series, but a dimwit who couldn’t tie his shoelaces without dislocating a finger.
Like its sister series, BBC1’s Shetland, Vera is based on a series of crime novels by Ann Cleeves. But unlike Shetland, this show has abandoned any pretentious attempt to be Britain’s answer to Scandi-noir.
Vera used to investigate the strangest and most bloodcurdling killings — victims torched and thrown blazing into lakes, for instance.
FORMAT OF THE WEEK
Every year millions of telly addicts like me swear we will stay away from the World Snooker championships (BBC2) and every year it hypnotises us again.
The makers of frenetic dramas like Prey should take note — a motionless picture can be more thrilling than any car chase.
But she’s given that up: her bodies now are more old-fashioned Agatha Christie than Swedish crimefighter Saga Noren. Last week, for instance, it was an old lady stabbed on the train, and yesterday brought a simple coshing.
If the director could only resist the temptation to sell us foreign cars and three-piece suites, Vera might start to look like a modern classic.
In The Flesh (BBC3) isn’t likely to ditch its principles and sell out. It’s as earnest as a sixth-form drama production, and the dialogue is just as cringe-worthy. Despite game performances from old troupers Ricky Tomlinson and Kenneth Cranham, this tale of zombies in a rural Lancashire town is preachy and derivative.
The undead stalking the streets are called ‘the redeemed’ — but they are a metaphor for every kind of minority group, from immigrants to HIV sufferers.
If you are not accustomed to the cliches of B-movies about the living dead, be warned: In The Flesh features explosions of gore and dismemberment, as well as endless drooling corpses shouting ‘Rarrrgghhh!’
But they’ll grow up soon enough, and before you know it the undead will be presenting home improvement shows. How about A Tomb With A View, presented by Zombie Allsopp?
Document DAMONL0020140505ea55000b7
