{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"498"}
____
  
Features
'Throw hate preachers out of the mosques'
709 words
13 March 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
33
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
So Muslims want Police to save sons, daughters from Jihadists, it proves Muslims are not bringing their children up the correct way, they send them to mosques run by hate preachers. Be a lot better if they got rid of hate preachers. COL
So sad 2 hear abt Bob Crow's death. A true socialist & last of a breed! not like the gutless numpties running Labour now. Miliband tribute wot a joke! u aint a patch on him. ITFC
R.I.P. FELLOW LION AND WORKING CLASS HERO BOB CROW! GAWD BLESS! MILLSOLONDON
Rather spend £25mil on a space probe than let the spongers have it. Great idea. Ben and Tom, you are very narrow-minded people. you wouldn't be able to text your Luddite views in if it wasn't for space tech! SEVATAR
25M for Alien probe? Just look at Camerons Cronies so give to needy instead. Cliffi e
£25mil space probe money well spent! As 4 starving kids, wot about £8OBil being wasted on a bludy yuppee train track? Anon
Why don't we save ourselves a few bob by letting aliens try and fi nd us for a change? LEODIS
All u ladies sat at home playing angry birds and watching jezza. Get sum housework done (that includes u Donna x). Johnny 7, hull
Re colin. You say cameron should listen to the people of this country. labour never listened to the people about immigration or Iraq. Decker
if columbo was still about he would have had the pistorious case sewn up by now! excuse me sir, just 1 more thing! BORN SLIPPY
Text maniacs, would you rather be Andrew, Duke of York on one long holiday of a lifetime or Edward, Earl of Wessex who lives in a 57 room mansion in 87 acres of Surrey parkland? That's a tough one, isn't it? Captain Sensible
Sick and tired of royal family living life of luxury. Why do we have to pay for them. it's as bad as paying for the unwanted tv licence fee when people are struggling with money from day to day. TMAN, NOTTINGHAM
to call this country a democracy is a joke. Democracy died in 1979 when Thatcher took over. One of the fi rst things out of her mouth was, "We dont work for you, you work for us". Thatcher began the destruction of this country. Mr R Hamilton London
re sarah jane: government only getting involved in Ukraine in order 2 keep gas prices dwn. MORALS
wot really is the point of the Liberal Demoprats. they will do wotever it takes 2 stay in power! they are just lapdogs & sad. would u trust em? i sure as hell wont. had there day & blown it big time bye bye libs. UKIP
Next year u will av chance 2 get cam & con out but u wont. fuels cum down plus tax cuts, pension rises, votes on eu. u will 4get all ur past grief. SUNDANCE
Cameron cant give us a referendum on Europe because Clegg n Lib Dems wont let him, they vetoed it when the Tories put it to parliament. Diz
When driving on a motorway have you noticed how the HGV's indicate and then pull out without much notice? this is why many motorists stay in the third lane, lets show each other a bit of respect and drive safely. CHINNA MOSHA
Ive been reading the txts for a long time now and it seems the british public have had more than enough of whats goin on! We are treated with contempt. Kirky
Charles II was nicknamed "The Black Boy". Could any of you Text Maniacs tell me why? Your help with this would be very much appreciated. Treacledab
Maybe just me, but i fi nd Cara Delevingne quite SCARY looking??! anon
fed up of neighbours leylandii casting shadows over my property. They wont be laughing next year, i've planted a row of bonsa
TEXT OF THE DAY
Just read about a great white shark seen off the coast. That gives me an idea. I'm getting the mother-in-law a nice bright surf board for her birthday.Swamp Duck
Document DAISTA0020140313ea3d0004f
