{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1652"}
____
TV&Showbiz
MoS DIARY: Heartbreak for Uma as she calls off engagement
MAIL ON SUNDAY   
401 words
20 April 2014
01:24
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Actress Uma Thurman and her multi-millionaire fiance Arki Busson have split up, I can reveal.
The New York-based Kill Bill star and hedge-fund boss Arki have struggled to make their long-distance relationship work and have called off their engagement.
‘Uma and Arki were due to attend a gala together on April 8, but Uma showed up without her engagement ring or her fiance,’ says a source.
‘Arki was scheduled to attend and it seemed clear there was only one reason why he didn’t show – because  he and Uma are no longer an item.’
Another source adds: ‘Uma lives  in New York while Arki lives in London. He has been out and about without Uma since October when he went to a Halloween party alone.
They have been at one or two events together, like Harvey Weinstein’s pre-Bafta party in February, but on that occasion they looked miserable.’
This is the second time Uma, 43,  has broken off an engagement with French-born tycoon since they began dating in 2007.
In 2009 she returned an eight-carat diamond ring to him a year after he first proposed.
She took him back in 2011, and by 2012 they were engaged again, with Uma pregnant with their first child, Rosalind. She has not been seen without her engagement ring since – until now.
Uma has two children from her  earlier marriage to actor Ethan Hawke. Arki, 51, has two sons from a relationship with supermodel Elle Macpherson.
Arki’s spokesman was unavailable  for comment, while a spokesman for Uma declined  to comment.
Most people need only provide proof of identity and a reference to get a visa before starting a job in America – but Harry Potter star Daniel Radcliffe had to produce his collection of newspaper cuttings.
The 24-year-old is starring in the dark comedy The Cripple of Inishmaan on Broadway, but he almost didn’t make it on stage thanks to US immigration officials.
‘For Daniel to get his visa, it had to be proved that no American performer could act in the role as well as him,’ says a friend of the star.
‘It was actually his brilliant reviews from the London version of the play which helped persuade officials there was no one better for the job.’
Document DAMONL0020140420ea4k0002u
