{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1746"}
____
  
News
JAMAICAN KILLER WE CAN'T DEPORT BECAUSE HE'S GAY; ILLEGAL MIGRANT SUDDENLY REMEMBERS HE IS HOMOSEXUAL TO AVOID BEING KICKED OUT
BY REBECCA CAMBER AND DANIEL MARTIN   
779 words
17 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
4
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
AN illegal immigrant who stabbed a 15-year-old schoolboy to death less than a year after arriving in Britain cannot be deported because he claims to be gay, judges ruled yesterday.
The 29-year-old Jamaican was jailed for life aged 16 when he and another schoolboy knifed Abdul Maye to death over a £10 debt outside his school in east London.
A judge at the Old Bailey ordered that he be kicked out of Britain once he had served a minimum of eight years.
Judge Paul Focke told the thug, who cannot not be named for legal reasons: 'You are a Jamaican national and within months of coming to this country you committed murder.
'I am of the view that your continued presence in this country will be detrimental to its citizens.'
But yesterday, the Court of Appeal ruled that he could not be sent back to Jamaica because he could face degrading treatment for being homosexual that would breach his human rights.
In an extraordinary judgment which has provoked outrage, Lord Justice Kay said he believed his mother's evidence that he was gay - even though the Home Office said he 'had made no mention of it' until his first appeal against deportation failed.
The decision is expected to infuriate Home Secretary Theresa May, who has battled to send him home since he was released from prison in 2012.
Douglas Carswell, Tory MP for Clacton, said: 'Most people would think this is outrageous. It's a gross distortion of the concept of justice.
'Until we have freed ourselves from the European Convention on Human Rights, these sorts of basket-case decisions will carry on happening thick and fast.'
Peter Bone, Tory MP for Wellingborough, said: 'Whether or not this man is sent back should be entirely at the discretion of British courts.
'The idea that his human rights should have any impact whatever when he has come in to this country illegally in the first place to murder someone is absurd.
'When it comes to murderers, courts should have the absolute right to sentence people for as long as they want, or to send them home immediately after.'
The killer, referred to only as JR, arrived in the UK in December 2000 at the age of 15 on a temporary visa to visit his mother.
An application for leave to stay longer was refused, but the yob remained in the country anyway.
And less than a year later he and a 14-year-old stabbed a fellow schoolboy to 'save face' after he humiliated them by refusing to pay a £10 debt - a payment which he owed them for cannabis.
The Old Bailey heard JR, who only has an IQ of 63 - putting him in the lowest two per cent of the population - knifed Abdul in front of his horrified classmates outside Little Ilford Comprehensive School in Manor Park after the victim had just finished a mock GCSE exam on December 7, 2001.
The victim, whose family fled to Britain from the civil war in Somalia in 1995, died shortly afterwards in hospital.
In the weeks beforehand, the schoolboys had threatened to 'chop' or 'stab' the victim and the Jamaican sprayed him and a friend with CS gas.
The pair were jailed for life in September 2002 and told to serve a minimum of eight years and two months. But this was reduced on appeal to six years and two months with the deportation recommendation set aside.
However, the Secretary of State ordered JR's deportation in 2009.
When his first appeal failed, the killer submitted a fresh bid against deportation in April 2012 arguing for the first time that he was gay.
Catherine Rowlands, acting for the Secretary of State, argued that JR's sudden claim of homosexuality after ten years in jail should have been rejected 'on credibility grounds' as 'he had made no mention of it' during the previous asylum application.
She argued that 'the claim of homosexuality was contrived and brought as a last resort to avoid deportation'.
But the Court of Appeal heard compelling evidence from his mother who said she 'knew all along' that her son was gay and his 'late disclosure' was 'prompted by societal attitudes, particularly that of Jamaicans towards gays'.
JR was released in June 2012 and since then the matter has been going through the courts, but yesterday three judges at the Court of Appeal blocked the Government's final attempt to have him deported.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140416ea4h00012
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:33
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
