{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2634"}
____
News
London teenager locked up for importing Uzi machine gun and 'arsenal' of other weapons from US disguised as ornamental OWLS
EMMA GLANFIELD   
772 words
19 March 2014
10:08
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Reza Khalilzada bought IWI.22 calibre Uzi machine gun and ammunition
* Police found nunchucks, CS gas, knives and drugs during search of home
* The 18-year-old was found guilty of possessing prohibited weapons
* He told officers he had been importing the weapons from US 'for money'
* Khalilzada was sentenced to six years behind bars at Isleworth Court
A teenager who bought a machine gun and 187 rounds of ammunition and imported them from the US disguised as ornamental owls has been locked up.
Reza Khalilzada, a Dutch national, ordered the Uzi machine gun from the United States but was caught when his parcel was intercepted by customs officials on August 8 last year.
The package's label stated that it contained a ceramic dish and an ornament featuring three ceramic owls sitting on a log but x-rays revealed that in fact it held the lethal IWI.22 calibre UZI machine gun and 187 rounds of ammunition.
Following the discovery, US Homeland Security notified Metropolitan Police and officers from the Met’s Central Task Force carried out a search of his address – where he lived with his parents and three siblings.
During the raid of the family home in Pinner, Middlesex, on August 14 last year, officers uncovered the barrel of an AK-47 rifle under his mattress - which is also believed to have been imported from the US.
When detectives questioned Khalilzada about the machine gun, he told police he had responded to a website advert offering money to provide a ‘drop-off address’ for an unknown package, because he was not doing well at college and wanted a job.
During the search of his bedroom, officers also found a rucksack containing nunchucks, CS gas, a lock knife, lighter fluid, aerosol cans, a lighter, a catapault and ball bearings, a scarf and bandana, balaclavas, gloves, field dressing for wounds and bandage tape, amphetamines, ecstasy and four CDs containing images and videos of Khalilzada's family.
Detectives also seized ear defenders, three computers and a number of USB memory sticks, £600 in cash and several bank cards.
Khalilzada, 18, was charged with firearms offences on August 15 last year. However, the next day his parents reported that another package - also from the US - had been delivered for him.
It contained various parts of an assault rifle which, when combined with the AK-47  rifle barrel found under the mattress, created a fully functional, automatic assault rifle with the potential to kill. The ammunition seized at the US border also fitted this rifle.
Examinations of Khalilzada’s computer showed it was heavily encrypted but the teenager failed  to supply police with a password, which he claims he has forgotten.
He admitted two counts of possession of a prohibited weapon (AK-74 barrel and CS gas), and two counts of possession of a controlled drug (MDMA and amphetamine) and was found guilty of another weapons charge and customs charges at Isleworth Crown Court. He was sentenced to six years behind bars.
Detective Inspector Rob Murray, of the Met’s Central Task Force, said: ‘Khalilzada's arsenal contained everything one person would need to potentially kill and seriously injure a lot of people.
‘With the assistance of our partners in the United States, we've taken these weapons off the streets and out of criminal hands, where they could have potentially resulted in very serious consequences.
‘I hope this case and the sentence acts as a deterrent to anyone thinking of being involved in the illegal purchase or distribution of firearms and ammunition.’
Matthew Etre, of the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement Homeland Security Investigations Attaché in London, said: ‘This case is an example of Homeland Security Investigations' commitment to investigate and help disrupt the flow of weapons and sensitive technologies illegally exported from the United States.’
UZI MACHINES GUNS: THE FACTS
The Uzi submachine gun was developed in Israel by designer Uziel Gal in 1948.
It was one of the first weapons to use a telescoping bolt design in which the pistol grip housed the ammunition clip making it a shorter weapon and easier to balance in one hand.
The IWI.22 calibre UZI machine has 20-round.22 LR magazines.
It measures around 18.5 inches in length and can fire 600 rounds per minute. It has a range of 394 feet and has a muzzle velocity of 1,312 feet per second.
It weighs around 7.72lbs when empty and has a barrel length of 10.24 inches.
Document DAMONL0020140319ea3j002jr
