{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"942"}
____
  
Features
PLATELL'S PEOPLE
BY AMANDA PLATELL   
1,429 words
3 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
19
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Cancel the confetti. Put away the bunting. Cressida and Harry have broken it off, crushing mounting hopes of another Royal Wedding. Some speculated it was because Cressie was too needy. Others said the couple rowed over money. But friends say that overshadowing it all was Harry's first love, Chelsy Davy, whose own flourishing new relationship made him uneasy about his feelings.Me? I reckon it wasn't Chelsy who was the spectre at the royal romantic feast, but Kate. Surely it's no coincidence that the split came so soon after two weeks of wall-to-wall coverage of Kate, William and baby George's tour of Australia and New Zealand.Kate did a fine job Down Under — the perma-smile, the knee-length middle-aged frocks, the perfectly tousled hair and Dynasty make-up. And, of course, the bonny baby on her hip.Here was the modern-day royal wife at work — as perfect as a Disney princess, and, dare I say it, as bland.
 For Cressie it must have offered a terrifying vision of her future.It's not simply that, as Harry's wife, she would for ever be compared to Kate. Who was the more fashionable, the more dutiful, the better mother?It's that she could see from Kate's example that the 'fairytale' royal existence is anything but. Indeed, for any normal young woman, with her own identity and aspirations, royal life must seem stultifying.Certainly, it would be hard to find two girls more different than Cressie and Kate. From the moment the then Miss Middleton met Prince William at university, all she ever wanted was to be his wife — encouraged onwards by her socially ambitious mother, Carole. Kate never held down a proper full-time job; never lived anywhere except in her parents' homes; never sought financial or emotional independence. Cressie, on the other hand, left dance college and immediately got a £20,000 job with a theatre marketing company in Soho to be self-sufficient. She moved into a modest flat in Shepherd's Bush, which she rents with a friend. And she still harbours dreams of dancing professionally — dreams that would have become impossible if she'd married into the Firm. Not for Cressie a life of walking two steps behind her Prince, fawning over his every word, traipsing around cutting ribbons and shaking hands with strangers. She's far more at home in old jeans and a pair of Converse trainers than in Alexander McQueen couture and L.?K. Bennett heels.No, far from being too needy for Harry, I suspect Cressie wasn't nearly needy enough. And frankly, what modern woman could blame her?--* The three parties' response to Ukip's lead in the European elections is to brand its supporters racist. When will they understand that decent hard-working Brits are legitimately concerned about the uncontrolled numbers of immigrants who take their jobs, fill their schools with non-English speaking children, lengthen waiting times on the NHS and claim benefits having never put a penny into the system? They're not racists but realists.* A poll says people think Nick Clegg is not only the most handsome party leader, but also the most likely to be a good cook. Cleggy in a pinny stirring the mung beans? Sorry, it's not an image that sets my heart racing.* The man who threw an egg at Nigel Farage has been arrested on suspicion of assault. Yet none of the care workers who slapped, abused and humiliated their elderly patients at the Old Deanery care home have been charged. Surely hitting an old woman with dementia is a far greater crime than egging a pompous politician.--Sporting a strange new hairstyle apparently resulting from a second hair transplant, Gordon Ramsay was said to be copying a look favoured by his pal David Beckham. Really? Looked far more like Ricky Gervais's TV character Derek to me — an unattractive halfwit with little grasp of reality, who's got audiences switching off in droves. Yup, that's Gordon.--A SMALL COMFORT FOR PEACHES' BOYSLike most people hooked on drugs, Peaches Geldof was a master of concealment. On the surface, and no doubt in her troubled heart, she was a devoted mother and wife. Even her obsession with 'attachment parenting', which often led to periods of time away from her husband, may have been part of her camouflage.Apparently, no one close to her knew she was visiting a rehab clinic in the weeks before her death to collect methadone, which helps users get off heroin.Tragic though her death was for all those who loved her, and especially her two young sons, I hope they will take some comfort from knowing that to the very end, this adoring mother was trying to get clean. For them.--After the shock announcement that Paxo's leaving Newsnight, the bookies are speculating as to who will be his replacement.Please let it be Radio 4's PM presenter Eddie Mair. If they give the top job to Kirsty Wark, Emily Maitlis or Laura Kuenssberg, expect Newslight not Newsnight — and a stampede of the few loyal viewers it has left.--Johnny Depp speaks warmly of his former partner of 14 years, Vanessa Paradis, whom he dumped for the bisexual 28-year-old actress Amber Heard (no, sorry, we haven't). 'I love her and she loves me, and she's a great mummy,' says Depp. For which, read: 'She takes care of the kids while I go off and wallow in my midlife crisis.'--VICTIMS HAVE A LIFE SENTENCEAmong the thousands of tributes to devoted teacher Ann Maguire was one from Frances Lawrence, whose husband Philip was killed 18 years ago trying to protect a pupil from a knife gang.'By now perhaps I should have learnt words of comfort for you,' she wrote, 'but I have learnt only that there are no words. I send all my love and my prayers on the cruel journey that you are forced to begin.'And nothing could be more cruel than to learn, as Mrs Lawrence did this week, that the man who murdered her husband will be free in days, despite being jailed 'indefinitely' for the killing. The only life sentences served now are by the loved ones of the victims.--* Heston Blumenthal's Dinner has been named one of the top 10 restaurants in the world, despite having to close earlier this year due to an outbreak of a vomiting bug. If this is the best, I dread to think what goes on in the worst.--HUHNE GOT OFF LIGHTLYHow can it be fair that Constance Briscoe, the female judge who aided and abetted Vicky Pryce in her vendetta against her husband Chris Huhne, was given a 16-month jail sentence — twice what either of the main culprits got. All three of them lied. All three were in contempt of court. And all three betrayed their positions of authority in a bid to protect themsleves. Yet Briscoe got far harsher treatement. Still, I expect all is not lost for her. If Huhne's experience is anything to go by, she'll walk straight out of jail into a job as a columnist for The Guardian.--Despair as George Clooney finally settles down with his high-flying human rights lawyer Amal Alamuddin — and surprise, too. There was silly me thinking he was holding out for a Dorothy!--CLIFFORD'S OTHER BETRAYALAs Max Clifford contemplates his eight-year jail sentence, we should spare a thought for the two other women he so brutally betrayed — his first wife and daughter.The PR guru admitted in court to being serially unfaithful to his wife of 33 years, Elizabeth, who died in 2003. His idyllic family life provided the sexual predator with the perfect cover.But even more loathsome was the way he used his disabled daughter, Louise, now 42, to foster the impression he was a devoted father who worked tirelessly for charities that helped those like her. Despicable.--Jeremy Clarkson is in hot water over using the N-word (or not) — just the latest in a long line of gaffes from a man who used to be the nation's most treasured 'blokes' bloke'.  Surely it's no coincidence that since he's started spending less time with his clever and calm wife Frances and rather more with a younger blonde assistant, his ego has expanded even faster than his waistline. Go home Jeremy, and grow up.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140502ea530000i
