{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"24"}
____
TV&Showbiz
Mother nurture: Billie Piper enjoys quality family time with young son in North London
DAILY MAIL REPORTER   
310 words
24 March 2014
15:40
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
She may be a successful actress, but Billie Piper refuses to let her career come before her family.
The 31 year-old brunette star was spotted out in London's Hampstead on Monday with her two year-old son, Eugene Pip.
Together, the pair enjoyed a cute day of bonding as they shared a set of scooters on the border of Hampstead Heath.
Wearing a white dress with leather ankle boots, Billie proved that she is clearly a trendy mother.
With her hair worn up into a retro double bun, she accessorised with a heavy black coat and a mini rucksack - no doubt packed with toddler essentials.
Of course, for her latest role in the Showtime horror series Penny Dreadful, Billie’s attire was far different.
The actress plays Brona Croft, an Irish immigrant seeking to escape her dark past in Victorian London; as the origin stories of such classic literary characters as Victor Frankenstein, Frankenstein's monster; Dorian Gray and Count Dracula are regaled in the Showtime TV show.
The eight-part series was written and executive produced by Skyfall duo John Logan and Sam Mendes in their first collaboration for television, with the ensemble cast including Josh Hartnett, Eva Green, Timothy Dalton, Harry Treadaway and Rory Kinnear.
Showtime's President of Entertainment, David Nevins, had nothing but praise for Logan and Mendes.
‘John Logan and Sam Mendes are two of the great storytellers of our time,’ Nevins said.
‘The visual spectacle combined with the psychological insight in their reimagining of these iconic literary characters seems totally mesmerising to me. This promises to be a wholly original television show.’
Billie has also been lined up to star in a new Sky Arts project with another Skyfall alumnus, Ben Whishaw.
Document DAMONL0020140324ea3o005mz
