{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"3369"}
____
Top Ukip aide caught in row over 'employing illegal workers' in restaurant
Paul Robins   
366 words
17 May 2014
02:15
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
UKIP has been embarassed again after one of its leaders was caught employing illegal immigrants in his restaurant.
Business spokesman Amjad Bashir was rumbled for hiring the cheap foreign labour his party is campaigning against.
Border officials raided the Manchester eaterie set up by Bashir and his two sons last year and slapped them with a hefty fine.
Nigel Farage
The scandal is the latest in a long line of gaffes to hit the anti-Europe party ahead of next week’s European elections.
It comes after it emerged that Ukip printed anti-European Union leaflets in Germany and has used eastern Europeans to hand out anti-immigration flyers.
Party chiefs were also attacked for using an Irish actor to pose as a jobless British builder in a poster campaign against immigrant workers.
The growing list of cock-ups threatens to torpedo leader Nigel Farage’s hard-fought lead in the polls.
Lib Dem MEP Edward McMillan-Scott said it was further proof that Ukip is a shambles.
“Forget the obvious hypocrisy – employing illegal immigrants is exploitative and against the law,” he said.
“Not only are Ukip whipping up ill-feeling towards immigrants, they are supporting a man who has made money off the backs of illegal workers.”
The Home Office confirmed that seven people were arrested for immigration offences following the raid on the Zouk Tea Bar and Grill in Manchester last year.
Mr Bashir, 61, whose family originally comes from Pakistan, denies any wrongdoing.
Three days after the raid he quit as a director of the company which owns the restaurant.
But he remains a major shareholder in it and continues to oversee the business.
Related articles Sir Ian McKellen says Nigel Farage needs to 'get out more' over his views about gay people Ukip Nigel Farage says over-70s are uncomfortable with homosexuality and gay marriage Oops! Ukip accused of using immigrants to hand out anti-EU leaflets
Yesterday Mr Farage played down the scandal.
He said: “They had an argument and a row with the immigration people which they are appealing.
“I’m not going to prejudge that.”
Document DAICO00020140517ea5h0005l
