{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3735"}
____
Travel
From the Giant's Causeway to Crohy Sea Arch, breathtaking photos of hidden Ireland show Emerald Isle as never before
TRAVELMAIL REPORTER   
444 words
21 May 2014
13:50
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Photographer Gareth Wray has been photographing rural landscapes since he was a child
* Stunning images reveal the hidden beauty of the Emerald Isle, capturing lesser-known destinations
* Locations include Bloody Foreland, Fanad Head and Crohy Sea Arch
The towering Irish cliffs of Moher stand tall over the rippling Atlantic Ocean.
From Giant's Causeway to the rolling hills surrounding Keylemore Abbey, these stunning photographs capture the true beauty of Ireland - across Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
The beautiful images were captured by Gareth Wray, of Strabane, Northern Ireland, who has been photographing rural landscapes since he was a child.
Gareth, 32, said: ‘I decided to capture these images to show members of the public who have never visited Ireland what true beauty it really holds.
‘Amazing and unique beauty can be found in Ireland's famous tourist attractions such as Kylemore Abbey, but I mostly aim for lesser-known overlooked locations such as Bloody Foreland, Fanad Head and Crohy Sea Arch - all in County Donegal.
‘Nature is at its most beautiful when untouched and undeveloped. I want my pictures to show the true Ireland - undisturbed by modernism.’
For Gareth, a lot of hard work and dedication goes into every image.
Travelling all across Ireland, he has visited locations such as County Donegal, Cork, County Tyrone, County Clare, Limerick, County Antrim, Galway, County Mayo and County Fermanagh in order to capture his perfect shots.
‘I spend a lot of time researching different locations and weather charts, so I can get the perfect pictures that are unique to my personal style of photography,’ Gareth said.
‘I also try to find new points of view and different skies from other photographers, this normally means me climbing cliff faces or standing on top of ruined buildings.
‘For example while capturing the Crohy Head Sea Arch, in County Donegal I had to use a rope to lower myself down a large rock face as it was the only way I could get to the shore below.
‘The most physically demanding image to capture has to be Fanad Head Lighthouse in County Donegal. 
‘This image was so difficult due to extremely steep and wet cliff faces surrounding the point I needed to climb.’
The beautiful photographs have caught the eye of many, including Irish Immigrants that love and miss the Emerald Isle.
Gareth added: ‘A large portion of my followers is made up from Irish immigrants; they often say the photographs give them a sense of home sickness making them want to return to Ireland.’
Document DAMONL0020140521ea5l005bu
