{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2180"}
____
  
Features
PLATELL'S PEOPLE
BY AMANDA PLATELL   
1,504 words
8 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
19
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
LET PRESS FIGHT CORRUPT COPSTwenty-one years on, not a single police officer has been held to account over the Met's shameful handling of Stephen Lawrence's murder.We now know that small sections of an otherwise decent police force were not only  racist but also corrupt, choosing to protect each others' backs rather than fight for the victims of crime. When the police and the justice system failed, it was the Daily Mail, with its courageous campaign, which took up the fight for Stephen and his family.Yet under Lord Leveson's proposals for reform of the Press, the police whistleblowers whose information was so vital to the Mail's campaign would be banned from talking to journalists.No police force will ever be free of corrupt cops, but unless we have every means  at our disposal to expose them — including, vitally, an unfettered press — nothing will change.  --Research shows that if you lose your temper you risk a heart attack even two hours after calming down.
 Gordon Ramsay (right) must have an ambulance permanently parked outside all  his restaurants.--From the moment Prince William became engaged to Kate Middleton, he did everything he could to ensure they would have as normal a life as possible. And who can blame him?After living his childhood years forever in the public eye, and suffering the death of his mother, he was determined to do things differently when it came to his own family.When they were first married, William and Kate demanded — and were given — privacy and the right to live, as far as possible, like any other young couple.We admired the way they made their home a modest farmhouse in Anglesey. And how, while he was out working as an RAF helicopter pilot, she would be seen at the local supermarket alongside other housewives.It seemed so normal, and such a refreshing change from the self-indulgent grandeur of Prince Charles with his 150 flunkeys.They started off saying there was to be no nanny, for example, as they would be hands-on (they are now employing one full-time).Which makes it all the more disappointing that this apparently 'ordinary' young couple have decided to jet off to the Maldives on a second honeymoon, leaving behind baby George just eight months after his birth.For this is no ordinary holiday. Kate and William flew first class — with around six taxpayer-funded protection officers — to the Maldivian capital Malé, and went straight to the airport's VIP suite before taking a private hydroplane to five-star luxury at the Cheval Blanc Randheli hotel on the atoll of Noonu.I understand the couple will also spend a romantic night away from George during their New Zealand tour. They'll stay at a fabulously luxurious lakeside lodge, leaving the infant Prince with their travelling nanny. How grand can a couple who say they love the simple life get? And how can any new mother swan off for some 'me time' on a five-star sunlounger, leaving her baby behind? It's not as if Kate, who has never had a proper job, is deprived of holidays. Her tan can hardly have faded since returning from Mustique last month. As for William, who also doesn't now have a proper job, he's breaking off from his ten-week agriculture course at Cambridge University which goes on until the end of the month!Couldn't the couple have waited for some sun until their Australian tour next month?My concern is that the grounded couple we came to admire in Anglesey are all-too swiftly becoming a pair of high-handed, high-living royals in the Prince Charles mode.Swanning off at a whim on holidays partly funded by taxpayers, whose disposable income seems to shrink every month, is not the best way of enhancing their image. At this rate Kate and William could end up demonstrating not the hard-working qualities of the Queen and Prince Philip, but the worst excesses of Princess Margaret and Prince Andrew.--Women have six-and-a-half hours free time each day, says a new report. It was clearly written by men — only they could consider hoovering, cooking, ironing and tidying up after them to be leisure activities.--* With a personal  fortune of tens of millions, mostly gained through exploiting his experience as a war monger — sorry, peace broker — Tony Blair will be giving a large donation to the near-bankrupted Labour Party.What a shame he isn't giving some of his ill-gotten gains to Dr David Kelly's family or to help the families of the men who died in his wars or who lost limbs, not to mention the  victims of those IRA murderers given Get Out Of Jail Free cards by this cynical, amoral, greedy man.   * A new poll says people describe Nick Clegg as a 'spineless liar', David Cameron as 'posh and out of touch' and Ed Miliband as a 'weak idiot'. At best, say voters, Red Ed's  'trying'. Yes, very  trying indeed. * Attacking failing teachers, Vince Cable says they let pupils down as they know 'absolutely nothing about the world of work'. A bit rich coming from a man whose own boss, Nick Clegg, has never had a job outside politics. * Criticism of Speaker Bercow's 12-day, £41,884 jolly to Burma and New Zealand is unfair. Have some pity on the poor soul. How else can he escape his harridan of a wife Sally?--* As Ukraine trembled on the precipice of civil war, our PM posted a selfie of himself on the phone in Number 10 gazing resolutely into the distance. He tweeted: 'I've been speaking to @BarackObama  about the situation in Ukraine.' Silly sod, he looked like he was ordering a pizza.  * As some back Ukraine's desire  to turn west and join the EU, has anyone spared a thought as to how we will absorb the immigrants from its 45 million population? By the way, what is 'skinny latte to go' in Ukrainian? * How dare critics say Britain  has done nothing to punish the Russians over their invasion of  Crimea — we cancelled Prince Edward's visit to the Sochi Paralympic Games. That'll teach the dastardly Putin! --As flood victims returned to their destroyed homes and livelihoods, trust-me-Dave's promise that money was no object to help them must have rung very hollow indeed. Especially when they learnt we are giving £1?billion in aid to 'victims' in Ukraine. Meanwhile, 500 people have formed a volunteer army to help with the clear-up, ripping out carpets and emptying freezers full of rotting food in the homes of strangers. There are still many decent people in this country.--PRUNELLA'S PLIGHTTimothy West's tender account of his wife Prunella Scales's 'mild Alzheimer's' was not just loving, it was also informative. This disease can be a rapid descent into despair, not only for sufferers but their families, too. The person they loved is gone and replaced with the shell of a human being who cannot even remember their name. Some people with the disease suffer mood swings or depression and even become violent.But for others, like Prunella Scales, it is a more gentle slope into forgetfulness. This is what it has been like for  my mum, who also has Alzheimer's. So what if Mum repeats herself or asks for a gin and tonic despite being teetotal. She is still there, and we love her all the same. She can make us laugh and reminisce just as we always have done with her.By talking about Alzheimer's so honestly, Timothy West showed us that the disease, though often devastating, is not always so terrible.--GIVE YOUR DOSH, POSHJ.K. Rowling, Jemima Khan and Victoria Beckham (left) have launched a campaign to put pressure on the British government to help sexually abused children in Syria and in other war zones. A worthy cause indeed, but couldn't these three women, among the wealthiest in the country, just put their hands in their Louis Vuitton purses?--The live televising of the Oscar Pistorius murder trial was justified on the grounds that it offered transparency and openness during a deeply controversial court case.When we saw the accused in court this week sobbing with his head in his hands, grasping his rosary beads as he heard a witness describe his girlfriend's dying moments — and how Pistorius had prayed to God for her to live — it didn't look like transparency, but stage-managed manipulation straight  out of the O.J. Simpson handbook.--Lawmakers are considering making non-violent 'psychological abuse' within a relationship a criminal offence punishable by law. Such 'abuse' would include a spouse telling you they didn't like what you were wearing. Given my own history of fashion disasters, half my ex-boyfriends would be in Belmarsh right now.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140307ea380000y
