{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1281"}
____
RightMinds
TOM UTLEY: Call me loopy but there's something mystical about a UK passport. Flogging them to oligarchs just feels tawdry
TOM UTLEY   
1,376 words
28 February 2014
01:08
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Sotheby's, Moscow, some time in the near future: ‘Next we come to lot number 132. A lovely little item, this one, which we’re selling on the instructions of Her Majesty’s Government in London.
‘Just the thing to brighten up the lives of the missus and the little ones, and to shake off those infuriating fraud investigators.
‘Now, who will start the bidding for a guaranteed fast-track to permanent residency rights in the UK, with the promise of British citizenship and passports for all the family to follow? Do I hear £2.5  million sterling? That’s 150 million roubles to you, sir …’
Of course, this is pure fantasy — for the moment. But I can’t have been the only one who was astonished to read that something like it could soon become a reality.
Proposals from the Home Office’s official immigration advisers aim to reform the so-called investor route by which millionaires can buy indefinite leave to remain in these islands. I am astonished and more than a little appalled.
Bonkers
I must confess that it had passed me by (or, more likely, I’d just forgotten) that such a scheme existed. But it seems we’ve been selling these visas, which can lead automatically to full citizenship for those who want it, ever since John Major’s administration approved the idea in 1994.
Let me say at once that I can well understand why the Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) believes the system needs changing. For the deal as it stands appears to be extraordinarily generous to the non-EU plutocrats who take advantage of it, while offering much less to the British taxpayer than it surely could.
Indeed, it is misleading to suggest the visas cost these Russian oligarchs and Chinese zillionaires a penny, since all they are required to do is invest a minimum £1 million in UK Treasury bonds — and since we have to shell out interest on these loans, there’s a sense in which we are paying them to enjoy what Britain has to offer.
Under the current rules, that £1 million will secure them permanent residency after five years, when they will be free to sell their gilts. But if they want to speed things up a bit, £5  million will allow them to stay indefinitely after three years and £10      million after only two.
Then it’s just a 12-month wait until they become eligible for naturalisation as British citizens, when they have to take a bonkers test, answering such questions as: ‘There is no place in British society for extremism or intolerance — true or false?’ (Yes, that is one of the practice questions for the official Life In The UK Test — unless I’ve fallen victim to an internet hoax).
From then until their dying day, they and their families can enjoy all the blessings bestowed upon us native Brits at birth, such as the rule of law, free and fair elections, excellent schools (for those who can afford them), a free Press (well, comparatively so, for the moment), wonderful shops and restaurants, uncorrupt officials, free healthcare, honest(ish) politicians, lovely weather, clean, uncrowded trains … All right, perhaps I’m overselling it a bit.
Enough to say that British citizenship still has an awful lot of attractions to your average Russian, Chinese or Kazakhstani billionaire — particularly if things are getting hot for him at home.
So no wonder MAC chairman Sir David Metcalf believes we could squeeze more out of them in return for admitting them to Shakespeare’s ‘happy breed of men’, awarding them Cecil Rhodes’s ‘first prize in the lottery of life’ and allowing them to bag all our best houses and clog up the traffic with their stretch limos.
Yes, they contribute something to our economy by buying expensive goods and the priciest seats at the Royal Opera House.
Some of the 1,647 who have taken advantage of the scheme since 2008, when the Government belatedly started counting them, may even pay taxes like you and me — though I suspect most wouldn’t dream of doing anything so silly and have accountants sharp enough to avoid the necessity.
Corruption
But as Sir David says, they would surely be prepared to pay more for the opportunity to join the ranks of the Queen’s subjects. Hence his proposal that not only should we double the £1  million minimum investment required, which hasn’t been raised since the scheme began 20 years ago.
He suggests we should also test the market by auctioning off 100 or so visas, with a reserve price of perhaps £2.5  million.
Under his plan, the first £2  million of the proceeds would have to be invested in gilts, infrastructure bonds or venture capital, while the surplus would go into a fund for good causes.
All right, the sale he proposes wouldn’t be quite as I described in my opening paragraphs. Instead, he would invite applicants to send in sealed bids, without ever revealing how much the winner paid (which would surely offer huge scope for corruption, while offering m’learned friends openings for lucrative legal challenges).
But the effect would be precisely the same. We would be selling British nationality for hard cash. And the idea of it fills me with distaste.
Yes, I know we’re hideously in debt. And I can see the force of the argument that since we throw open our borders to all and sundry from the EU (just look at yesterday’s release of rocketing migration figures), a few billionaires from outside it won’t make much difference. So why not milk them?
But in my book, treating nationality as a saleable commodity, to be auctioned to the highest bidder, is tacky, demeaning and just plain wrong. Quite as wrong, in fact, as selling the right to vote (which is included in the package).
This sort of thing may be thought all right in banana republics or countries such as Malta, which offers a full EU passport for £500,000 to anyone prepared to live there for a year. But surely it is far beneath the dignity of the United Kingdom.
At the risk of sounding loopy, I would say there is something almost mystical about nationality. It’s a covenant between us — a bond second in strength only to our family ties.
It is this intangible blessing that gives us a wholly irrational surge of joy when a young woman we’ve never heard of, but who happens to be British, hurtles down the Sochi ice on a tea-tray and wins a gold.
Devalue
Would you feel the same buzz if Lizzy Yarnold had bought her British citizenship at auction? I don’t think I would. It’s an asset beyond price — and trading it for money can only devalue it.
Nor do I think it any part of the business of government to sell official documentation for anything more than an administration fee. Obviously, it’s fine to sell tradable assets, such as oil exploration rights or broadband licences. But you and I are not allowed to sell our British passports. It just feels wrong to me that ministers should feel that they can.
Perhaps, I really should see a shrink, but I thought the DVLA was behaving improperly when it began selling personalised car number-plates for huge mark-ups on the standard registration fee.
It’s a Government agency, for heaven’s sake, employed simply to issue plates and make a note of who owns which vehicle.
I couldn’t help wondering what business it was of a branch of the state bureaucracy to set up as a novelty gift shop. But if that was tawdry, how much more so is the plan to sell British nationality to any Xiaoping or Igor with deep enough pockets?
Meanwhile, what next? An auction of letters from the Attorney General, granting immunity from prosecution to fraudsters and blood-soaked terrorists?
Now, that could be a very nice little earner. But I mustn’t go putting ideas into politicians’ heads.
Document DAMONL0020140228ea2s001uu
