{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1840"}
____
TV&Showbiz
'What the f***, man... what are you doing?' Jon Hamm slams Justin Bieber but says all the star needs is a 'parent or good friend'
AMELIA PROUD   
537 words
22 April 2014
23:13
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Who better to tell sloppy trouser wearing, bad attitude Bieber that he needs to get his act together than the one and only Don Draper?
Okay, so it's not exactly the sharp-suited Mad Men lynchpin but rather his alter-ego, Jon Hamm, but the 43-year-old still knows what he's talking about.
In an interview with Men’s Fitness, the Missouri raised star issued some blistering invective in the direction of the 20-year-old.
Hamm, who once branded Kim Kardashian 'a f***ing idiot,' told the magazine: 'Look at Bieber or whoever. You’re like, ‘What the f***, man? What are you doing? Why?’ There’s no one telling those people no, and it’s a shame.
'... (These people need) a mom or a dad or a really good friend who can say, ‘Hey, s***head!’... You see people in the world and you’re like, "Do you know how a washing machine works? Do you know how to wash a dish?" Life skills are something we’re missing… just s*** you needed to learn in life.'
Bieber was arrested in January for drag racing, DUI and resisting arrest in Miami Beach and is set to go to trial on May 5.
And of course, Justin's jailbird father Jeremy, 38, hasn't got the best reputation for reigning his son in, or for curtailing his own behaviour.
He was even WITH the child star turned bad boy when he was arrested, and it's recently emerged that he was charged with assault in 2002 after allegedly kung-fu kicking a young woman in the face.
And many of Hamm's countrymen feel similarly irked by his progeny.
A petition to have him deported and revoke his green card was even posted at Whitehouse.gov.
'We the people of the United States feel that we are being wrongly represented in the world of pop culture,' it read.
'We would like to see the dangerous, reckless, destructive, and drug abusing, Justin Bieber deported and his green card revoked. He is not only threatening the safety of our people but he is also a terrible influence on our nations youth. We the people would like to remove Justin Bieber from our society.'
More than 270,000 people signed it, forcing the White House to comment.
'Sorry to disappoint, but we won't be commenting on this one, we'll leave it to others to comment on Mr. Bieber's case, but we're glad you care about immigration issues. Because our current system is broken.
'Independent economists say immigration reform will grow our economy and shrink our deficits by almost $1 trillion in the next 20 years. For those of you counting at home, that's 12.5 billion concert tickets - or 100 billion copies of Mr. Bieber's debut album. You better believe it.'
Justin tweeted to his fans on Easter Sunday.
'Learned a lot this past year thru trial & error but that is life. Excited for what's next,' he tweeted.
Document DAMONL0020140422ea4m005xy
