{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"680"}
____
News
Top judge who was soft on foreign criminals has been sacked after it emerged he was living with an illegal immigrant
HARRIET ARKELL   
723 words
10 March 2014
10:51
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Senior Tribunal Judge Richard McKee, 65, shared home with Nigerian
* Fatima Umar, 39, was arrested at his flat in north London earlier this year
* Umar, who assaulted two constables during the arrest, had overstayed visa
* When it emerged Mr McKee had helped her, he had to talk to his bosses
* As a result, he agreed to stand down last month, but will get full pension
* MP Dominic Raab said: 'Those who uphold the law should not be above it'
A senior immigration judge has been forced to quit after his bosses discovered he was living with an illegal immigrant.
Richard McKee, 65, agreed to step down after admitting he was supporting 39-year-old Nigerian woman, Fatima Umar, who had overstayed her visa to the UK.
The judge, a full-time Tribunal Judge of the Upper Tribunal since 2002, quit on 4 February after Umar was arrested at his £410,000 flat in Kilburn, north London. 
As she was arrested, she assaulted two police officers and caused £5,000 damage, it was reported today.
Umar is now serving two eight-week jail terms for the two assaults and causing the damage, the Sun reports, and is expected to be deported when her sentence ends.
According to police records, she was sentenced to 14 weeks in prison three years ago after assaulting Mr McKee, it was reported.
He was one of three senior immigration judges who allowed 26 foreign criminals to stay in Britain because of their 'right to a family life' in just one year, while ruling that only seven be sent home.
Last year, Mr McKee's ground-floor flat was the subject of a police investigation after it was discovered that his home was being used for 'unlawful activities' which he had not told his bosses about.
A spokesman for the Office for Judicial Complaints said at the time: 'The premises of Senior Immigration Judge Richard McKee, of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers, were the subject of a police investigation into its misuse by others for unlawful activities.
'Judge McKee also failed to inform the judicial authorities of these matters. The Lord Chancellor and the Lord Chief Justice concluded that Judge McKee’s actions had fallen short of the standards expected of all judicial office holders and therefore issued him with a reprimand.'
He managed to hold on to his job, but had to stand down after the arrest and assault of the police officers at the beginning of last month led to the discovery that he was helping Umar financially.
A spokesman for the judiciary said:‬ ‪'On 31 January 2014 it was brought to the Chamber President's attention that Upper Tribunal Judge McKee was providing financial support to a person who was alleged to be an immigration offender.
'This was put to Mr McKee who then retired with effect from 4 February.'
The former judge is now likely to receive a full pension of at least £50,000.
Today Tory MP Dominic Raab spoke of his anger at the situation.
He said: 'It beggars belief that a judge tasked with defending our borders has been helping someone who has flouted them, only to walk away with a full pension.
'Those who uphold the law should not be above the law.'
Tribunal Judge McKee, who has so far made no comment on matters leading to his resignation, was called to the Bar in 1991, appointed a part-time Immigration Adjudicator in 2000, and a full-time Immigration Adjudicator in 2002.
DAVID MCKEE: THE JUDGE THE FOREIGN CRIMINALS HOPED TO GET
Between June 2011 and May 2012, Mr McKee, 64, heard 13 cases involving criminals appealing against deportation, and in 11 of them he ruled in favour of the criminal bringing the appeal.
Criminals he allowed to stay included Congolese national Wabi Longange, a failed asylum seeker found guilty of causing the death of a woman passenger by careless driving, and an Australian man, known only by the initials CB, who sexually assaulted a 17-year-old girl he had fostered eight years previously.
He also let Algerian illegal immigrant Amar Chennaoui, 43, stay after he was jailed for two-and-a-half years for unlawful wounding.
Document DAMONL0020140310ea3a003c7
