{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3126"}
____
News
EXCLUSIVE: Moment heartbroken woman conned by globally infamous fraudster, bigamist and fake CIA agent turned the tables on him in a New Jersey parking lot police sting
DONNA ANDERSEN   
2,338 words
24 April 2014
13:43
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* American William Allen Jordan, 48, famous as a fake spy in the UK, arrested Tuesday for the same scam in New Jersey
* Conman was outwitted by his most recent victim, Mischele Lewis, of Florence Township, New Jersey after she lured him to parking lot
* She fell in love with him but became suspicious after he distanced himself when she got pregnant
* She also handed over $1,300 to 'British men' on phone who talked to her in code and said they worked secretly with Jordan for the UK government
* She contacted previous wife who wrote book on him called 'The Bigamist'
* Jordan told her he was childless, when he had 13 kids with 8 women . At one time Jordan had two wives, two fiancés and a girlfriend in the UK 
* He'd also spent time behind bars for molesting girl under the age of 13
* Mischele spent a month playing him at his own game until the police were ready to arrest him 
* 'This needs to end, and it needs to end with me,' Mischele said
This is the moment a woman bravely trapped an infamous conman and bigamist who stole her heart and allegedly scammed her and at least nine other women from both sides of the Atlantic.
WIlliam Allen Jordan, 48, an American who gained worldwide notoriety after he pretended to be a CIA agent so he could defraud vulnerable women looking for love in Britain, thought Mischele Lewis was his next victim.
But the 36-year-old registered nurse and single mom to two kids turned the tables on him in dramatic fashion.
After spending a month playing cat-and-mouse with him, she lured him to the parking lot of a store in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, on Tuesday, where police slapped handcuffs on him in a pre-organized sting.
Jordan was picked up and charged with sexual assault, theft by deception, and impersonating law enforcement, according to the Burlington County, New Jersey, prosecutor's office. Bail was set at $60,000.
'I feel relieved now,' Mischele said. 'I don't have to pretend anymore. I'm trying to be hopeful that this will bring other victims forward.'
Jordan was once married to two women simultaneously in Britain. He told both of them that he was a spy, and had both convinced that the 'other Mrs. Jordan' was not really a wife, but an agent working undercover. 
In 2006, Jordan pleaded guilty to bigamy, obtaining funds by deception, failing to register as a sex offender and possession of a stun gun.
That case drove one of his victims, Mary Turner Thomson, to write an acclaimed book on her ordeal. In it she detailed a parade of women who had contacted her after falling for Jordan's charms.
He was also featured in numerous TV documentaries on the worst villains alive. The Investigation Discovery channel will run another show in the fall featuring Jordan.
After serving two and a half years in a British prison, Jordan was released and deported back to his home in New Jersey, where he allegedly started the scam all over again.
When Mischele, who lives in Florence Township, New Jersey, learned to her horror that her beau was not who he said he was, she went to the police.
Mischele met Jordan online in January 2013. According to Mischele, Jordan said his true name was Guillaume, which was French for William. But he hated the name, so he went by 'Liam Allen'.
Jordan readily admitted to Mischele that he was born in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. But he told her that at age two and a half, he was sent to live with relatives who were professors at Oxford University. 
Speaking with a British accent, Jordan said he, himself, attended Oxford, and later joined the British military. Then, because he was skilled, cunning, smart, and flew helicopters, Jordan said he was offered a job with the UK Ministry of Defence. 
He lived all around the world, so he had never married and never had children, he told her. Eventually he left that job and returned to New Jersey, renewing contact with the parents who had sent him away as a toddler.
Jordan and Mischele corresponded by email for a few weeks, and then met in person at a mall.
'We sat on a bench, we talked, the conversation flowed wonderfully,' Mischele said. 'We would laugh; he was funny. He would reach out and caress my hand or leg — it was affectionate, not creepy.'
'Time completely flew by. We parted ways, and agreed that we would make time for each other really soon.'
Two months into their involvement, Jordan told Mischele that he needed to talk to her. 'I thought he would tell me that he was married,' Mischele said.
They met at the Cherry Hill Mall. Jordan said that although he did own a medical records company, as he had previously told her, he also still worked for the British government.
'He said he escorts foreign dignitaries and their families from place to place,' Mischele related. 'He was a glorified bodyguard, working between D.C. and New York. Sometimes he would fly helicopters and small airplanes.'
Mischele tried to keep an open mind, but had many, many questions about her beau's work. 'I wrote out all the questions,' Mischele related. 'We sat down one day, and discussed them all.'
In May 2013, Jordan told Mischele that if they wanted to be together, she would need a to get a security clearance. Once she received her clearance, she would be provided with a secure telephone, so she could contact him whenever she wanted.
By this time Mischele was in love, so she agreed. Jordan told her that she would be contacted.
Mischele received a text from a Washington, D.C. phone number. The sender identified himself as Tom Chalmers from Five Star Realty. He was inquiring about her interest in an Allen Tudor.
Mischele was confused, but then realized that it was the beginning of the security clearance process, and Chalmers was texting in code. She quickly figured out how to reply in the same code. 
The first time Mischele spoke to Chalmers on the phone, she was asked to provide a 'voice digital fingerprint.' 
'I called on the phone and heard beeps and blips,' Mischele said. 'I had to say my name for the voice recognition software. I said my name three times so the computer could learn my name.'
Mischele was told that the voice digital fingerprint was accepted, so she and Chalmers could speak over a secure line.
Chalmers sounded like an older man with a British accent. He asked Mischele a multitude of personal questions — her name, social security number, where she lived, and about her family members.
Chalmers said there would be a series of tests.
'They would always tell me there's a reason for anything,' Mischele related. 'At any given time, something could not be true. It may be a test, to see if I could be depended on.'
'Tom said this was not just for Jordan, but his whole team. If he got compromised, it would hurt the whole team.'
Chalmers also told Mischele she would need to do a series of financial transfers to prove her worthiness. So over 10 days in June, Mischele made multiple transfers of $200 or $300, adding up to $1,300.
Chalmers promised all the money would be returned, including $700 Mischele had previously loaned to Jordan.
Mischele's security clearance application was then handed off to another operator called Marcus — Mischele never got a last name — who sounded much younger than Chalmers.
One night Marcus called Mischele at 4 a.m., claiming that was when they could talk without being recorded. 
Marcus revealed to Mischele the real reason why her boyfriend had stopped working for the British government years earlier: Jordan flew drones, and his job was to kill terrorists. For one particular assignment, the targeted terrorist was surrounded by innocent women and children who also would have died. Jordan refused the kill order, so he was dismissed from his job.
All through the summer of 2013, Mischele was contacted by Chalmers and Marcus. But once September arrived, she never heard from them again, even though the security process wasn't complete.
According to Mischele, Jordan said, 'I'm not supposed to tell you this, but it can be part of the test, to see how you handle being out of touch.'
Mischele's reaction was overwhelming stress. She loved Jordan, but his story didn't always make sense, and sometimes he disappeared for days.
'Emotionally I was pulled in so many directions,' Mischele said. 'I was feeling deep inside like atoms were bouncing off each other. But I was shoving it down. I couldn't lose it in front of my kids.'
In October, Mischele and Jordan started talking about having kids together. 
'I wanted to give him a biological person who belonged with him, for the rest of his life he could claim as his own,' Mischele said. 'He wasn't close with his parents and siblings. He played on my nurturing instincts.'
Jordan celebrated Thanksgiving with Mischele's family. 'He said had never had an American Thanksgiving, so my family went all out,' she said.
Shortly after that, on December 8, 2013, Jordan asked for Mischele's hand in marriage.
'I never knew what a soul mate was until I met you,' Jordan said, claimed Mischele. 'Your family is wonderful; your kids are wonderful.'
Jordan promised to spend Christmas Eve with Mischele and her kids, but didn't show up. He promised to be there Christmas Day, but again didn't show up. Mischele's family was totally disappointed. 
Jordan did spend time with Mischele during the day of New Year's Eve, but not that night. He also didn't show up on New Year's Day.
In January 2014, Mischele was becoming disenchanted with the relationship and considered breaking up with Jordan. Then she discovered that she was pregnant. 
Mischele anticipated that Jordan would be overjoyed. She was wrong. 
'After I told him I was pregnant,' she related, 'he said, "I need to process this." Then he distanced himself.'
About this time, Jordan left his wallet out — something he never did. 
'Something told me to look at it,' Mischele said. Inside she found an immigration card with the name of William Allen Jordan.'
Mischele didn't investigate the name immediately. But on February 18, 2014 — after her boyfriend, and the father of her unborn child, had ignored her on Valentine's Day — she Googled 'William Allen Jordan.'
The first web page that came up was a story on Lovefraud.com entitled, Will Allen Jordan, AKA Will Allen, convicted sex offender and bigamist, deported from the UK, returns to New Jersey.
'I read the article — oh my god,' Mischele recalled. 'I started shaking. I threw up — I don't know if it was shock or morning sickness.'
She learned that one of Jordan's two simultaneous wives in the U.K., Mary Turner Thomson, had actually written a book about her fake marriage to Jordan. It was called The Bigamist — The True Story of a Husband's Ultimate Betrayal.
Mischele downloaded the book and read it in one night. She also contacted Mary via her website. Mary responded within 15 minutes, and they talked on the phone for two hours.
Jordan, Mischele learned, had at least 13 kids with eight different women. At one time, he had two wives, two fiancés, and another girlfriend on the side. She learned that Jordan was a pedophile, and had served time for molesting a girl between the ages of nine and 13. She also learned that he had swindled £198,000 — more than $333,000 — from Mary.
Jordan had never been a spy, although Mary said he was good at impersonating voices. Mischele suspected that 'Tom Chalmers' and 'Marcus' were, in fact, Jordan.
Mischele also learned that since Jordan had been released from prison, he'd allegedly had at least two previous victims in New Jersey and one in Mexico. The next day, Mischele confronted Jordan.
'I thought he would deny, deny, say it was a mistake, a misunderstanding. He didn't. He said, "I was a bastard. I was a terrible person. I did terrible things."' 
Although Jordan claimed that he wanted to change, Mischele didn't believe him. 
She learned that Jordan had been professionally diagnosed as a psychopath, and psychopaths don't change.
And as a nurse, she knew that this personality disorder is highly genetic, and there was a chance that her baby could inherit it. So regretfully, she decided it was best not to continue the pregnancy.
She also decided that she wanted to bring Will Jordan to justice.
So Mischele maintained contact with Jordan, pretending that she was willing to try again, if he worked to retain her trust.
But every time she spoke to him, she immediately called Mary Turner Thomson in the UK, who told her what was true, what was a lie, and what was partially true.
Mary also put Mischele in touch with six more of Jordan's alleged victims, who shared their stories.
'My story has a piece of everybody else's story,' Mischele said.
For 10 weeks, Mischele engaged in a psychological chess match with a seasoned con artist. She asked questions, pretended to take him back, and told outrageous lies, until Florence Township and Cherry Hill police were ready to make an arrest.
Then she agreed to meet him at the store, and watched from behind a display of snack foods as he was taken into custody.
'I felt passionately that this needs to end, and it needs to end with me,' Mischele said.
* Donna Andersen is author of Lovefraud.com.
Document DAMONL0020140424ea4o00566
