{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1608"}
____
News
Why divorcees like to be by the sea: Faded seaside towns have higher numbers because of low cost of living
STEVE DOUGHTY, SOCIAL AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT   
710 words
28 March 2014
01:31
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Official figures show high number of divorcees living in seaside towns
* Blackpool has highest concentration, followed by Hastings and Torbay
* Experts think the low cost of living in the towns is behind the trend
Divorcees are moving to the seaside to take advantage of the cheaper cost of living in faded resorts, an official report said yesterday.
It linked the high population of divorced people in coastal towns to their inexpensive housing and general low prices.
People who have gone through divorce may look for cheaper places to live because of their 'reduced economic assets', the Office for National Statistics said.
The connection between seaside resorts and divorce - first revealed by the Daily Mail last year - is set out in figures gathered by the 2011 national census.
They show that all the top 10 districts with the highest proportion of divorced people in their population are coastal towns.
Blackpool had the highest concentration of divorcees, with 13.1 per cent of adults divorced, followed by Hastings, with a 12.8 per cent divorcee rate.
Other resorts on the list include Torbay, Weymouth, the district of Thanet, which includes Margate and Ramsgate, Eastbourne, Great Yarmouth and Worthing.
Speculation on the reasons for the high numbers of divorced people have included the possibility that many look for a new start in life in a different place after the end of a marriage.
Analysts have also pointed to the generally older populations of seaside towns, which means there are likely to be more divorcees.
The ONS report said of the resorts: 'The top 10 were all in coastal areas, and mainly on the south coast of England, apart from Blackpool and Great Yarmouth.The top 10 all had higher average ages than England and Wales.'
The median age of an adult is 44.9 years, but the lowest average age of the population of the divorce top 10, found in Gosport, Hampshire, is 46.
The report added: 'Higher levels of divorced population may relate to the affordability of housing and living costs in some of these areas resulting in divorced people with reduced economic assets living there.'
'It added that previous figures have 'highlighted some of these coastal areas as having high levels of deprivation.'
Among the 10 resorts, Blackpool regularly features high on lists of the worst towns for poverty and life expectancy, whereas Hastings, Margate, Eastbourne and Torbay have a reputation for attracting 'benefit tourists', young people who live on state handouts often mixed with seasonal work.
Every area on the list is either a resort or has one nearby - such as the naval town of Gosport, which includes the popular beaches of Lee-on-the-Solent. Nowhere inland in England, or anywhere in Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland has a proportion of divorced adults over the 11 per cent mark.
Harry Benson of he Marriage Foundation think tank said: 'It is not suprising that after people go through the pain of divorce they are looking for a new life. They may well try to find that at the seaside.
'What these figures don't show is the proportion of separated people who were never married in the first place. It is likely that the proportions of separated cohabitees, who the census continues to regard as single, will also be high.'
The report also suggested that the number of single people is rising. Between 2001 and 2011 the number of single people in England and Wales has increased from 12.5 million to 15.7 million, and single people in 2011 accounted for 35 per cent of the population.
London had eight of the 10 areas which are home to the highest proportions of single people, with six out of 10 people in Islington saying they have never been married.
Increasing numbers of single people are likely to be connected to declining numbers of marriages, and the older ages at which people do now marry, and the growth of the population through immigration, which involves a high proportion of young and single people.
Just under half the population, 47 per cent, were married in 2011.
Document DAMONL0020140328ea3s0004h
