{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2405"}
____
  
News
CLEGG PAYS ELECTION GURU £110,000... WITH YOUR CASH
BY GERRI PEEV AND TIM SHIPMAN   
822 words
15 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
20
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
NICK Clegg faces the embarrassment of being hauled in front of a Commons committee to explain why taxpayers are paying his election strategist's six-figure salary.
South African Ryan Coetzee's £110,000 pay cheque is the highest of any of the Deputy Prime Minister's special advisers.
His official title is head of strategy and he spends much of his time advising Mr Clegg on how to boost the Lib Dems' dismal poll ratings and refining their media messaging. But he is also a key player in the party's General Election strategy and the Lib Dems may be asked to explain his salary to the Commons public administration select committee.
Bernard Jenkin, the Conservative chairman of the committee, said: 'There is absolutely no doubt that a party pollster or election strategist should be paid for by the party, as is the case with (Tory election guru) Lynton Crosby. If someone has been appointed as a Spad (special adviser) at taxpayers' expense but is doing this work even on the side, during the working day, then my committee will have questions to ask about who approved this appointment and how it could possibly continue.'
David Cameron's chief election co-ordinator Mr Crosby is paid out of Tory Party funds, while the Labour Party has to ask the unions to pay its hired guns.
Labour MP Sheila Gilmore said: 'There are now very serious questions for Nick Clegg to answer over whether Mr Coetzee has been working on Lib Dem election strategy while being paid to perform official government duties.
'If the Lib Dems are using the public payroll to support their party political activity, this would be a breach of the rules and an abuse of public trust.
'The public will expect urgent reassurances that the important role played by special advisers isn't being exploited by Lib Dems desperate to improve their woeful ratings.'
Some Lib Dem MPs believe Mr Coetzee will soon have to be paid directly by the party, rather than from the public purse, before next year's election.
Asked if that should happen now, Mr Clegg said yesterday he could not see a problem with the arrangement.
'We've done it by the book and it's not unusual for politicians in government to get support on what are the main concerns of the British public and how can we address them in government. That's exactly what we're doing.' A spokesman for Mr Clegg later insisted that Mr Coetzee fully complied with the code of conduct for special advisers.
'A key part of his role as director of strategy is to ensure that all government messaging strictly reflects the Lib Dems and Lib Dem priorities.
'He is a special adviser so he is paid out of public funds.
'The salaries are all transparent and published on the internet.'
The spokesman did not say what sort of visa Mr Coetzee had come into the country on but insisted 'he clearly has the right to work here - he is employed by the UK government'.
Mr Coetzee is seen as being much more involved in election strategy than his predecessor, Richard Reeves, and has presented his polling analysis to MPs and activists on Lib Dem 'away days'.
Despite being popular with other Lib Dem advisers and ministers, he has reaped criticism from some in the party. Lord Greaves, a Lib Dem peer, has said the party's elections strategy should 'set out a programme for government based on what Liberal Democrats stand for - policies rooted in principles and Liberal ideology'. He added that many in the party will be pitted against 'those who will follow the party's newly risen saviour, "he who must be obeyed" Ryan Coetzee.'
He said Mr Coetzee's ideas were devised 'from his hundreds of spreadsheet pages purporting to tell us what our target 20 per cent of the electorate think about everything from the immigration of Bulgarians to funding for tiddlywinks tournaments in Tooting'.
A former MP for the left-of-centre Democratic Alliance in South Africa, father-of-one Mr Coetzee seems to spend much of his time on Twitter discussing South African politics, cricket and rugby.
He has also shown an irreverence on Twitter, declaring: 'I've watched about 2 minutes of the Pistorius trial. Unfortunately I keep getting asked about it as if I'm an expert witness of some sort.' In another tweet, he said: 'I am a big fan of the odd drunk tweet. For better or for worse. Life's a bit short to be interminally [sic] sober.'
In a jibe at British Olympian Mo Farah, he tweeted after the London marathon: 'Wouldn't mind watching an interview with the actual winner of the race. Have only seen one with the guy who came 8th.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140414ea4f00020
