{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"196"}
____
RightMinds
DAILY MAIL COMMENT: Madame Fifi and a very public humbling
DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
632 words
4 April 2014
03:13
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
In the pre-election TV debates of 2010 there was one overwhelming winner.
Set against the entrenched, battle-weary leaders of the two main parties, Nick Clegg – then a relative unknown – came across as fresh, engaging and dynamic.
He seemed to speak honestly to the voters rather than patronising them, and gave a convincing impression of someone who could offer a real alternative to the self-serving, inward-looking political class that had ruled Britain for so long. The Lib Dems’ poll ratings soared.
So popular did Mr Clegg become, and so desperate were Gordon Brown and David Cameron for some of that popularity to rub off, that their mantra for virtually every policy question became:  ‘I agree with Nick.’
What a difference four years have made.
The two recent live debates between Mr Clegg and Ukip leader Nigel Farage have been an utter humiliation for the Deputy Prime Minister.
On issue after issue, from immigration to Europe to out-of-touch politicians, Mr Farage trounced his opponent. Polling suggests that hardly anyone now agrees with Nick – or indeed trusts a word he says.
His time in government has been littered with so many broken promises, policy flip-flops and crackpot initiatives, that he has been exposed as a charlatan.
The list is almost endless. He swore to scrap university tuition fees then trebled them, reneged on an agreement to support electoral boundary changes in return for a Bill on Lords reform, signed up to the introduction of free schools then attacked them, and backtracked on the offer of an EU referendum.
He saddled homes and businesses with spurious green taxes, and blocked proposals for a planning freeze on hideous and inefficient onshore wind farms.
Mr Clegg and his party are also firmly committed to the politics of envy, proposing an unfair and unworkable mansion tax, opposing a lifting of the inheritance tax threshold and threatening further cuts in pension tax relief.
As a result of this litany of betrayal and incompetence, Lib Dem support has evaporated. After reaching a heady  34 per cent a few weeks before the 2010 election, their poll ratings have plummeted to 10 per cent.
But incredibly, while the Lib Dems may be floundering, they are by no means dead. With Labour and the Conservatives virtually neck and neck, as few as 20 or 30 seats (around half his current total) could be enough to put Mr Clegg back into coalition government next year.
And we know from experience that the Madame Fifi of British politics will bestow his favours on either party if it means he can cling on to the trappings of power.
With the economy returning to growth and the Chancellor boosting morale  with an imaginative and popular budget, the Tories have a chance of winning outright next year. But there is much to do.
Meanwhile, it’s Mr Farage who is addressing many of the issues ordinary people care about in a language they like and understand. If they are to reconnect with the voters, the Conservatives must do the same.
If they fail, there is a real prospect we could be stuck with the duplicitous Madame Fifi for another five years – and that is a punishment the country simply doesn’t deserve.
Saying no to drugs
It seems brutal for the American immigration authorities to refuse Nigella Lawson entry to their country because of her self-confessed drug taking, especially when rock stars and other celebrities with actual drug convictions have been allowed to come and go unhindered.
But surely their robust attempts to keep foreign drug-takers out of their country are to be applauded. Wouldn’t Britain be a better place if we did the same?
Document DAMONL0020140404ea44000ma
