{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1700"}
____
  
Features
A HOLY VISITATION ON THE WATERFRONT
384 words
18 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
59
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A View From The Bridge (Young Vic Theatre) Verdict: So real it's religious ?????
BY PATRICK MARMION
THIS solemn production of Arthur Miller's New York docker drama from 1956 is as close as you'll get to a religious experience this Easter without stepping inside a church.
Starring Mark Strong and Nicola Walker as Eddie Carbone and his loyal wife, Beatrice, it boasts two super-intense actors.
But fashionable Belgian director Ivo van Hove tops that with a Presbyterian rendition of the play, oddly inspired by Japanese Noh theatre, with bells tolling at key moments.
Jan Versweyveld's set is a mausoleum, from which side walls rise at the start to Faure's Requiem. Inside, Eddie, stripped to the waist, showers after a hard day's toil. Miller's play treats work as a virtual blessed sacrament, sought by desperate Italian immigrants. So it's fitting, perhaps, that no one sets foot on stage without first removing their shoes.
But the total ban on furniture is a slightly perverse choice, given that Miller's story is anchored in the trappings of working-class Italian-Americans. Instead, this Spartan set sneakily enshrines modern minimalist values.
The justification is that it's a Greek tragedy, with Eddie sheltering the Sicilian immigrants who come to threaten his increasingly dodgy bond with his pretty, orphaned niece. Vows and counter vows duly reach a bloody, ritualised climax.
One effect of van Hove's austere production is to demand even more of the acting, and this in turn pushes it towards melodrama.
As Eddie, Strong — tall and angular — prowls the stage like a lean wolf. When pushed to the edge of endurance, his eyes are, as Miller describes, 'like tunnels'.
Nicola Walker, as Beatrice, supplies devout intensity; while Phoebe Fox, as her niece Catherine, is a volatile mix of naivety and sexual awakening.
Emun Elliott and Luke Norris bode trouble as the handsome Sicilians who step off the boat complete with ready-formed Brooklyn drawls.
And if Michael Gould's accent wobbles a bit as the lawyer-narrator, the show owes less to realism than to sacramental submission. It is all rather pious, but saying so in this thespian enclave would be heresy, and could risk an inquisition!
PATRICK MARMION
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140417ea4i0001y
