{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3156"}
____
  
Features
A FANTASTIC FATHER
BY BRAIN VINER    
1,112 words
11 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
46
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
From its arresting opening line, Calvary promises much of what it goes on to deliver: scalpel-sharp dialogue, and a truly wonderful lead performance by Brendan Gleeson as Father James, a decent, hard-working Catholic priest in an Irish village that is less Ballykissangel than Ballykissdevil.
Gleeson is in almost every scene, and with a lesser actor at its core, this wouldn't be half the picture it is. The irony is that the most memorable lines aren't his, beginning with that lacerating opener, delivered by one of his parishioners in the anonymity of the confessional box.
This man explains that he was sexually abused by a particular priest from the time he was seven years old, but that his abuser is now dead, so Father James must carry the can. He is told that he will die on Sunday week, once he has had a chance to get his house in order.
It is an intriguing premise, and one that could unleash a pure, straightforward thriller, but the writer-director is John Michael McDonagh, who gave Gleeson another peach of a role in the darkly humorous 2011 film The Guard, and whose brother Martin also cast Gleeson, unforgettably, as a world-weary hitman in the marvellous In Bruges. So naturally what ensues here is more of the black stuff: comedy, McDonagh-style.
With the heavyweight Gleeson anchoring the film, the other characters get to bob around him, few of them as believable as the shaggy priest with a rocky hinterland.
Father James was married before he entered the Church. He has a troubled grown-up daughter (Kelly Reilly) and a history of alcohol dependency. But that just gives him more empathy for his parishioners, a thoroughly motley collection, including Veronica (Orla O'Rourke), the promiscuous wife of the butcher who sports facial bruises that may have been inflicted by the butcher himself, Jack (Chris O'Dowd).
She's not an easy woman to live with, Jack tells Father James, before delivering another of the film's most cherishable lines. 'I think she's bipolar, or lactose intolerant, one of the two.'
Veronica's assailant might also be one of her occasional lovers, an immigrant mechanic (Isaach de Bankole), who is not above threatening a man of God.
Add to these an obnoxious, unhappy financier (a dead-eyed Dylan Moran) who has bought the local big house, the policeman (Gary Lydon) with a penchant for rent boys, a coke-snorting doctor (Aidan Gillen) and a reclusive American writer (M. Emmet Walsh) eager to get his hands on a gun, and we have a cast of suspects for a crime yet uncommitted.
Moreover, just to increase the intrigue, Father James tells the Bishop that he knows who has issued the death threat. What he doesn't know is how seriously it should be taken, and of course nor do we.
McDonagh could have cranked up the intrigue even more, but gives us instead a series of character studies. These include studies of the character of the Catholic Church — with which, for all his own commitment and integrity, Father James's parishioners have a deeply complicated relationship — and indeed of rural, parochial Ireland.
McDonagh feeds us the standard clichés born of a thousand movies, not least the cheery ceilidh in the village bar, but carefully subverts them. The bar, it transpires, is about to be sequestered by the bank. And all this is symbolised in sporadic shots of the Sligo landscape, as bleak as it is beautiful.
So this is a thought-provoking film, as well as funny and moving. But it is not without misjudgments. The obtuse younger priest (David Wilmot) might have been lifted from an old Father Ted script, and the rent boy speaks with an affected Brooklyn patter that is plain irritating. McDonagh sometimes strains too hard to find his gallery of grotesques.
All that is forgivable, however, which is apt since forgiveness is at the heart of the picture itself.
After all, and above all, it gives us Gleeson in glorious form, a big-hearted, bear-like man in a cassock the size of a Demis Roussos kaftan who like all the best screen clerics, from Karl Malden in On The Waterfront to Tom Hollander in Rev, rather makes you wish he was the real thing.
* THE Last Days On Mars does a pretty good job of evoking the real thing: there is so much reddish dust about that this could only be Mars, or possibly the South-East of England after a Saharan sand storm.
With a fraction of the budget enjoyed by Gravity's Oscar- winning director Alfonso Cuaron, debutant Ruairi Robinson has done a fine job. But this is an odd film, which for its first third develops quite promisingly as a standard space procedural, only to be abruptly invaded by zombies, ending up as an inter-planetary Night Of The Living Dead.
The premise is that this is the last few hours of the first manned mission to Mars, and if that is perfectly credible, I didn't buy for a second the idea that such an enterprise might be a joint-venture between the U.S. and the UK.
I'm quite sure they won't want to share the credit with us, when the time comes.
Still, this at least yields some top British acting talent among the astronauts, including Romola Garai as the likeable Lane, and Olivia Williams as prickly, insensitive Kim (admirably, this mission has room for both genders, as well as all nationalities). Kim is a difficult character, constantly upsetting the zero-gravity applecart, and I was enjoying the political tension within the crew when suddenly one of them returns from an ill-fated walkabout having been infected by a bacterial life-form, turning him into a monstrous killer.
The rest of the picture unfolds more or less as a zombie shock-fest, although there is nothing more shocking than a revelation about the second man on the moon, Buzz Aldrin, which I'll leave you to find out for yourself.
Holy father: Kelly Reilly and Brendan Gleeson in Calvary. Inset: Chris O'Dowd as the town's butcher
Isit voluptat. Putat. Ut lore tio corero od ming ex ent utpating erillumsan ea feugait ad dignim ipsuscil dolortincing ex er se molore venim duis exerosto odipisi tatum ilis dolore essent doloboreetum delit augiamc onulla faci tem dolortinim nostrud te ea feuip eugait ad tis doloreet veliqui ssequat. Acil ea feu faccum venim augue dolore etumsandrem exerost ionsecte tat augiat, sumsandreet amcons esectem dit aliquat, quam delis at. Nummy nullutatuero conulla
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140410ea4b0001m
