{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"2188"}
____
  
Features
Save our BBC3! It has some cracking shows
736 words
8 March 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
27
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
Hands off BBC3. I dont have a computer u idiots. I enjoy Him And Her and other programmes. Why not close BBC2 between 2am-8am instead? jim .
instead of closing bbc 3 why not just cut its hours instead broadcasting 7 till 12. joe .
So bbc are getting rid of bbc3. So does that mean we will get a reduction in the licence fee? Andy gatenby guisborough .
Economists, employers and workers should learn from the example John Lewis and Waitrose stores have set. Workers work hard, profits are good, bonuses for everybody, happy environment. Farouk Crosshill .
i have said for years the biggest thing with immigration is firms using job agents so they can pay minimum wage and get out of paying into pensions. bob scarb .
To SleazySanta. You talk about equality. Have you worked all your life AND brought 3 kids up, cooked, cleaned, washed, ironed etc. Prob not - and not many other blokes either i bet. I deserve to retire at 60. I'm bloody knackered! lou, yorks
So the world cup arrives in Britain next week as part of its global tour. Best make the most of it as its the first an last we'll see of it. Piaggio.t5 .
wayne rooney to be made captain of man utd. thats gotta be worth another 100k a week wayne. BILL THE GHOST .
Jose normally talks sense, but Terry a role model? come on Mourinho! NICKYBOYZ .
boom £1bn to Ukraine, big raspberry for British flood victims. just goes to show how much this government cares about British people. PILLEY PETE .
Any chance we could have Putin 4 our govt? At least he would fight tooth & nail protecting our borders & way of life. Den ? I agree about the royal family. they have so much money they do not .
know how to spend it. Most of it comes from us taxpayers. kevin o rourke .
To midbrickie, well said mate, ppl go on about bulldog spirit, that was in world wars 1 & 2. Now its powder puff Britain and it certainly aint GREAT. Geoff .
The goverment have slashed funds that affect so many vulnerable people, in cost cutting exercises, if we've got to cut the national debt how come huge companies pay little or no corporate tax, and the bankers get obscene bonuses? oh cometh election day. CHINNA MOSHA .
I am giving Funky Leven my vote in the next election! Sounds 2 me he would do a beta job than Cameron. X Mary Doll .
Smugglers costing the taxpayer £millions a day. More like the government with its rip off taxes on beer, spirits & cigs. SCOUSE .
re cyclists on pavements. if i had a bike i wouldnt ride on the roads either. those potholes would do some serious damage to a bike 'n a cyclist. Bob oi, SFC .
Daffy: how would you like to "reverse park" my artic into a 9ft wide gap? Lady lorry driver
2 lycra clad daffy da pedal pushing sexist pig: my wife is fab @ reversing & drives a gritter 4 da council. you ride a bike, you moron. uncle snack .
2 DAFFY duck. Wur u really watching dat lady reverse for 15mins or just having a gud old gawp & got caught. mrs uncle snack .
Any hints on how to cut a large turnip in half? I find this task very annoying. SCOUSE ? Price of milk down to £1 Too little to latte. James .
Lots of people have told me that the second i've been introduced to them, they immediately get a mental image of Jeremy Clarkson even though I look nothing like him. Strange or what? HUGH JARSE .
My mate's raving about having his first electric toothbrush. Now says he can brush his teeth and have a pee at the same time without splashing all over the floor. Grobbo
fair play to luisa.women have been treated like s@@tforcenturies.wish all ladies and men thought like her. Janette b
Well done Luisa & more power to you. Sean
luisa has the right attitude and we are in the 21st century, so get over it people. maxine, halifax
.wouldnt either. If any of you still think that women are the weaker sex, then you obviously havent tried pulling the duvet back 2 your side of the bed. LEO F TEXT OF THE DAY
Document DAISTA0020140308ea380001r
