{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"3326"}
____
  
Features
Yet another holiday? It's a real Dee-sgrace
703 words
14 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; Scotland
31
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
Fat BENEFIT sponging Parasite Dee going back to Magaluf shows what a parasite she is, Even the locals say she is lowering the tone of resort, She is making it into a scums escape from reality. Just like Britain who will let any s*** come here and turn country into a sh**heap slum for parasites. col
So The Great White Dee is going abroad again. The Islanders are going to need a bigger boat. LEO,LEEDS
fair play to gary barlow he might be more inclined to pay if tax wasn't wasted on benefits, druggy's immigrants an oversea's aid to those that don't need it. Lets not even mention MP's expenses. MZ Emblem
Gary barlow obe? Take it back, take it back, take it back for good! ALAN SMALL, EDINBURGH
re, funky leven, Gary b quote top notch. Foxiefella
If Gary Barlow is allowed to keep his OBE then give Lester Piggott his knighthood back. Wraggie the Hangman
The rich hire devious accountants to end up paying little or no tax whereas Joe the working man loses up to a third of his gross wage in N.I. and tax at source in P.A.Y.E. In some cases much more than the rich self employed. Farouk Crosshill
you said tue pg 6 that our taxes pay for our roads, hospitals, services, etc. i cant see it, paying more but getting less n the rich get richer eh cameron. Cat weasel.
re. Best of Fest pullout. Given the prices would it not be prudent to have the NI number of those going to ensure its not MY BLEEDING TAXES BEING USED to allow the 'sheep' following groups with soppy names, making equally soppy noises. Bigchef
For gods sake. Why are so many people using so called social media sites like Tw*tter & Faceache? Are they so conceited that they think the lives they lead are so interesting to other people? I hear 'I use it to keep in touch with my friends'. On faceache perhap but Tw*tter! Then they complain of bullying. Get a REAL life. The Bear, south london.
How come the bbc show elvis costello singing olivers army which contains the. N word on repeated top of the pops shows on bbc 4 as recent as last week. Tom dunne
To Floyd, TV watchdogs edited the N word out of The Dambusters film years ago. LEO F
I've heard it all now - spray painting dog poo pink. Just what is that going to achieve? It won't prove which dogs bum it came from will it? lou, yorks.
so new young boys going 2world cup but how many will play 2gether- it'll be same cliche we need experience in team-well expo has won us f**k all to date BILL THE GHOST
reckon roys young lads are gonna win us the world cup. Didnt Feargal say 'teenage kicks so hard to beat'? bazzy b
WINNING WAG squad centre page;- Coleen rooney has 3 kids (sorry 2 the third one is wayne her husband);-> colin
So talentless Nick Grimshaw thinks Lily allen and Rita ora's music are like bum burps, well it's better than listening to his whiney voice, so shut it Grimmy' because if I wanted to listen to an a**hole I'd lock myself in the khazi. Chicken George Shrewsbury.
To Rosko, I agree mate, HP Fruity no where near as nice as it used to be, different bottle, different sauce, sort it out! Phantom Painter Rotherham
to Rosko, Yeadon. Yes I agree, but OK Fruity was the best! Can you still get it? CHARLTON GARRY.
must be bizarre being Prince William and Prince Harry on a stag do. Stuffing pictures of your granny into a lap dancers bra & knickers! The Karma Machine
Eurovision winner! So wrong on so many levels. Explain that 2 a child? Billy the staffs Dad x
For some reason Katie Price is trying to grow a beard. LEODIS
TEXT OF THE DAY
me and thewife watched3 fi lms backto back last night.luckily i wasthe one facingthe telly!Turbo
Document DAISTA0020140514ea5e0006t
