{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"146"}
____
  
News
England give me house, doctor, school, benefits... thank you so very much
PETER DYKE   
377 words
3 April 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
9
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
C5'S SHOW TO EXPOSE SPONGERS
A NEW TV show will expose immigrants who move to the UK simply to rake in cash.
The Channel 5 documentary Gypsies On Benefits And Proud will spark a backlash from working families struggling to survive.
Most of the travellers featured are from Eastern Europe, and among its "stars'' is a mum with 11 children.
Since arriving seven years ago and settling in Rotherham, South Yorks, Katarina Cisarova has barely done a day's work.
Katarina, 43, who is a Slovakian Roma, gets almost £2,000 a month in benefits payments, and brags: "We have a good life here. We have everything that we want here. It's very nice."
Her husband Peter, who has not had a job for two years, adds: "I like England. England give me house, give me doctor, give school, benefit. England good, thank you so much England."
Beg
Most of the couple's grown-up children do not work and rely on the welfare state.
Romanian Ion Lazar, who has three children, does not hide the fact he has moved to London to enjoy a life on benefits.
He says: "I know it's very, very easy to take benefits in England. She's give me home free, she's give me money free."
Ion admits his aim is to make £40,000 from benefits payments to help him build a new house for his family, who are still living in the Romanian village where he grew up.
He says: "I think this money I can make in one year, maybe two."
The show will also feature Viorel Dinu, 25, who lost both legs in an accident when he was seven and gets around on a skateboard.
In Romania, he had to beg to get by. But after moving to Nottingham he gets £750 a month in benefits. Viorel says: "I come to the UK cos I don't have a nice life there."
Executive producer Jacqui Wilson said: "People should watch this programme before jumping to conclusions."
The show airs Friday, April 11, on Channel 5 at 9pm.
The Star Says: Page 6
peter.dyke@dailystar.co.uk
Document DAISTA0020140403ea430002n
