{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"949"}
____
  
Features
IF YOU REALLY WANT TO KNOW, ED, LOOK IN THE MIRROR...
BY RICHARD LITTLEJOHN   
1,638 words
20 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
17
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Bob Geldof famously declared he didn't like Mondays. Most people would agree with him. How often do you start the week with a smile on your face? When was the last time you rolled out of bed on a Monday morning laughing your head off?
Me, neither.
But yesterday there was a rare ray of sunshine, from a most unexpected source. Normally, the prospect of Ed Miliband being interviewed on the Today programme is enough for me to dive back under the duvet and contemplate the after-life.
Mister Ed is nobody's idea of a comedian. But when asked by Sarah Montague about an exclusive story in the Daily Mirror claiming that 60 Labour MPs were employing staff on 'zero-hours' contracts, he came out with the best punchline of the year:
'I haven't seen that report.'
It was the funniest thing I'd heard since the Daily Mirror/Viglen shares scandal. During that investigation, Piers Morgan denied any involvement in illegal insider-trading on the grounds that he didn't actually read the Daily Mirror.
Which was curious, to say the least, given that Morgan was editor of the Mirror at the time.
Equally, for the leader of the Labour Party to pretend that he hadn't read a story about 60 Labour MPs in the Labour-supporting Daily Mirror is beyond absurd.
OK, so Ed is a paid-up North London Guardianista, rather than a typical Northern working-class Mirror reader. But the Mirror is his party's most dependable cheerleader in Fleet Street and a must-read for every Shadow Cabinet minister and Labour backbencher.
Even if Miliband missed it over his muesli on Friday, he employs people to keep him up to speed.
'Anything in the papers today, Tom?'
'Not much, boss, usual stuff. More Rolf Harris, Susanna Reid's legs again. Oh, and the Mirror says that 60 Labour MPs are employing staff on zero-hours contracts.'
'Really?'
'Yep, I had Lenny McCluskey on the blower at six o'clock this morning about that last one. He's not happy.'
See what I mean?
A claim, in a Labour newspaper, that Labour MPs are exploiting staff by treating them as what the TUC calls 'slave labour' is deeply embarrassing for Miliband.
'Deeply' is one of Ed's new favourite words, perhaps on the advice of his recently imported image-maker from the U.S., Hiram P. Axlegrease IV. If he used it once during yesterday's interview, he used it a dozen times.
Miliband has even developed that insincere catch in the throat, which Tony Blair copied from Bill Clinton, all part of his mission to convince us of his passion, empathy and, er, sincerity.
But why should we buy any of it when he says he didn't see that story in the Mirror? He's either lying through his teeth or he genuinely doesn't give a toss what Mirror readers think.
My best guess is: both. Most politicians lie in the cause of expediency and Miliband is no exception. He also has a tendency to take his traditional working-class supporters for granted, which is why so many of them will join disgruntled Tories in voting Ukip on Thursday.
Miliband was on Today talking about his plans to raise the minimum wage. He is truly, madly, deeply concerned that Britain has become one of the 'worst countries in the developed world' when it comes to low pay.
And whose fault is that?
The major reason for low pay is Labour's decision to dismantle our borders and import millions of foreign workers prepared to do jobs for wages which, while several times higher than they could expect at home, are way below those British workers could live on.
Plenty of immigrants are also prepared to shack up in overcrowded conditions, which if imposed on British families would be condemned as worse than Dickensian. Yet Labour deliberately chose to encourage millions of British citizens to live idly on benefits, while jobs they could be doing were taken by hard-working newcomers.
For the record, I've always been in favour of a high minimum wage. But it really shouldn't be necessary to impose one by law.
Most decent employers would be happy to pay better wages if their profitability wasn't under constant attack from politically motivated high taxes and suffocating, time-consuming, bureaucratic interference, most of it generated from Brussels. The elephant in the Today studio yesterday was the stark reality that Britain can do nothing to control this flood of cheap labour while we remain in the EU.
But this, naturally, was never mentioned — even though Thursday's election is supposed to be about Europe.
Mainstream politicians would rather it was about anything but Europe. That's because, in truth, there's little to choose between any of them when it comes to the EU.
OK, so Cameron promises a referendum and Miliband doesn't. But the Prime Minister has no intention of recommending that we pull out altogether. Nick Clegg says the concessions Britain can expect from a 'renegotiation' would be so trivial even a raving Europhile like him could support them.
They'd rather attack Ukip as a bunch of racists — the political class's smear of choice. The truth is all parties have their share of 'fruitcakes' and 'loonies'.
From outside the Bubble, half their policies seem to have been drawn up by lunatics — from the plan to spend £50 billion on a railway line through England's green and pleasant, simply to cut five minutes off the journey time from London to Birmingham, to the Flat Earth imbeciles who think the best way to solve Britain's energy crisis is to carpet the country with useless windmills.
There are plenty of proper racists among Tory and Labour supporters, too. You could argue that the contempt all the main parties display towards white working-class opinion is a form of racism. That's if they didn't hold everyone's opinion, outside the political class, in complete contempt.
Anyone who dissents from the cosy, self-regarding consensus which dominates British politics can expect to be trashed as a racist, or a Little Englander, or some kind of 'phobe' or 'bigot'. It saves the Bubble from having to engage in difficult debate.
The 'zero-hours' scandal — which involves Tory and Lib Dem, as well as Labour MPs — is a graphic illustration of the 'do what I say, not what I do' arrogance of the political class.
In a properly ordered political system, Ukip wouldn't need to exist, because the established parties would reflect, rather than despise and try to silence, public opinion. As things stand, if Ukip didn't exist, the allegedly 'mainstream' politicians would have to invent it.
Frankly, I don't think Ukip is a serious party of government, but I'll be voting for them on Thursday anyway. As I have written before: if we can't express protest at the ballot box, where else are we supposed to express it? Would they rather Middle Britain took to the streets and burned down Town Halls, like they do in France?
The Tories, Labour and the Lib Dems may be wondering why all their attempts to smear Ukip have, thus far, backfired. Perhaps they are unfamiliar with the old adage about people who live in glasshouses.
If they want to know why Ukip support is holding up, they should take the late Michael Jackson's advice and start by looking at the man in the mirror. Or, in Miliband's case, start by reading the Mirror.
Britain votes on Thursday and the results will be announced on Sunday. None of the main parties is going to like Monday.
 
 
I'M A ROADRUNNER, BABY
Last week I brought you news of a demand from animal rights activists PETA for a memorial on the M62 near Manchester to 1,500 chickens killed in a crash.
Roger Savage writes to say that Dorking, in Surrey, has beaten them to it with this giant sculpture on a local roundabout.
Meanwhile, a number of readers have emailed drawing my attention to a rival organisation, also called PETA.
It stands for People Eating Tasty Animals.
 
***
The NHS pleads poverty, yet still found £30,000 over four years to provide lard-bucket Chris McDonnell with 'anti-obesity' treatments, including tummy tucks and a gastric band.
Initially, it worked and he dropped half his body weight. But not for long.
McDonnell, 31 years old and originally weighing in at 32st, paid taxpayers back by liquidising Mars bars, kebabs and pizzas in a blender so he could guzzle them down with a straw.
As a result, his incredible bulk is back where it was.
Next time they should fit the gastric band over his mouth.
***
 
Senior German politicians have rejected Call Me Dave's pledge to renegotiate Britain's membership of the EU as a 'desperate attempt to appease Ukip'.
Which only goes to prove that, despite the evidence of history, they still think Britain's role in Europe is to appease Germany.
***
 
In one extract from my memoirs, I speculated that if there were to be an outbreak of verrucas at the swimming pool these days, it would be evacuated and closed for days while a hi-viz, haz-chem team moved in to 'decontaminate' it.
David Pedley has sent me a cutting from the Stranraer Free Press about a last-day-of-term prankster who dropped a dead fish into a school pool. Yep, you guessed, it was shut down immediately for two days by elf'*'safety while a professional clean-up was performed.
You couldn't make it up.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140519ea5k0000k
