{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3182"}
____
TV&Showbiz
Emmy Rossum shows off her long legs in short skater skirt as she runs errands in LA
CLAUDETTE DAVIES   
459 words
10 April 2014
08:01
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
She spent Tuesday on the set of Sesame Street and couldn't resist sharing her exploits on Instagram.
But it was back to reality for Emmy Rossum on Wednesday as she was spotted running errands in West Hollywood.
The Shameless star - who is still reeling from the dramatic season finale of her show on Sunday, which she admitted even she did not know about - was casual yet chic in a black skater skirt and a striped top.
Emmy's skirt displayed her toned pins and she kept her outfit casual, with a pair of flat sandals.
Her long brown hair was pulled to the side in a plait and she accessorised with a simple chain.
Rossum stopped to pick up some food on Robertson Blvd as she enjoying the soaring temperatures in Los Angeles.
On Tuesday, Emmy spent time filming at Sesame Street.
Sharing a picture of herself with some of the famous puppets, she wrote: '
So in LOVE with my new friends @sesamestreet!'
Meanwhile, Rossum took to her Twitter page on Sunday to admit that even she was shocked by the dramatic twist in the season four finale of Shameless, which left viewers flabbergasted.
Those who have not yet seen the episode may want to stop reading now.
A scene after the credits revealed the surprising news that that Steve Wilton aka Jimmy Lishman, who was believed to have been murdered by Brazilian mobsters at the end of season three, is alive.
The scene saw the character, played by Justin Chatwin, pull up to the Gallagher house win an unnamed woman (played by Dichen Lachman) who asks if he would like to go inside.
He replies, 'Not tonight', before they drive off.
Steve/Jimmy was a love interest of Emmy's character Fiona, who married Estefania, the daughter of a Brazilian mobster but later resumed his relationship with Fiona.
Nando, Estefania's father, wanted her to become a citizen and stay in the US, and threatened to kill Jimmy if he did not convince Immigration theirs was a real marriage.
After failing to convince Immigration that the marriage was not a scam, Nando took Jimmy on a boat, here it was believed he was murdered.
Emmy took time out of her road trip to Vegas to share her thoughts on Twitter, writing: 'HOLLLLLLY MOLY NO IDEA. HE'S ALIVE. JUST FOUND OUT WITH YOU. PPL CALLING ME. SO MAD DIDN'T SEE LIVE. #JIMMYSTEVE @Justingchatwin #SHAMELESS.'
She added: 'Got the 411 from @Justingchatwin & our producers. They flew him 2 Chicago & put him in another hotel so noone would know! #sneaky #SHAMELESS.'
Document DAMONL0020140410ea4a002pd
