{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3278"}
____
  
News
BUT ROMANIAN AND BULGARIAN NUMBERS DIP
BY IAN DRURY AND JACK DOYLE   
567 words
15 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
12
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
UKIP were accused of scaremongering by a Home Office minister yesterday after the number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in Britain fell slightly.
Those in jobs from the two countries dropped by 4,000 in the three months after employment restrictions were lifted on January 1 compared to the three months before.
But despite the surprise dip the total number working here was up by 29,000 - nearly 26 per cent - in the first quarter of this year compared to the equivalent period in 2013.
The Office for National Statistics said there were 140,000 people from the two eastern European countries in jobs in the UK between January and March this year.
That was down from 144,000 in the three months to December, before Romanians and Bulgarians gained the same rights to work in Britain as other EU citizens. The figures do not include dependent family members of immigrant workers or the unemployed.
Before employment restrictions were lifted ministers repeatedly refused to estimate how many Romanians and Bulgarians would arrive in the UK, leading Ukip to raise concerns that a 'massive influx' would place extra demands on public services and depress wages.
Amid growing worries the Government introduced measures to prevent EU migrants from claiming unemployment benefits for their first three months here, while those found begging or sleeping rough could be deported.
Yesterday, after the figures were published, Tory Police Minister Damian Green hit out at the rhetoric from Nigel Farage's party. He said: 'They started scaremongering in the run-up to January 1. They have been proved wrong and they have decided to carry on scaremongering.'
Tory minister Anna Soubry said: 'These figures just show that Ukip preys on people's fears, it preys on prejudices in many people. And they make these wild, actually rather offensive claims, and hey, what happens? It was all a load of nonsense.'
Lib Dem Business Secretary Vince Cable added: 'This idea of waiting for tens of thousands of people pouring off the planes from the Balkans was just a scare story.'
Labour MP Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons Home Affairs Select Committee, said: 'Those, including Ukip, who promised the end of the world on January 1, now owe the public and those from Romania and Bulgaria a full apology.'
But critics pointed out that the number of workers from Romania and Bulgaria had increased by 43,000 - or 44 per cent - since the first three months of 2012. They also suggested that the December peak meant many arrived in the UK in time for the lifting of employment restrictions.
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of MigrationWatch, said: 'The latest annual figures show an increase of 29,000, in a period when restrictions were in place for nine months. We believe they are consistent with our estimate of a 50,000 population increase from Romania and Bulgaria for each of the next five years.'
Dr Carlos Vargas-Silva, senior researcher at the Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford, said: 'Until we have complete data for 2014 it is impossible to achieve any definite conclusions about the impact of the end of restrictions.'
Ukip head of policy Tim Aker said: 'We never said it would just be about Romania and Bulgaria. We are looking at the massive influx from the EU.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140514ea5f00020
