{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"69"}
____
RightMinds
Crimea and a great tragedy in waiting
DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
625 words
26 March 2014
01:01
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
With unconcealed contempt, Russia’s foreign minister shrugs off the West’s latest effort to punish Vladimir Putin for annexing Crimea.
‘It’s no great tragedy,’ sneers Sergei Lavrov, as his country is expelled from the G8 club of nations.
Who can blame him for being less than terrified by the free world’s reaction to his president’s flagrant breach of international law?
Indeed, nothing could more starkly expose the impotence of Europe (helplessly dependent on Russian gas) than the pathetic sanctions imposed so far.
Though the words from Downing St and the White House may ring with theatrical anger, the clear message of their deeds is that the West has no will for a potentially ruinous confrontation over Crimea – whose people, after all, overwhelmingly approve reunification with Russia.
But far more worryingly, the crisis has also laid bare how a vulnerable Europe – all but abandoned by the increasingly insular US – lacks the means to back up its threats, should Mr Putin press his territorial ambitions further.
Yes, the Mail welcomes David Cameron’s determination to speed up fracking for shale gas – in recognition, 50 years late, that we depend too heavily on volatile foreign regimes for our energy supplies.
But after decades of winding down our armed forces, shouldn’t the nations of Europe also plan to meet any military threat? How can Britain expect to be taken seriously when our approach to defence is cut, cut and cut again?
This paper prays that Mr Putin will hold back from further violations of the international order – though we fear the West’s pathetic posturing will only tempt him to pursue any ambitions he may  have to re-establish a Soviet-style sphere of influence.
Indeed, this crisis is a clarion warning to our continent that decades of peace have made us dangerously complacent.
If we ignore the lessons from Crimea, that really will be a ‘great tragedy’. 
BBC’s criminal fee
As a cross-party Commons committee paves the way for decriminalising non-payment of the licence fee, BBC Director of Strategy James Purnell protests that the present system ‘works pretty well’.
Pretty well for whom, Mr Purnell?
Not for the criminal courts, that’s for sure. They are clogged up with 180,000 prosecutions for fee evasion each year – more than one in ten of all their cases.
Nor does it work well for TV owners, struggling to feed their families. Even if they never watch the BBC, they are forced to give the Corporation £145.50 a year, on pain of a criminal record and hefty fines, backed by the threat of jail.
No, the system works pretty well only for former Labour Culture Secretary Mr Purnell and his 23,000 pampered colleagues in this bloated public sector behemoth.
Indeed, isn’t the appointment of this Blairite apparatchik, with his overweening sense of entitlement, symptomatic of everything that’s wrong with a BBC stuffed with like-minded Guardianistas?
If the Corporation wishes to preserve any part of the licence fee, its first job must surely be to reconnect with its audience, after decades of stifling debate on public concerns such as the expansion of EU powers and mass immigration.
Yet this week it emerges that director-general Lord Hall refuses to appear before MPs to discuss BBC coverage of EU affairs, claiming this would undermine ‘editorial independence’.
What breathtaking arrogance. If the Corporation truly values independence, it should look at how to wean itself off the teat of subsidy – and start competing fairly with other media organisations.
The MPs’ move to decriminalise non-payment of the licence fee is a welcome step towards introducing the BBC to  the real world.
Document DAMONL0020140326ea3q00029
