{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"623"}
____
Femail
Hallelujah! Dressing like a slob is now the height of fashion writes JANET STREET-PORTER
JANET STREET PORTER   
1,421 words
9 March 2014
22:42
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Going for a walk along the sunny Kent coast last Saturday, I dressed in a North Face windproof jacket, old sweatpants and hiking shoes — topped off with a fleece beanie, my trusty camouflage rucksack and thrift-shop sunglasses.
Practical and anonymous, but suddenly bang on-trend, according to American style-spotters.
Don’t laugh, the comfy well-worn look we wear shopping, slobbing out in front of the telly and walking the dog has been identified as an important new trend called ‘normcore’ — and fashion designers are leaping on the bandwagon.
Marc Jacobs has even designed hiking sandals (costing hundreds) for goodness sake, and designers from Top Shop to DKNY and Chanel are sending baggy denim dungarees, shapeless sweaters and shirts, comfy ‘mom’ jeans and trainers on the catwalk.
Designers are plundering sportswear and leisure clothing  for inspiration, and plastering  their logos all over it.
So what is normcore? According to forecasters in the U.S., the more successful you are, the less you have to express it.
By dressing to blend in to the crowd, you’re staying ‘I’m confident in myself’. Think size medium, mass-market ranges like Gap and Converse, plain T-shirts and stonewash denim.
Trend-spotters cite Barack Obama in his comfy jeans and dreary baggy white shirts as a good example, or Apple co-founder Steve Jobs, who only ever wore a black turtle neck and nondescript jeans.
Look at Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg and tech genius Bill Gates — they always look utterly banal, not a logo in sight.
Zuckerberg sticks to a round-neck T-shirt and only wears cheap clothes, and Bill Gates has the ultimate geek haircut teamed with those tragic glasses and a plain white shirt. All hugely successful, are they making a point we haven’t spotted?
If you’ve got a big brain, do your clothes have to shout ‘look at me’?
For all we can sneer at the idea of normcore, it does raise an interesting issue. Fashion is supposed to be about expressing individual taste, but have you noticed that so many of us end up looking exactly the same?
We have unlimited choice in every price range, but so many successful women conform to a narrow stereotype — loosely based on Her Royal Blandness, Kate Middleton.
Clever female politicians, from Gloria de Piero to Yvette Cooper just love those form-fitting dresses with their little jackets made by High Street favourites like L. K. Bennett, Zara and Reiss. This sexy but somehow sexless demure look is a watered-down version of the fabulous bodycon dresses designed by Roland Mouret a few years ago. And isn’t it amazing that so many clever women choose clothes that invite comment?
Look at Theresa May and those desperately silly shoes. You’d think that the people who work in fashion would all look different, expressing their personal taste.
But look at the occupants of the front row at shows — lemmings in long skirts, ankle socks, all looking like they’ve all been hatched at the same on-trend factory.
High fashion has turned them into consumer- driven clones.
Look at Lily Allen, turning up at everything to promote her upcoming album in a different outfit every day, even tweeting a photo of herself on the Tube. And what about Amy Childs tweeting pictures of herself wearing four frocks from her new range in 24 hours?
These women pride themselves on being fearless spokeswomen, and yet they are just clotheshorses enslaved by fashion.
To swap frocks so often surely shows a lack of confidence.
We can moan that men don’t take us seriously, but perhaps we are addicted to dressing to get noticed — so maybe we can learn from the cult of normcore.
Cressida Bonas turned up with Prince Harry at a charity event at Wembley last week in dreary jeans, a plain, dark jacket and a sweatshirt — I think she’s got the message. Until the fashion police get their hands on her.
Sweep these clueless fools out of politics
New immigration minister, James Brokenshire, put his foot in it by claiming that a ‘wealthy metropolitan elite’ employing cheap labour was to blame for uncontrolled immigration, by denying our working classes jobs.
I challenge Mr Brokenshire to find this untapped pool of British talent.
My cleaners have been Spanish, Polish and Latvian — and all have cost at least £10 an hour.
They are often highly qualified, working to pay their tuition fees or building capital to start a business back home.
Why should we be demonised for paying a cleaner from another EU country?
Who is this wealthy metropolitan elite this clown refers to anyway?
They are usually working women who want a life outside the home, willing to settle for very little cash in hand after paying for cleaning and childcare.
Another politician who doesn’t live in the real world.
The lonely soul with a lesson for gold-diggers
How refreshing to read about Tony Hawken, the man divorcing the richest female entrepreneur in Britain, who isn’t opting for a massive pay-off or a bitter court battle over shares.
Mr Hawken married Xiu Li Hawken more than 20 years ago, after they met on a blind date — he was a maths teacher, she was learning English.
Since then, his wife has built a chain of 22 shopping centres across China, runs a leading football team there, and is worth £1.1 billion, while he has stayed in this country raising their son, now 17. On a recent holiday, he said he was ‘uncomfortable’ when his wife chose wine costing £900 a bottle — he’s a man of modest tastes who prefers to drink at  a Wetherspoons  pub, and buys books from charity shops. Mr Hawken still tutors under-privileged students for free.
He settled for less than £1  million and says he wishes he’d divorced years ago so he could have found a girlfriend. I don’t think he’ll have any trouble, though his scruffy beard might have to get the chop.
Filthy little mutt that's muscled in on my man
My partner has bought a puppy — claiming he wanted unconditional love and devotion, so that me put in my place.
I admit I’m not a pet person (years ago I gave my cat to my mother when it enraged me by weeing in my handbag), but now I have to learn to communicate with Badger — the new addition to our house, and anticipate his needs.
I just thought dogs moaned or barked, but a leading animal researcher reckons animals are capable of telling us how happy or miserable they are.
Professor Ian Duncan will reveal his ground-breaking findings at a conference devoted to the science of animal thinking and emotion in the U.S. next week. He has devised tests where animals are asked a question repeatedly, and claims the results reveal what they feel. His research into what chickens and pigs feel has led to change in the rules on battery farming.
So what is going on in our house? Our mini Border terrier has cleverly planted a big poo right in front of where I watch TV, followed by a puddle by the back door. He moans if he can’t sit on the sofa, and walkies are regarded as a chance to trip me over with his lead.
As far as I can see, the dog is getting his message across very successfully, which is that I’m an irritant he will overcome.
My partner and he are  deeply in love, and I’m just  a wallflower.
The wonderful weather at the weekend brought traffic jams and the first rash of middle-aged men with beer guts dressed as teenagers in cut-offs or shorts. It also means English strawberries in supermarkets earlier than ever. Should we celebrate? Does fruit grown under glass in winter taste of anything?
For my money, the best strawberries are those that come later, ripening outside in what we used to call summer, perfumed and soft. So much fruit has zero flavour now — especially those highly priced mini figs in Waitrose and Tesco.
They smell musty and are like eating a bit of phone directory, a million miles from slurping a soft ripe black fig in Italy in August. Why do we want summer fruit in winter? It’s a sickness.
Document DAMONL0020140310ea39000ut
