{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"442"}
____
What the hell will The X Factor gain from Cheryl Cole's return?
Mike Ward   
950 words
11 March 2014
19:44
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
JOEY Barton, Jeremy Paxman, Charlotte Crosby, that poodle who's just won Crufts – off the top of my head, those are just a few possible X Factor judges who'd have been a more exciting prospect than Cheryl bloody Cole going back.
Don't get me wrong, I've got nothing personal against Cheryl bloody Cole. Over the years she's treated us to some consistently adequate music, some hilarious body art, and some of the most inspiring shampoo commercials in living memory.
Not only that, but if forced to nominate my favourite member of Girls Aloud, I'd say Cheryl could well make the top five.
Bu honestly, Cheryl going back to The X Factor? Really? What the hell's the point?
Surely "wor Chezza" has already been there and done that.
More to the point, didn't she already hit an absolute peak on that show, back in 2009? Namely, the extraordinary feat of persuading the Great British voting public that Joe McElderry was the future of pop.
Yes, that's right, Joe McElderry won The X Factor. You weren't dreaming it. And Cheryl bloody Cole was the judge who made this happen.
Come on, as a talent show judge you're never going to top that, are you? Seriously, if you can persuade millions of people to think: "I must spend my hard-earned money voting for this lad, I couldn't live with myself if he got eliminated from The X Factor" – then you really are utterly wasted on a TV talent show.
With powers of persuasion like that, you ought to be working for the United Nations. You'd have the crisis in Ukraine fixed by teatime. Given another fortnight, you could probably even persuade Jeremy Clarkson and Piers Morgan to play nicely together, although obviously you'd wait a further month or so before taking their muzzles off, just to be on the safe side.
Of course, we all know why this latest X Factor rejig is happening. Simon Cowell is back on the panel as well, and Simon always likes to have someone to take the pee out of him, so he can then take the pee back again and we can all have a good chuckle and briefly forget the rubbish that's happening on stage.
His Geordie bicker buddy fits the role perfectly.
Let me stress, I'm not some kind of anti-X Factor snob. I still watch almost every show. But, come on, even its biggest fans have to admit it's been treading water. And with Simon and Cheryl both back, it's not even doing that anymore: it's now officially swimming backwards.
Who'll be the next big name snapped up for the judging panel, I wonder?
Dr Fox?
Pete Waterman?
Nigel blinking Lythgoe?
For a show that was meant to be about looking to the future, it's getting scarily good at looking to the past.
I didn't mind Sharon Osbourne making her brief return, mostly because she's bonkers. In fact, it was Sharon who made the last series worth watching. But that was a one-off stunt they couldn't really have taken much further, any more than they could have brought back last year's yodelling nitwit more than once. These novelties soon wear off.
I guess the problem The X Factor faces is that although it's losing viewers, it's not losing enough to justify axing it, or even resting it. Not until ITV has lined up a sure-fire ratings-grabber to take its place. And unless they take up my suggestion of bringing back celebrity diving show Splash! without any water in the pool, I really can't see where that sort of hit is going to come from.
Related articles Returning X Factor judge Cheryl Cole stuns in sexy black dress Rough Copy's Kaz booted off X Factor tour
Meanwhile, over on BBC1, The Voice UK seems to have hit upon an alternative formula that people are finally warming to. It's not without its flaws, of course, and it's arguably just as pointless in the end, but at least it feels more fun and fresh and upbeat. Better still, it rarely strays far down the sob story route, or leaves rejected contestants feeling as though they should chuck themselves under a bus.
My own view is that these X Factor panel shake-ups never go far enough. If they really mean business, why not have one judge from outside the music industry? Someone with no vested interests, no pop fanbase to suck up to, no album to promote. Someone with something genuinely different to say, however controversial. Someone who'll really stir things up.
One week we could have Britain's biggest motormouth cabby, for example. The next, we could have the most gobby bloke or woman from down your local, or maybe that bloke who stormed out of the Question Time audience in Essex the other night during the immigration debate.
Ultimately, if The X Factor wants to give its judging panel a proper revamp, the answer isn't to re-hire the likes of Cheryl Cole.
It's to hire someone who'll really tell it like it is. Someone who's prepared to be a spokesperson for the people. Someone who's willing to cut the crap – and who, if the situation demands it, isn't scared to cause offence.
Oh sh*t, I think I've just nominated Garry Bushell...
* You can read Mike's TV previews every day in your Daily Star.
Document DAICO00020140312ea3b0002t
