{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1117"}
____
News
Farage WILL form far right alliance with France's Marine Le Pen, claims outspoken Dutch MP Geert Wilders
TOM MCTAGUE, MAIL ONLINE DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
783 words
6 May 2014
12:05
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Ukip has ruled out working with France's controversial Front National
* Nigel Farage claims Marine Le Pen's anti-immigration party is 'anti-Semitic'
* But she is on course to win upcoming Brussels elections
* Le Pen wants to form a eurosceptic bloc to undermine Brussels
* Dutch MP Geert Wilders says Ukip will find a way to work with Le Pen
Nigel Farage will take Ukip into an alliance with a host of extreme right wing parties, one of the EU's most controversial politicians has claimed.
Anti-EU Dutch politician Geert Wilders said Mr Farage will ditch a promise never to work with France's National Front - led by Marine Le Pen.
Mr Wilders and Miss Le Pen have joined forces to create a 'European Freedom Alliance'. Like Ukip, both are leading in the polls ahead of the crunch May 22 European Parliament elections.
Mr Farage has refused to join the alliance - and pledged never to work with the French nationalists because of their  'anti-Semitism and general prejudice'.
But Mr Farage has refused to rule out working with Mr Wilders - despite the Dutch politican’s controversial views on Islam and immigrants,
Mr Wilders, who leads the Dutch Freedom Party, sparked controversy this year by joining in chants demanding 'fewer Moroccans' at a campaign rally.
But the Dutch politician dismissed criticism of his behaviour - and insisted he could persuage Mr Farage to work with Miss Le Pen’s Front National.
He told The Telegraph : 'I am optimistic that Mr Farage will have more room to work together than he does today after the elections.
'He is not excluding my party and there is still an opportunity but he is tougher on the Front National for now.
'I understand he is a politician but I hope after elections both Miss Le Pen, Mr Farage and myself will be able to work together.
'I respect Mr Farage a lot. I think he is a very charismatic and excellent politician I understand he has a lot of support.
'But I also respect Marine Le Pen a lot. She is a very charismatic leader as well doing well in the polls with almost the same message when it comes to Europe.'
Mr Wilders said Mr Farage would join the far-right alliance after the elections - where Eurosceptic parties are expected to get a third of the vote across the Continent - because it would hand the anti-EU parties much more power.
He said: 'I hope we can overstep our differences to represent the all the millions of people who elected our parties to be as strong as possible a countervailing power against all the Europhiles in Brussels.
'It is not helpful to have two leaders of two important parties [Mr Farage and Miss Le Pen] fighting publicly. I hope I can play a role in bringing them both together. I would like to work together very closely with Ukip and Front National.'
Polls put the French Front National and Dutch Freedom Party in a strong position to form a far-Right bloc in the European Parliament. They are expected to end up with at least 38 MEPs from at least seven countries.
The Austrian Freedom Party, Belgian Vlaams Belang, Italian Lega Nord, Slovak National Party and Sweden Democrats have all vowed to join the alliance.
If the group does as well as the polls suggest, it would be entitled to over £2million a year in EU funds. But they would be in an even better position if Ukip's expected 25 MEPs were to sign up as well.
Mr Wilders said: 'The elections are historic because many Eurosceptic parties, in the UK, Netherlands and France, will have a very good result.
'If they are not the outright winners they will be second in many cases. That is historic.
'People are fed up. We want to decide who we invite into our country, how we spend our money for Dutch taxpayers, not to give it to Greece or Cyprus.
'We have to be masters again of our borders and budgets.”
But Ukip has insisted that there will no alliance with Mr Wilders and Miss Le Pen.
Ukip's Roger Helmer said on Twitter today: 'Memo to Gert Wilders: UKIP MEPs will absolutely not sit with Marine Le Pen's party. Ever.'
A party spokesman added: 'Ukip has made it clear that the party will have nothing to do with Front National or any of its fellow travellers in their new group.
'There have been no contacts between Nigel Farage and Geert Wilders.'
Document DAMONL0020140506ea56003uz
