{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1844"}
____
News
Asian community knows how to look after their elderly relatives, says minister who says Britain has forgotten 'family obligation'
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
605 words
22 April 2014
15:37
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Simon Hughes claims Britain has forgotten the 'wider family obligation'
* Lib Dem says fewer people would need NHS care if families helped
* Lessons can be learned from Asian and African communities, he says
British families must learn from Asian and African communities who look after elderly relatives ‘until the end’, a justice minister has suggested.
Lib Dem Simon Hughes said too many people end up living alone later in life, relying on councils and the NHS for care.
However, many recent immigrant communities understand the ‘wider family obligation’ which means fewer people need to rely on the state.
The number of over-65s living alone has risen by 280,000 to 3.6million in the last decade.
Research among people aged 50 and over suggests loneliness can be twice as unhealthy as obesity.
Mr Hughes claimed British families have slowly abandoned the idea of a responsibility to the wider family and instead expected the state to provide care.
He said people should look to Asian and African families, where several generations often live under the same roof.
Mr Hughes said: ‘Our society has often left too many people who are the responsibility of the public services on their own in later life, even though they have family alive and other people you would have thought would care.
‘We have gone through a period where the sense of a wider family responsibility has been much less important than it has in the past.
“I think we need to learn better the lessons of many other cultures and communities, of which the Asian and African communities are noticeable. They understand the obligation to look after your family to the end,’ he told the Telegraph.
‘If we had a society in which we collectively take responsibility for our families I think we would see fewer people dependent on the state.’
This month a report accused GPs of ignoring the risks of loneliness.
It said family doctors were failing to associate a solitary lifestyle with harmful habits such as smoking, drinking and a poor diet, with just a third believing it can lead to an early death.
Britain’s ageing population means the problem is likely to worsen. The number of over-75s is predicted to rise from 4.2million to more than 6.3million over two decades.
Mr Hughes added: ‘There are many families, some of which are from more recent immigrant cultures, who are very good at understanding the wider family obligation.
‘We need to look to our neighbours who often, even if they are not well off, manage to share family responsibility which means not forcing them into care homes. It can be done.
‘We should not consign any individual to be neglected by the family and often have a much less happy ending than they would otherwise have.’
According to the Campaign to End Loneliness, there are 800,000 people in England who are chronically lonely and some five million people say television is their main form of company.
In a speech last year, Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt said Britain should be ashamed of the way it treats grandparents.
He warned a million elderly are left forgotten and isolated because friends and relatives fail to visit them.
Citing the example of Asian nations, he said families should take more responsibility for grandparents and not leave caring to the state.
Mr Hunt, who has a Chinese wife, was struck by the reverence and respect for the elderly in the Far East.
Document DAMONL0020140422ea4m003xp
