{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"1258"}
____
Hypocrite Hopkins! Katie attacks Rebecca Adlington for bowing to bullies... just like her
Emma Kelly   
637 words
28 February 2014
13:21
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
KATIE Hopkins usually spends her days bullying pop stars and TV personalities about their weight, family or career.
But the rent-a-gob has now decided to bully someone for bowing to the pressure of bullies – and blasted the bullies themselves too.
Confused? Yeah, us too.
The former Apprentice star has blasted Olympic swimmer Rebecca Adlington for reportedly getting surgery to decrease the size of her nose.
After tweeting earlier this week that Becky's nose job was a "big mistake", Hopkins elaborated on why the Olympic medallist's confidence boost was such a disastrous move.
In her column for The Sun, the gobby TV personality wrote: "They picked on your nose, but you changed it. What's next, Becky? Your eyes? Your hair? Your boobs?"
She also moaned that Rebecca had "let them [internet trolls] win" by going under the knife, before adding: "You'd think that a gold medal would make you invincible."
Katie also compared the Olympic hero to HERSELF – labelling Becky "my lookalike", and saying that the blonde's looks "invited scorn".
But in the midst of the bizarre double standards, Katie did throw in a few giggles – namely by referring to herself as Concorde, Horse Face and Beaky.
Katie Hopkins
Hopkins, who has riled viewers with her obnoxious views on The Big Benefit Row and The Big Immigration Row, bit back at those who used her looks as a source of insults, writing: "I am happy with my nose. I can use it as a sundial if I'm in the mood."
While Katie – shock horror – actually seemed to be on Rebecca's side, telling her not to listen to the bullies, in typical Hopkins fashion she managed to make matters worse for the jungle babe.
Becky famously broke down in tears after spending time with beauty queen Amy Willerton in the I'm a Celeb jungle, and comedian Frankie Boyle joked that the star had "the face of a dolphin".
In an interview with the Times last year, the engaged swimmer admitted that she never found herself "particularly attractive", and said: "I’ve got a very big nose. That’s what most of the negative comments on Twitter are about — my nose.
"People say, 'Oh God you look like a dolphin,' or 'I didn’t realise they let whales into the Olympics, but at least you should be able to swim faster with a nose like that'."
While many of Katie's followers agreed that Becky shouldn't have let bullies affect her confidence, some pointed out the hypocrisy in her argument.
One girl tweeted: "How Katie Hopkins can criticise Rebecca Adlington's bullies when she openly bullies women on their appearances is beyond me."
When not blasting those who listen to the harsh words of bullies, Katie has been insulting Lily Allen for becoming "hideous" and "fat" during pregnancy; telling CBB's Liz Jones that she has a "flat face"; calling Sam Bailey "a fat mum in a jumpsuit"; and labelling Little Mix's Jesy Nelson a "chubber".
In fact, just days after her original tweets blasting Adlington, Katie took to Twitter to say: "12 is definitely a size called fat", and asked followers: "Do fat people deliberately wear over tight clothes. Or did they get bigger and keep on imagining they fitted?"
Internet trolls blasting other internet trolls – and so the vicious circle of bullying continues.
Related articles The Big British Immigration Row Live: Katie Hopkins and Luisa Zissman face off Katie Hopkins causes a stir on The Big Benefits Row: Live TOWIE's Gemma Collins calls Katie Hopkins a cringe of a woman after sick weight insults Lily Allen lashes out at Katie Hopkins after rent-a-gob insults her pregnancy weight gain
Document DAICO00020140228ea2s002bd
