{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2061"}
____
News
'Farage's mask is slipping' says Clegg but Ukip still set for landmark victory in Euro elections despite allegations of racism while Labour slump lower in the polls
SOPHIE JANE EVANS   
2,854 words
18 May 2014
14:27
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Ukip is set for landmark victory in the European elections, says new poll
* Party is leading with 35 per cent among those 'absolutely certain' to vote
* Labour is on 24 per cent, while Conservatives have dropped to 20 per cent
* Comes as Nigel Farage has denied allegations of racism in LBC interview
* Claimed he would be concerned if group of Romanians moved next door
* Added there are 'differences' between Romanian and German immigrants
* Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg accused Mr Farage of 'divisive politics'
* Meanwhile, Ed Miliband said remarks were 'deeply offensive' but not racist
Ukip is set for a landmark victory in this week's European elections despite allegations of racism against leader Nigel Farage, a poll has shown today.
The party is leading with 35 per cent - one point up on last week - among those 'absolutely certain' to vote in the elections to the Strasbourg Parliament on Thursday.
Meanwhile, Labour remains in second place on 24 per cent - and support for the Conservatives has dropped down two points to 20 per cent.
It comes as Mr Farage has defended his comments that there are 'differences' between Romanian and German immigrants. 
During an interview with the radio station LBC, the politician remarked that he would be concerned if a group of Romanians were to move in next door to him.
He also said he felt 'uncomfortable' hearing so many foreign languages spoken on trains in London.
The interview, carried out by presenter James O'Brien on Thursday, was eventually interrupted by Mr Farage's media spin doctors.
Yesterday, The Sun ran an editorial claiming the Ukip leader was 'racist' to declare Romanian immigrants and other foreigners were 'different'.
Mr Farage later released a statement rejecting the allegations - but stoked the row by stating in it that there was a 'high level of criminality within the Romanian community in Britain.'
In the statement, he said: 'Police figures are quite clear that there is a high level of criminality within the Romanian community in Britain.
'This is not to say for a moment that all or even most Romanian people living in the UK are criminals.
'But it is to say that any normal and fair- minded person would have a perfect right to be concerned if a group of Romanian people suddenly moved in next door.'
Scroll down for video
However, despite Mr Farage's remarks, today's poll suggests the UK Independence Party is on course for a landslide win, with its highest lead ever in a European elections survey.
The ComRes poll, carried out on more than 2,000 British adults for The Independent on Sunday, also shows that the Green Party has risen two points to seven per cent, pushing the Liberal Democrats into fifth place with just six per cent.
NIGEL FARAGE MAKES STATEMENT FOLLOWING THE LBC INTERVIEW
Nigel Farage released a statement yesterday rejecting allegations that he was 'racist' in an interview with the radio station LBC.
He said: 'The unfortunate reality is that we are in a political union with a post-Communist country that has become highly susceptible to organised crime.
'Where there are differential crime rates between nationalities, it is perfectly legitimate to point this out and to discuss it in the public sphere, and I shall continue to do so.
'Police figures are quite clear that there is a high level of criminality within the Romanian community in Britain. This is not to say for a moment that all or even most Romanian people living in the UK are criminals.
'But it is to say that any normal and fair-minded person would have a perfect right to be concerned if a group of Romanian people suddenly moved in next door.
'So far as I can see most of those media commentators objecting to this statement are people living in million pound houses for whom the prospect of such a turn of events is not a real one.'
But it stands in stark contrast to an ICM poll for The Sunday Telegraph, which claims Ukip has dropped into third place behind the Conservatives ahead of this week's elections.
It comes as Nick Clegg has claimed that Mr Farage's 'beer-swilling bon ami mask' is slipping to reveal an extremely nasty view of modern Britain.
The Deputy Prime Minister accused the Ukip leader of using divisive politics in the LBC interview, and also refused to predict how many euro MPs he expects his party to have after Thursday's elections.
He added that Ukip will likely do well and make gains in traditional Labour heartlands.
Asked if Mr Farage was 'indulging in racist language' with his Romanian comments, Mr Clegg told BBC One's The Andrew Marr Show: 'I think the mask is starting to slip and I think what's being revealed that sort of behind the beer-swilling bon ami is a rather nasty view of the world.
'I think anyone who singles out one community, one nationality, and says "I don't want to live next door to them", I really think that's the politics of division and I think it really should have no place in modern Britain.
'I would say to people if you don't like that point of view, if, like me, you are really put off by this very divisive, nasty approach to things then please go out and vote.
'The more people don't vote the more likely it is that Ukip will get in.'
The Liberal Democrat leader added he would be happy to debate again with Mr Farage following their recent television clashes, saying: 'I like to think that because I decided to take Nigel Farage on... that's one of the reasons he's being subject to more scrutiny, that's why you're seeing the mask slip and it's revealing an extremely nasty view of modern Britain.'
Mr Clegg also accused the Conservatives of stamping their feet and petulance in their attempts to reform the UK's relationship with the European Union (EU).
Prime Minister David Cameron is currently under pressure from allies of German Chancellor Angela Merkel to reveal whom the party's allies will be in the new European Parliament.
And he has insisted he will not return to Number 10 unless he can secure an agreement that an in/out EU referendum will go ahead in 2017.
Mr Clegg said 'you cannot win the argument in Europe unless you are in Europe', saying of the Tory approach: 'I think there's a sort of elevated form of petulance to say we are going to stamp our little feet to get our little short shopping list of really rather minor changes, which they're now advocating, and if we don't get them with them we'll quit.
'Guess what happens if you do that? People will say "suit yourself then".'
Mr Clegg said many of the changes sought by the Tories are 'motherhood and apple pie' that most people would agree with.
Asked if it was a 'phoney agenda' from the Tories, he went on: 'I think it's worse than that.
'It's never going to satisfy large parts of the Conservative Party because large parts of the Conservative Party actually want to join Nigel Farage and leave.
'They don't have the courage to say so, so what you've got is this phoney war if you like within the Conservative Party which is now being papered over, those cracks papered over, by this arbitrary timetable of holding a referendum in 2017.'
Mr Clegg said he had no problem with a referendum or reforming the UK's relationship with the EU, adding: 'I have a problem with the internal divisions of the Conservative Party being the determining factor of what should be a policy taken in the national interest.'
Meanwhile, Ed Miliband has also spoken out following Mr Farage's controversial interview, saying he believes the politician made some 'deeply offensive' remarks, but is not racist.
When asked whether Mr Farage was racist, Mr Miliband told Sky's Dermot Murnaghan: 'Personally, I don't think so.
'I think his remarks he made were deeply offensive... I think they were a racial slur but I don't think of Nigel Farage as a racist himself.'
UKIP LEADER NIGEL FARAGE'S INTERVIEW WITH LBC'S JAMES O'BRIEN
RACE STORMS
James O'Brien: 'John Lyndon Sullivan, he's a councillor of yours over in Gloucestershire.
'Overnight he's tweeted "I rather often wonder if we shot one poofter, whether the next 99 would decide on balance that they weren't after all. We might then conclude that it's not a matter of genetics, but rather more a matter of education".
'A fairly small fry in the UKIP machine, not a description you could apply to your small business spokesman, who it turned out this morning has employed seven illegal immigrants in the last year.
'Are they both idiots?'
Nigel Farage: 'Firstly, people say silly things. Yeah, of course, we've had more of it than we would like. But hey, hang on a second, what's going on in the other parties?'
O'Brien: 'So what happens to John Lyndon Sullivan then, for that tweet?'
Farage: 'He will face a disciplinary charge, on whether he's brought the party into disrepute.'
O'Brien: 'What about the small business spokesman who employed seven illegal immigrants?'
Farage: 'Well that, I think be a little bit careful on that story, you know. He founded a business, which he's no longer a director of, his sons run it, they have got a big row going on.
'He wasn't responsible for the day to day running of it. However, I've spoken to him this morning.  He says, they made checks and they are in dispute with the immigration authorities, and they've gone to appeal.  
'So we'll have to see how that plays out. But that doesn't make him an idiot, you know.'
UKIP'S ALLIES IN THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
O'Brien: 'What about the mud that's been thrown about the far right parties with which you sit in Europe - the Danish People's Party, the True Finns Party, the Dutch SGP, and perhaps most interestingly, the Lega Nord.
'I think you co-chair, do you, that group with Francesco Speroni...he described Anders Breivik [the far right Norwegian murderer who killed 77 people in 2011] as someone whose ideas are in defence of western civilisation.'
Farage: 'No he didn't actually, he didn't...one of his members did and we kicked him out of the group.'
O'Brien: 'No, no, you're thinking of Mario Borghezio, who went further and said in a radio interview that Breivik had some excellent ideas. 
'But Speroni himself, who is your co-chair of this group, said that Breivik's ideas are in defence of western civilisation.'
Farage: 'If you would come with me to Italy or Poland or Slovakia, and listen to the political discourse, you would realise how incredibly different it is to what we would consider to be acceptable in this country.  
'What I have done, in the European Parliament, is to try and draw a line and to say we will not sit with people who we believe to be on the extremes.  
'We will sit with people who we believe to have a reasonable, balanced point of view.
'Now, let's be honest, we have had a problem in this group with one or two members of the Northern League.'
O'Brien: 'Why don't you just leave then?'
Farage: 'Well we could leave it.'
O'Brien: 'Well why don't you leave it?'
Farage: 'We have said, that we will not sit, you know, with the Front Nationale, and parties like the Austria Freedom Party. 
'We have made that perfectly clear, that we are not a party that wants to be linked to the far right.
'But I promise you, if you look at the associations everybody has to form in the European Parliament, a degree of compromise is needed.'
FOREIGN LANGUAGES ON TRAINS
O'Brien: 'You've mentioned your discomfort at listening to foreign languages on a train recently.'
Farage: 'I made the point that I got on a train, went for several stops and there were a lot of people around me, and no one spoke English.
'And I thought, you know, this is... I didn't object to it, I felt slightly uncomfortable.'
O'Brien: 'You said, "I don't feel very comfortable in that situation", you did say you had a problem.'
Farage: 'I didn't feel comfortable, no.'
O'Brien: 'Your wife is a German speaker.'
Farage: 'Well my children are too, yeah.'
O'Brien: 'Does that make you feel uncomfortable?'
Farage: 'No, because they can speak English.'
O'Brien: 'How do you know those people couldn't?'
Farage: 'Well maybe they could, but I got the distinct feeling that it certainly wasn't their language of choice.  
'And if you look at the primary school situation in the East End of London, you know, where you've now got schools where a majority don't speak English.
O'Brien: 'The schools you refer to, the pupils you refer to, are registered and recorded as having English as a second language, they're not registered and recorded as not being able to speak English.
'Your own children would fit into that category.'
Farage: 'Well, hopefully lots of people can speak different languages.'
O'Brien: 'No, forgive me...the point you're making is that schools in the East End are full of children who can't speak English.  
'The children who are typified as speaking English as a second language would include your own daughters, their mother tongue being German.'
Farage: 'They come from homes where English is most definitely not the first language, and in too many cases is not their language at all.'
O'Brien: 'But no one's counted how many people are in the second category.'
Farage: 'No and it would be a very helpful and useful thing if they did, and perhaps we'd be even more surprised and even more shocked.'
O'Brien: 'Or perhaps we'd realised that most bilingual children in this country are children like yours.'
Farage: 'I made a comment there which wasn't intended to say anymore than I felt uncomfortable about the rate and pace of change and numbers of people...'
O'Brien: 'No, you were uncomfortable about people speaking foreign languages, despite the fact that presumably your own wife does when she phones home to Germany.'
Farage: 'Yeah I don't suppose she speaks it on the train, you know, that is the point I'm making.'
O'Brien: 'Why not?  Is she not allowed to, can't she speak German wherever she wants?'
Farage: 'Of course she can.'
ON LIVING NEXT DOOR TO ROMANIANS
O'Brien: 'What about the line about not wanting to live next door to Romanians.
Farage: 'I didn't say that. I was asked, if a group of Romanian men moved in next door to you, would you be concerned.
O'Brien: 'What about if a group of German children did?  What's the difference?'
Farage: 'You know what the difference is.'
O'Brien: 'No I honestly don't.'
ON HIS EUROPEAN EXPENSES
O'Brien: 'Finally, the question of your expenses and your financial arrangements.
'I heard you on Radio 4 saying that you'd submit to a full audit.  You've reversed ferreted on that on the grounds that other MEPs don't.
'So these are the transparency arrangements that all Labour MEPs sign up for.  Can you sign up for those today?'
Farage: 'Yeah, they don't...they don't actually.  What they do is they have an auditor who make sure they spend the money in accordance with the rules. There are no expenses.
O'Brien: 'You say that as if there's something wrong with it. They have an auditor to make sure they spend the money in accordance with the rules.'
Patrick O'Flynn [Ukip's media chief]: 'Sorry, we had an agreement about timing, you've massively…
Farage: 'Hang on, hang on.'
O'Brien: 'This is Patrick O'Flynn, UKIP's Director of Communications and former political commentator on the Daily Express. Is this a friend in the media or a member of the political class?'
Farage: 'There are no expenses, these are allowances, fixed rate allowances, which I've spent in accordance with the rules.'
O'Brien: 'So will you go for the audit that all Labour MEPs go for?'
Farage: 'We will make a decision en masse.
O'Brien: 'But yes, but Nigel you're in charge.'
Farage: 'But I'm very suspicious of the word audit used in that context.'
O'Brien: Are you?'
Farage: 'Yes.'
Document DAMONL0020140518ea5i004xz
