{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2465"}
____
News
Cameron is posh and rich, Miliband is a weak and slimy and Clegg is useless: What voters REALLY think of our party leaders
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
648 words
4 March 2014
17:03
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Men and women asked to name a word or phrase about three party leaders
* Prime Minister David Cameron is seen as posh, out of touch and smug
* Labour leader Ed Miliband is a weak idiot, and women said 'slimy'
* Lib Dem Nick Clegg viewed as weak, useless, untrustworthy and a liar
Britain’s political leaders have been condemned by voters as posh, lying idiots, a new opinion poll reveals.
David Cameron is dismissed as ‘out of touch’ and ‘rich', Ed Miliband is a ‘weak idiot’ and Nick Clegg is seen as a ‘liar’ by men and ‘nothing’ by women.
The damning verdict on the men vying to run the country comes amid claims the Tories are not losing the battle to woo women voters.
Pollster Lord Ashcroft, the former Tory donor, surveyed men and women to gauge their opinions of each of the three main parties.
Labour lead the Tories by seven points among men (37 per cent to 30) but 12 points among women (41 per cent to 29 per cent).
Women are less likely than men to think the Tories will take tough decisions for the long term, are competent and capable or ‘shares my values’.
In the poll voters were asked to give the first word that came to mind for each of the party leaders.
For David Cameron, men said posh, out of touch, competent and Prime Minister. Other answers included toff, weak, smug, leader and arrogant.
Among women, they said posh, out of touch, Prime Minister, idiot and rich, followed by smug, arrogant, weak and liar.
Out of the top 20 results, women gave four words which did not feature in the top 20 for men: Conservative, pompous, incompetent and family.
Men also said Eton, good, Tory and determined, which did not feature on the list for women.
Lord Ashcroft said: ‘The Conservative Party’s problem, then, is not that it is not attracting enough women; it is that it is not attracting enough of anybody.
‘The striking thing in the polls is not the gender gap but the overall numbers of either sex who are prepared to say the Tories stand for opportunity or are on their side.
‘It is not women who have a problem with the Conservatives, it is voters.’
Almost all of the words associated with Labour leader Ed Miliband were negative.
For both men and women ‘weak’ and ‘idiot’ topped the list. Only women said of Mr Miliband nothing, boring, who?, unsure, slimy and annoying.
Men singled out unions, out of his depth, geek, red, inexperienced and socialist.
Other answers given by both men and women were trying, fair, useless, OK, untrustworthy, Wallace and nasal.
Both men and women mentioned David, Mr Miliband’s brother who he defeated in the battle to be Labour leader.
Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg fared little better. The word ‘weak’ topped the list among both men and women.
Women also responded nothing, liar, useless, idiot, OK, who? Lib Dem, nice and follower. Men said liar, useless, untrustworthy, puppet, OK, nothing, who?, good and Lib Dem.
Women alone described Mr Clegg as boring, spineless, wet, unsure and soft. Men also described him as a waste of space, two-faced, indecisive, lap dog and opportunist.
Lord Ashcroft added: ‘Is it better to be thought “spineless", “wet" and “soft" (women), or a “two-faced" “lapdog" “opportunist" (men)? Another strategic dilemma for the Deputy PM to ponder.’
When asked what the big issues facing the country are, men and women both listed getting the economy growing and creating jobs, controlling immigration and managing the economy.
But fourth on the list they differed, with men saying cutting the deficit and debt, while women said for improving the NHS.
Document DAMONL0020140304ea34006sz
