{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"2741"}
____
Nigel Farage wins over viewers AGAIN in live TV debate with Nick Clegg
Tom Rawle   
417 words
3 April 2014
00:10
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
NIGEL Farage has toppled Nick Clegg once again in a fiestier battle of personal blows in this week's live debate on the EU.
The beer-swilling Ukip leader won over viewers for the second time in the space of a week with 68% of those surveyed voting in favour of the popular anti-EU campaigner.
In the YouGov survey, just 27% voted for Deputy Prime Minister Clegg in a debate that saw Farage accused of living in a "fantasy" world and Clegg being a "wilful liar".
The poll results this week show a bigger difference to the 57% to 36% split being recorded last week.
In tonight's debate, Mr Farage laid into the current regime, calling immigration control a "disaster" and left the "white working-class effectively as an underclass".
He said: "It is good for the rich because it is cheaper nannies and cheaper chauffeurs and cheaper gardeners.
"But it is bad news for ordinary Britons.
"We need to have a control on immigration, on the numbers who come here and over the quality who come here."
Nigel Farage
Mr Farage then took a personal slant and said he was "shocked" Clegg would openly lie to the British public about the EU.
He added: "By saying 7% of our laws are made in Brussels, you are wilfully lying to the British people about the extent to which we have given away control of our country and our democracy.
"I'm really shocked and surprised that you would try and do that."
But Mr Clegg, who slowly gritted his teeth as Farage laid into him, said the Ukip leader could not live in a "fantasy" world anymore.
He even accused Mr Farage of "making things up to make a point".
Mr Clegg said: "I wouldn't be surprised if Nigel Farage soon tells us that the moon landing was a fake, that Barack Obama is not American, that Elvis is not dead.
"If it sounds too good to be true then it probably is."
He added that Ukip are still stuck in the 19th century, where they believe "Britain had the empire, women knew their place and stayed at home, people who are gay were not allowed to get married".
Related articles Ukip's Nigel Farage thinks Russian president Putin is a Vladi nice bloke Nigel Farage comes out on top after live head-to-head debate with Nick Clegg
Document DAICO00020140402ea42003jt
