{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"558"}
____
TV&Showbiz
SPOILER ALERT: Shameless star Emmy Rossum admits she had 'no idea' about shocking season four ending
COLETTE FAHY   
360 words
7 April 2014
08:42
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
It was the twist no one saw coming, not even the cast.
Shameless star Emmy Rossum took to her Twitter page on Sunday to admit that even she was shocked by the dramatic twist in the season four finale, which left viewers flabbergasted.
Those who have not yet seen the episode may want to stop reading now.
A scene after the credits revealed the surprising news that that Steve Wilton aka Jimmy Lishman, who was believed to have been murdered by Brazilian mobsters at the end of season three, is alive.
The scene saw the character, played by Justin Chatwin, pull up to the Gallagher house win an unnamed woman (played by Dichen Lachman) who asks if he would like to go inside.
He replies, 'Not tonight', before they drive off.
Steve/Jimmy was a love interest of Emmy's character Fiona, who married Estefania, the daughter of a Brazilian mobster but later resumed his relationship with Fiona.
Nando, Estefania's father, wanted her to become a citizen and stay in the US, and threatened to kill Jimmy if he did not convince Immigration theirs was a real marriage.
After failing to convince Immigration that the marriage was not a scam, Nando took Jimmy on a boat, here it was believed he was murdered.
Emmy took time out of her road trip to Vegas to share her thoughts on Twitter, writing: 'HOLLLLLLY MOLY NO IDEA. HE'S ALIVE. JUST FOUND OUT WITH YOU. PPL CALLING ME. SO MAD DIDN'T SEE LIVE. #JIMMYSTEVE @Justingchatwin #SHAMELESS.'
She added: 'Got the 411 from @Justingchatwin & our producers. They flew him 2 Chicago & put him in another hotel so noone would know! #sneaky #SHAMELESS.'
Justin added: 'I guess It's not over till it's over.'
'They didn’t tell me @Justingchatwin was going to be on the finale!!! DAMN!!!! That was awesome !!' co-star Steve Howey wrote while Shanola Hampton added: 'Ladies and Gentlemen I am completely shocked right now!!!!! I had no idea, best, kept secret!'
Document DAMONL0020140407ea47002uu
