{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2182"}
____
  
News
RED FACES IN CABINET AFTER MINISTER SLAMS 'WEALTHY ELITE' FOR CHEAP LABOUR
BY TIM SHIPMAN DEPUTY    
470 words
8 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
24
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
THE Tories faced fresh embarrassment over immigration last night when it emerged that Home Secretary Theresa May uses a Brazilian-born cleaner.
A day after Immigration Minister James Brokenshire condemned the 'wealthy metropolitan elite' for using cheap labour from migrants, his boss confirmed that she employs a female home help who was born abroad.
The cleaner has obtained British citizenship and aides denied that Mrs May played any role in assisting her quest for a passport.
But the revelation came as Downing Street admitted that Samantha Cameron helped the Prime Minister's Nepalese nanny get British citizenship.
Mrs Cameron signed Gita Lima's application for British citizenship in 2010 as the Nepalese nanny's employer. In that role she would have been expected to support her claim for citizenship.
A No10 spokesman said: 'Mr and Mrs Cameron's nanny became a British citizen in late 2010. Mr and Mrs Cameron did not write a letter supporting their nanny's application for British citizenship. The normal application process was followed throughout.'
A spokesman for Mrs May said: 'Theresa May's cleaner is a British citizen but she was born in Brazil. Theresa had no role at all in her cleaner's application for citizenship.'
But the fresh revelations will fuel the view of many voters that Cabinet ministers are part of the 'wealthy metropolitan elite' criticised by Mr Brokenshire.
And the details are likely to spark cries of hypocrisy among those who employ cleaners and nannies at the way ministers are prepared to criticise people who hire immigrant workers while doing exactly the same themselves.
In a speech on Thursday, Mr Brokenshire said: 'For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services, but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country.' The issue is particularly acute since Mr Brokenshire's predecessor Mark Harper was forced to resign after it emerged that he had employed a cleaner who was working in Britain illegally.
A Downing Street spokesman made clear that the Camerons employed Miss Lima not because she was cheap but because she was the best person for the job.
The candour of Mrs May and the Camerons was not matched by all in the Cabinet. The Daily Mail yesterday asked 20 of its members if they employed foreign workers as cleaners, nannies, builders and home helps.
However, the majority of those questioned failed to provide a substantive response.
Labour MP John Mann said they should come clean, adding: 'They should be seeking out British staff. We need every Cabinet minister to declare what staff they have employed from abroad.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140307ea3800024
