{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"368"}
____
News
Scotland is a nation of DRUNKS, says Alex Salmond who is accused of an 'unforgivable slur' against his own country
ALAN RODEN   
2,978 words
1 May 2014
15:09
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* First Minister says Scotland must end shameful relationship with alcohol
* His flagship plan to hike the cost of booze has been delayed by two years
* Says whisky cannot be successfully promoted from a 'nation of drunks'
* Reveals he is an avid fan of scheming Frank Underwood in House of Cards
* X-Factor style contest to be used to choose a new national anthem
Scotland is a ‘nation of drunks’ that must end its shameful relationship with alcohol, claims Alex Salmond.
The First Minister’s outspoken attack came as his flagship policy to hike the cost of booze was hit yesterday by a legal delay of around two years.
European judges will now rule on SNP plans for a 50p-per-unit ‘minimum price’ in a move seen as a victory for the drinks industry and responsible drinkers.
As Deputy First Minister Nicola Sturgeon yesterday told the Scottish Daily Mail that ministers will fight the legal challenge all the way to Luxembourg, Mr Salmond claimed in a GQ magazine interview that Scotland is the victim of a ‘social change for the worse’.
In the interview published today, he even appears to blame the country’s alcohol problems on Scotland’s lack of independence, saying: ‘There is something deep about Scotland’s relationship with alcohol that is about self-image – lack of confidence, maybe, as a nation – and we have to do something about it.’
The First Minister also attacked the Scotch Whisky Association (SWA) which is fighting the Scottish Government over minimum pricing.
SCOTLAND'S SHOCKING ALCOHOL STATISTICS
Scotland not only remains top of the alcohol league in the UK, it also has the eighth highest alcohol consumption level in the world. 
In 2010, 23 per cent more alcohol was sold per adult in Scotland than in England and Wales - the widest gap to date.
According to the Institute of Alcohol Studies, Scotland drank nearly 50 million litres of pure alcohol in 2007 - equivalent to 11.8 litres per head for every person aged over 16.
This is much more than England and Wales, which had an average consumption figure of 9.9 litres per head.
Scotland’s 11.8 litres is equivalent to 570 pints of 4% beer, nearly 500 pints of strong 5% per cent lager, 42 bottles of vodka or 125 bottles of wine - enough for every single adult to exceed the recommended drinking guidelines for men of 21 units every week of the year. 
Explaining that he promotes whisky when abroad, Mr Salmond told interviewer Alastair Campbell: ‘My argument is that if you are promoting it as authentic and of great worth, you cannot promote it from a nation of drunks.’
But last night critics accused the First Minister of an ‘unforgiveable slur on the people of Scotland’.
Last year, it emerged that off-licence sales have fallen for the first time since records began as Scots cut back on how much alcohol they drink.
There was a three per cent fall between 2011 and 2012 following a series of high-profile campaigns, a prolonged period of financial hardship, and a crackdown on supermarket deals.
Including drinks sold in pubs, total alcohol sales slumped by eight per cent between 2009 and 2012, according to the report for NHS Scotland.
Those findings placed more pressure on the SNP Scottish Government to abandon its plans for a blanket minimum-pricing policy that would penalise responsible drinkers.
And judges at the Court of Session in Edinburgh yesterday ruled that the drinks industry case against the Scottish Government’s policy should be referred to the Court of Justice of the European Union (EU).
Minimum pricing, which was approved by Holyrood nearly two years ago, would see a 50p-per-unit minimum price – putting up the cost of a crate of 24 standard lagers to £21.65.
Research has suggested that supermarkets could receive a £140million-a-year boost from the policy, while drinking levels could fall by only half-a-pint of beer a week.
AN AVID FAN OF HOUSE OF CARDS
He is a ruthless, scheming politician who lets nothing and nobody get in his way on his path to power.
So it perhaps no surprise that Alex Salmond has picked up some tips from Frank Underwood, portrayed by Kevin Spacey in the hit US series House of Cards.
Asked by Alastair Campbell in his GQ interview which film he last watched, Mr Salmond replied: 'Not been to the cinema much but I've watched all of House Of Cards.' 'Did you learn anything for your job? Deals? Dealing with people?' Mr Campbell asked.
'Yes, maybe,' Mr Salmond admitted. 'That was the best bit.' Mr Salmond also revealed that his favourite place in Scotland is the island of Colonsay, while he said California - and San Francisco in particular - is his favourite place in the 'rest of the world'.
'Favourite food?' Mr Campbell asked.
'It was lamb curry, but I am on this 5:2 diet. Don't tell me you didn't notice.' Mr Campbell suggested that two days without energy during a political campaign was 'bad', but the First Minister said: 'I want to be down to 14 stone for the campaign. I was 17, now I'm 15.'
The SWA started legal action against the proposal in 2012, claiming it was not within the powers of Scottish ministers and was incompatible with EU law.
In an unexpected result, Lord Doherty at the Court of Session dismissed the SWA’s claims last year – to the delight of SNP ministers and health campaigners.
But an appeal to the court’s inner house was launched almost immediately, and Lord Eassie ruled  yesterday: ‘There are aspects  relating to the Scottish ministers claim of justification… which we consider that it would be of help to have the guidance of the Court of Justice of the European Law.’
This move bypasses the UK’s Supreme Court, meaning the SNP will not be able to blame London judges if the policy is ultimately rejected.
The Mail recently revealed that whisky chiefs wanted the decision sent to the European Court, because the European Commission ruled last year that minimum pricing would breach EU law. A decision is not expected before 2017.
Miss Sturgeon said yesterday: ‘I am confident in the wisdom and legality of minimum pricing and we will continue to assert that position.’
In Mr Salmond’s GQ interview, conducted on March 14, he said: ‘People have the right to go to court but there has to be some means of a timeframe, otherwise the clock ticks down on the democratic process.’
He added: ‘I promote whisky. I do it on the argument that it’s a quality drink, has a worldwide cachet and that its recent great success in markets like China is about social emulation and authenticity, not cheapness.
‘My argument is that if you are promoting it as authentic and of great worth, you cannot promote it from a nation of drunks. You’ll never be able to say it is healthy and life-giving, but you can say that it’s authentic and high quality.’
ALEX-FACTOR CONTEST TO FIND SCOTLAND'S NEW NATIONAL ANTHEM
Scotland's new national anthem is set to be decided through a song contest if Scotland votes to leave the UK, Alex Salmond has revealed.
The Corries' Flower of Scotland is the nation's unofficial anthem and is sung before rugby and football internationals at Murrayfield and Hampden stadiums. It has also been chosen by Commonwealth Games athletes to ring out when Scots stars receive gold medals in Glasgow this summer.
But the song is not universally popular with its backward-looking references to the Battle of Banockburn and nationalist cry of 'we can still rise now, and be the nation again'.
Before 2010, Scotland the Brave used to be played to celebrate Scottish medal successes and, prior to 1958, Scots Wha Hae was used.
The First Minister revealed his plans for a song contest in his interview with GQ magazine. Pushed on the prospect of a Yes vote and the creation of an official anthem in place of God Save the Queen, he said: 'The people will get a choice.' When asked if that meant that there was going to be 'some kind of contest', the First Minister replied 'Yes'.
But Mr Salmond did not go into details about what shape that contest would take.
A Scottish Government spokesman said last night: ‘In this interview, the First Minister was simply spelling out the clear risks for Scotland as a nation if we do not take radical action to tackle problem drinking.’
But David Frost, chief executive of the SWA, said: ‘We believe that minimum unit pricing would be ineffective in tackling alcohol misuse and would damage the Scotch whisky industry in the UK and overseas.’ 
And Scottish Conservative health spokesman Jackson Carlaw hit out at the First Minister’s comments as a slur on the Scottish people, saying: ‘It would be offensive to hear from a foreigner, but for our own First Minister to hold these views is simply breath-taking and frankly unacceptable in a national leader.’
Mr Salmond has his own private whisky collection, but his wife Moira recently forced him to auction off a bottle – which had been signed by Sir Sean Connery – to boost SNP coffers.
DOUGLAS ALEXANDER: Salmond is obsessed by nationhood, not people. That is why he admires Putin 'pride'
An interview with Alex Salmond, published just days after the illegal annexation of the Crimea by Russia, has revealed much more about the First Minister’s politics than he intended.
His remarks to GQ magazine, in which he expressed his admiration for President Putin’s efforts to restore Russian’s pride in their country, has understandably caused alarm among many Scots who balk at the idea of having a Pro-Putin First Minister.
Coming just days after Russia’s illegal violation of Ukrainian sovereignty, the First Minister’s remarks were worse than a serious blunder at a serious time.
His remarks lifted the lid on the fundamental, inescapable truth about Alex Salmond’s vision of nationalism.
Because although Salmond has tried relentlessly to focus his referendum campaign on the benign aspects of civic nationalism, at its core is the belief that the interests of the nation always and inevitably transcend all other considerations, apparently regardless of the costs to individuals.
The nationalists’ a priori commitment to independence leads to a politics where the facts are fluid but the cause is constant.
Here at home, if the economy is doing well...that’s an argument for independence. If the economy is doing badly...that’s an argument for independence.
With such a world view it is no surprise that faith often trumps facts.
That’s what actually lies behind much of the SNP’s present difficulties on the currency, pension arrangements or indeed EU and NATO membership.
Because for many Nationalists – including Alex Salmond - the evidence on these vital issues is, and will always be, secondary to the primary goal of independence.
These latest comments expose that this dogged obsession with narrow nationalism at all costs now risks blinding them to motives and actions abroad.
Salmond’s rationale for his admiration of Putin is that he had “restored a substantial part of Russian pride” and that this “must be a good thing”.
Really? Can he genuinely defend a cause where regardless of the pain and the suffering caused, the pursuit of so called ‘national pride’ is simply, by default, justified and right?
'This dogged obsession with narrow nationalism at all costs now risks blinding them to motives and actions abroad'
When it comes to Putin’s Russia, what Salmond fails to acknowledge is the cost at which this has come.
There is no pride to be found in Russia having vetoed every single UN resolution designed to help end the conflict in Syria that has led to the death of over 150,000 people.
International organisations have said Putin has made Russia one of the hardest places to be gay in the world with homophobia in Russia leading to increased violence and attacks.
Putin’s political opponents are harassed and imprisoned, women's rights campaigners vilified and journalists intimidated.
These actions are a cause for national shame not pride and Putin's behaviour is making his country less respected and more isolated abroad.
Little wonder that Amnesty International responded to Salmond’s claims by saying he should “reserve his admiration for those worthy of it, not those who trample over human rights and flout international law.”
For Alex Salmond to simply put all of this down to justifiable collateral damage in pursuit of a great nationalist cause, reveals a fundamental truth about of the kind of nationalism that Salmond supports.
Doing your best for your country is not about horse riding bare chested through the Highlands but about doing your best for the people, building alliances, growing prosperity, facing out - everything that Salmond, apparently, relegates to second place behind his obsession with nationalism
The truth is that Putin’s patriotism is more about the greatness of the Russian state, than about the lives of ordinary Russians.
In stark contrast to the naivety of the First Minister, former US President Bill Clinton was wise and far more insightful when he said that President Putin ultimately has a fatalistic view of the misfortunes that befall ordinary people when larger things are at stake.
As true progressive politicians like Clinton – but alas not Alex Salmond –understand in politics the largest things that are at stake are the very things that befall ordinary people.
So my question to the First Minister is this: what price is too high in restoring the national pride that “must be a good thing”?
Today it is becoming clear that President Putin seems to be pursuing a straightforward but dangerous plan in Ukraine - to stoke Russian-nationalist views throughout eastern Ukraine in a cynical attempt to deploy nationalist sentiment to divide the population along ethnic and linguistic lines.
That is why when Russia illegally annexed Crimea in March, Putin claimed that he was acting to protect a ‘Russian speaking’ minority, despite there being no evidence of threats to or attacks on Russian-speakers in eastern Ukraine.
Still today Ukrainians are paying a heavy price as Putin seeks to restore the so-called pride that Salmond so admires.
Instead of praising him, Alex Salmond should be concerned by the fact that the only friends Putin had following the Crimea referendum were far-right National Front parties across Europe – including Hungary’s Jobbik, the Vlaams Belang in Belgium and Austria’s Freedom Party.
The truth is, from disregarding the views of the European Commission President to alienating NATO allies, we know the First Minister has form for making the wrong calls on foreign policy.
In 1999, in the heat of another Scottish campaign, he described British action in Kosovo as “unpardonable folly”. Fifteen years later, with a landmark peace agreement recently signed between Kosovo and Serbia, his misjudgement at the time could hardly be more evident.
Of course, nobody is accusing Salmond of supporting Putin’s excesses, but his comments reveal much about his deepest beliefs.
'We must be vigilant in speaking out against those who would use flags and symbols as a cover for denying basic rights and freedoms'
Does anyone really believe that it is just coincidence that Nigel Farage and Alex Salmond are the only two British politicians who apparently have similar opinions of President Putin?
Alex Salmond and Nigel Farage play the same politics of grudge and grievance to advance their cause and when they see that approach deployed by even Putin they seem drawn to defending it, regardless of the consequences.
Salmond’s nationalism suggests that the people across the rest of the UK are so different from us that separation is not only inevitable but necessary.
But I believe that politics should be about more than identity; it's also about ideals. And as Scots, millions of us understand that our common experience and moral obligations do not stop at the banks of the Tweed.
Scotland has flourished by celebrating diversity and difference because our Scottishness is rooted not in exclusivity but in the diversity of our heritage.
That is a world view consistently opposed by Putin’s Russia.
Immigration and emigration are the tides that by their ebb and flow have shaped who we are. Scots have wandered the world and the world has wandered to Scotland. Robert Burns was two weeks away from becoming an economic migrant from Scotland and for hundreds of years we have welcomed economic migrants to our shores.
The debate ahead of 18 September will involve questions not just about who we are, but what we believe.
And I want to see Scotland, regardless of the outcome of the referendum, speaking out against the rise of the ugly side of nationalism across Europe. We must be vigilant in speaking out against those who would use flags and symbols as a cover for denying basic rights and freedoms.
I believe that Scotland will be diminished if the First Minister places narrow nationalism – the abstract concept of ‘nationhood’ - above the people that make up the nation.
That is true for us Scots here at home. It is also true for those living in Putin’s Russia. We shouldn’t be afraid to say so, and stand with those who would struggle for these ideals, wherever they may be.
Both sides in the Scottish referendum campaign should use this debate to reassert that Scots reject narrow nationalism pursed by those like Putin, and choose a future not defined by difference or grievance but possibility, potential and hope.
Document DAMONL0020140501ea51002uv
