{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2032"}
____
  
News
CAMERON: I'LL QUIT IF IN-OUT REFERENDUM ON EU DOESN'T GO AHEAD
BY JAMES CHAPMAN    
586 words
29 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
21
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
DAVID Cameron has suggested he would resign if he fails to deliver his pledge to hold a referendum on Britain's membership after the next general election.
He accepted voters were 'sceptical' about his promise but insisted: 'I would not continue as Prime Minister unless it can be absolutely guaranteed this referendum will go ahead on an in-out basis.'
Mr Cameron last night also made clear that a referendum is a 'deal breaker' in any future coalition negotiations - insisting it could not be ditched if he were to fail to win an outright majority and seek a new power-sharing deal with Nick Clegg.
'This is a guaranteed part of our plan... I can't make it any clearer than that,' he said. 'This is a totally key part of our plan.'
Mr Cameron has pledged to hold a referendum on Britain's future in Europe by the end of 2017 if he remains in Downing Street, whether or not he succeeds in negotiating substantial changes in our relationship with Brussels.
But he made it clear he wants to see changes to the EU's fundamental treaties ahead of the vote in 2017. 'I'm giving myself some time to negotiate these changes - two years after the election to fix this renegotiation,' he told a conference call with handpicked members of the public.
'But people can absolutely be guaranteed that if I am Prime Minister after the next election, that referendum will take place.'
His remarks come amid a growing focus on the EU ahead of next month's elections to the European Parliament. Polls suggest Ukip are on course to win.
Boris Johnson yesterday attacked the 'continual deceit' that Britain can control immigration while remaining members of an EU with an unrestrained right to free movement.
The London Mayor said voters realised the Government was 'not doing anything' about 'completely untramelled' migration from the Continent.
His intervention came as Ed Miliband's policy guru warned Labour risks losing support to Ukip because it has become too 'middle class' and needs to address concerns about immigration and welfare.
Lord Glasman, a policy adviser elevated to the House of Lords by the Labour leader, warned the support of the working classes had 'died' in 2010 and the rise of Nigel Farage's party was eating into his party's 'heartlands'.
His blunt message came as another poll suggested Ukip is on course to win the European elections on May 22, which Mr Farage has claimed will trigger a 'political earthquake' in Britain.
Mr Johnson said Tories 'shouldn't be talking about what other parties are going to do about the EU', but should focus on it being the only major party offering voters a referendum on Britain's future in Europe.
He also told Total Politics magazine that significant reforms to the right to free movement were needed to win back trust.
Mr Cameron has suggested changes to the rules will be among his demands in a proposed renegotiation of Britain's relationship with Brussels ahead of a referendum in 2017.
'We are living in cloud cuckoo land,' Mr Johnson said. 'One of the reasons people are so angry about immigration... it's the continual deceit that we can somehow solve this problem whilst remaining members of the EU. They can see there's a massive incoherence in the argument.'
j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140428ea4t00029
