{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"2337"}
____
  
News
Benefits bride: Give toyboy hubby a visa visa
FELICITY CROSS   
401 words
20 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; Scotland
7
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
A BRITISH expat is planning to move back to the UK with her Tunisian husband to live off benefits.
Deborah Chniti, 43, emigrated two years ago to marry her 27-year-old Facebook lover.
But after falling ill, she can no longer work and is broke while her husband of four years, Ala, earns only £5 a day as a labourer.
The grandmother-of-four now wants to come home to live off the welfare system as she did before.
But immigration officials have turned down Ala's visa application and shattered their hopes of living back in Stokeon-Trent.
UK rules now state that Deborah needs to earn at least £18,600 a year or have savings of £62,500 before her husband can get into the country.
But she is appealing and intends to take her case to the European Court of Human Rights.
She said: "I'm missing out on my grandchildren growing up. I think it's disgusting. The law has to change. I'm an emotional wreck.
"No-one speaks English where we live. I'm stuck in the house all day.
"I can't go to the shops because they don't understand me as they don't speak English."
Deborah had been on the dole, supported by disability living allowance payments.
She moved to Tunisia in June 2012 and thought she could return with Ala after four years, without him needing a visa.
Yesterday, the mum-of-three added: "I need to go home.
"I want to be with my children and grandchildren, but I can't leave my husband.
"He doesn't want a penny from the Government. He said he will work 24 hours a day to support me if it comes to that. I can't work because I have a bad back from three car crashes and will need a knee replacement operation when I am 70."
A Home Office spokesman said yesterday: "We welcome those who wish to make a life in the UK with their family, work hard and make a contribution, but it must not be at the taxpayers' expense.
"Our family rules were brought in to make sure that spouses coming to the UK do not become reliant on the taxpayer for financial support."
The Star Says: Page 6 felicity.cross@dailystar.co.uk
Document DAISTA0020140520ea5k0005g
