{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1186"}
____
Femail
My haven: Mary Beard, TV historian and professor of classics, 59, in her room at Newnham College, Cambridge
JOHN MCENTEE   
612 words
21 March 2014
22:24
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
EARLY DAYS
This has been my college office for a decade and I’m here most of the week – I love the light and its slightly faded Victorian feel. I keep this pair of photos of me aged about three with my mum and dad here in an old-fashioned frame. I had an idyllic childhood in Shropshire with my mum Joy, who was a feisty feminist school teacher, and my dad Roy, who was a feckless architect but just as important to me. He taught me to look hard at the buildings  I lived in and saw around me.
JUST IN CASE
For Christmas and my birthday combined in 2012 – my birthday’s on New Year’s Day – my husband Robin gave me this suitcase and it’s one of my best presents ever. It’s a bit mad to be honest – it was more expensive than your average flight – but it does recapture the glamour of travel. I’ve never actually dared put it in the hold of a plane, but it’s a great talking point when I go through security. There’s not a single security guard who hasn’t said, ‘Brilliant suitcase!’ Bonding, I’d say...
TERRIFYING TIMES
When I appeared on Question Time in Lincoln a year ago citing a report that more immigration had actually helped the local area, I was viciously attacked on the internet. It was tough keeping going as normal when I was getting death threats. ‘We will blow you up/decapitate you at 11.29/you have been warned.’ Of course you feel scared, but another part of you thinks, ‘This is really silly.’ This cartoon in The Times was cheering because it put it all in perspective.
SHOE ADDICT
This is a replacement  pair of shoes for the ones I wore when we made Meet The Romans. The originals went down drains and into tombs over weeks and weeks and got well and truly wrecked, but I think they got me and the viewers up close to the Romans. I still have them, they’re in the cupboard, cherished but almost finished. So now I step out in my new pair – I’ve always been a shoe addict but Toast trainers are my current favourites. They’re dead comfy – and sparkly too!
BRUSHED UP
My new hairbrush is a favourite object already. It was hugely funny when the TV critic AA Gill, among others, said I was too ugly for TV when he reviewed Meet The Romans, saying I should at least have brushed my hair. As one of my colleagues who was on screen with me said, ‘Blimey Mary, I saw you brushing your hair all the time!’ Anyway, this hairbrush was a joke present from my producer for my birthday this year. It’s a great brush and I now call it ‘Gill’ for short!
LATIN LOVER
Some books stay with you for ever and ever.  I had this copy of Kennedy’s Revised Latin Primer when  I was at Shrewsbury High School For Girls – and who hasn’t nicked a book from their school? It was written more than 100 years ago but I still go to it every week to check my Latin. The old ones really are the best. I will take this book  to the grave. You never know when you’re going to need to check the genitive plural of ‘urbs’. Amo, amas, amat
As told to John McEntee. Mary’s new book Confronting The Classics (Profile) is out now in paperback.
Document DAMONL0020140321ea3l007kl
