{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"747"}
____
News
Heartbreak for family as Marine who 'smothered grenade with his body to save comrades' is denied Medal of Honor because there is no proof he intended to
ALEX GREIG   
762 words
24 February 2014
01:53
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel has rejected a bid for Sergeant Rafael Peralta to be awarded the Medal of Honor
* Peralta died in action in Fallujah in 2004 at the age of 25
* Fellow Marines say that as he lay wounded he used his own body to smother a grenade to protect them
* Hagel says Peralta does not meet the 'proof beyond a reasonable doubt' standard for the honor
* Peralta has been awarded the Navy Cross, the military's second-highest honor
The secretary of defense has denied a fallen Marine a Medal of Honor and will not reconsider the San Diego man for the honor.
Sergeant Rafael Peralta was killed in Iraq in 2004 after he smothered a grenade with his own body to protect other soldiers, according to witness Marines.
However, secretary Chuck Hagel sided with his two predecessors who each deemed that Peralta does not meet the the 'proof beyond a reasonable doubt' standard required for the country's highest award for bravery.
According to the Los Angeles Times, Peralta was an immigrant from Mexico who enlisted the same day he received his green card.
He was leading Marines in clearing houses of insurgents in Fallujah when he pulled a grenade under his body after being injured, smothering the blast and saving the lives of his comrades.
However, a panel reviewing Peralta's nomination agreed with medical evidence that found he was already dead from a head wound and that any action in smothering the grenade was involuntary.
Peralta was awarded the Navy Cross posthumously, the military's second-highest honor.
Part of the citation accompanying the award reads:
'Without hesitation and with complete disregard for his own personal safety, Sergeant Peralta reached out and pulled the grenade to his body, absorbing the brunt of the blast and shielding fellow Marines only feet away.
'Sergeant Peralta succumbed to his wounds. By his undaunted courage, intrepid fighting spirit, and unwavering devotion to duty, Sergeant Peralta reflected great credit upon himself and upheld the highest traditions of the Marine Corps and the United States Naval Service.'
The decision was heartbreaking for Peralta’s family, who refused to accept the Navy Cross, insisting that he had earned the higher award.
Many Marines who bore witness to the event are indignant at the rejection of the man who they believe saved their lives.
Robert Reynolds told the Washington Post that what he witnessed the day Peralta died was the type of heroism 'you only hear about in boot camp... He gave me a chance to a second life.'
Adam Morrison, a staff sergeant who is stil la Marine said, 'I am honored to have been trained and fought alongside Sgt. Peralta. I believe Sgt. Peralta saved my life.'
U.S. representative Duncan Hunter had been campaigning since 2012 for the Department of Defense to reconsider Peralta for a third time.
The Los Angeles Times reports that Hunter felt that new evidence in the form of pictures detailing the damage done to Peralta's body armor and rifle proved that the grenade exploded under Peralta's body justified a reopening of the case.
'I fully respect Secretary Hagel's decision, and I'm grateful for the extraordinary amount of time and attention he's dedicated to reviewing this case,' said Hunter in a statement to NBC 7 Saturday.
Peralta was initially nominated for the honor by seven Marines who fought with him that day.
Douglas Sterner, an Army veteran of the Vietnam War and curator of the Military Times Hall of Valor, told U-T San Diego that Peralta is being held to an unfair standard.
'The Medal of Honor is recommended by the comrades in arms that witness the action. It has to go through a vetting process, but the individuals who witness the action should be the basis on which that medal is awarded.
'I have never heard ‘beyond a reasonable doubt’ used in the same sentence as Medal of Honor before. It’s a legal term, not a military term,' he said.
Peralta's brother enlisted in the Marines in 2010 to keep a promise he made at his fallen brother's funeral.
'Peralta has a Navy Cross. That can never be taken away and his legacy will endure, and that's something that no one can take away from him, his family or the Marine Corps,' said Hunter’s statement.
Document DAMONL0020140224ea2o00238
