{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"3786"}
____
Ukip candidate tells Lenny Henry to 'emigrate to a black country'
Jaymi McCann   
452 words
27 April 2014
17:06
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
A UKIP candidate has added to a week of scandal for the party after suggesting comedian Lenny Henry should go live in a “black country”.
William Henwood, from Enfield north London, was responding to Lenny’s assertion that there aren’t enough black people on TV.
Mr Henwood defended his tweet after a backlash online.
In the past he compared Islam to the Third Reich. He is to run in next month’s council election in Enfield.
The 66-year-old wrote: “He should emigrate to a black country. He does not have to live with whites.”
Plus, he later told the BBC: “I think if black people come to this country and don't like mixing with white people why are they here?
“If he wants a lot of blacks around go and live in a black country.”
Mr Henwood has also tweeted: “Islam reminds me of the 3rd Reich Strength through violence against the citizens.”
There have been calls for the party to distance themselves from this sort of rhetoric.
Jeremy Hunt told BBC Radio 5 Live that Nigel Farage should explain why “So many poeple with those kinds of views seem to be attracted to becoming candidates for Ukip”.
Related articles Britain's poles sign up to Ukip: The party branded ‘racist and anti-Europe’ UKIP candidate suspended after claiming Muslims are 'animals' and Africans should get Aids
Ukip deputy chairman told Pienaar’s Politics: “This is a council candidate whom you would have never have heard but for all the social media archaeologists that are employed by Labour, the Liberal party and the Tories to try and track down any unknown Ukip member or activist who may have said something unpleasant on social media.
“Every party has got them. We have strict rules on racism. We don't allow it.
“We're the only party that doesn't allow ex-BNP or National Front members to be candidates and we have strict rules on social media. I know because I helped to devise them. This man's case will be investigated.”
This comes after a week of scandals for the UK Independence Party.
A candidate for Merton Council – who appeared in their European election broadcast – was suspended for expressing “extreme racist views”.
They’re controversial advertising campaign launched last week was condemned as “racist” by some.
A woman who appeared in a poster explaining why she would vote Ukip turned put to actually be Farage’s aide Lizzy Vaid.
It was also claimed that a man portrayed in the adverts as a British builder who could not find work was actually an Irish immigrant actor.
Document DAICO00020140427ea4r00231
