{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"302"}
____
'It will change our lives': Volunteers welcome Health Lottery grant
619 words
3 May 2014
03:30
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
VOLUNTEERS at a community centre have welcomed a £48,000 grant raised through the Health Lottery saying it will “change lives”.
Health Lottery owner Richard Desmond and Conservative Party chairman Grant Shapps met staff at the Number 1 Hatfield Community Resource Centre yesterday.
The centre hosts arts and craft clubs, knitting classes and provides internet access to people living in the neighbourhood.
As Hatfield has a large immigrant population there are conversational groups for people who do not speak English as their first language.
The project has been awarded £47,507 from the People’s Health Trust using money raised by HealthCourage through The Health Lottery.
Health Lottery owner Richard Desmond
Mr Desmond and Mr Shapps, MP for Welwyn Hatfield, joined a crochet class and were given a tour of the premises to see the work done there.
Mr Desmond, the owner of Express Newspapers, said: “I always love seeing how money raised through The Health Lottery is spent and meeting the people and volunteers that it helps.
“It’s good of Grant to give up his time and come and see the work that goes on in his constituency – I don’t think that either of us expected to leave here today knowing how to knit, and to tell you the truth, I’m still not sure that I’ve got the hang of it.
“I love going out to see all these programmes and I think I am going to come back here so that I can be the best knitting and crocheting media owner there is.”
Knitting teacher and volunteer Ibi Adam, 42, from Hungary, said the centre allows people from different backgrounds to come together and share skills.
She said: “I think it is really important to bring people, who could otherwise become isolated, together in a project like this.
“It gives a message to the community, it helps people relax and improves their quality of life in so many ways.”
The centre’s chairman Julia Coan said: “This funding is hugely important, I has allowed us to make this space welcoming, bright and comfortable.
“The people of Hatfield deserve somewhere like this, where they can come and spend time together.”
Trustee Debbie McCormick, 55, added: “I have never been involved in something like this before, there is so much potential here.
“We are trying to let people know we are here and get them through the doors.
“This funding will give us a new lease of life, it will change people’s lives, and is life-changing for Number 1.”
Mr Shapps said: “This project is like a linchpin for the area, the building is one of the first things people see and the work that goes on here is nothing short of transformative.
“What’s happened to this building because of the Health Lottery has been amazing.
“It’s bringing plenty of resources to Hatfield’s residents and there’s lots for people to do.
“It’s great for the Health Lottery and great for Hatfield.”
John Hume, chief executive of People’s Health Trust, said: “Number 1 Hatfield is a vital hub for community activity where local people come together, to lead new activities as champions, as well as sharing and learning new skills and supporting new friendships across the generations and across different cultures.
“It is a fantastic project which prevents social exclusion and we’re delighted to be able to support this great local idea.”
The Health Lottery was launched in 2011 to help support local health causes throughout England, Scotland and Wales.
Some £50 million has been raised for more than 1,200 community health projects around the country.
Document DAICO00020140502ea52002e7
