{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3101"}
____
  
Features
MINORITY RIGHTS FOR CORNWALL? WE ESSEX MEN WANT THEM TOO!
BY SIMON HEFFER   
1,187 words
25 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
22
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
As part of our politicians' endless search for minorities to ingratiate themselves with, they have decided that the Cornish are 'a national minority'.
An announcement to this effect was made by Danny Alexander, Chief Secretary to the Treasury, on a visit to Bodmin, and it has no doubt caused dozens of Cornish people, and millions of Cornophiles all over the world, to heave sighs of relief at the end of their centuries of oppression.
It has also sparked one of the greatest outpourings of drivel, rubbish and tripe in this country's recent political history.
A man called Stephen Williams, described as the Government's 'Communities Minister', greeted Mr Alexander's announcement by grovelling to the Cornish people about the joy they would feel at this moment.
'The Cornish and Welsh are the oldest peoples on this island,' the Lib Dem MP for Bristol West proclaimed, without any actual facts to reinforce such a statement.
The Cornish will be added to the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities — which means that those who had hitherto feared pogroms being conducted in the streets of Penzance and Newquay can sleep easy.
Far be it from me to suggest that this shameful stunt has anything to do with the fact that the Lib Dems — who appear to have been wholly behind it — are about to face obliteration even in a county that has long been the party's heartland.
Nor, I am sure, is it anything other than a coincidence that Ukip are strong in Cornwall, thanks to the betrayal of the county's fishing industry by the EU's Common Agricultural Policy — something endorsed by Nick Clegg and his friends.
Since Cornwall is a giant retirement home for people from all over Britain, it would be interesting to know how many residents are actually ethnically pure members of the 'oldest peoples' in these islands. Not a lot, I should imagine.
And since, as one campaigner interviewed on Radio 4's Today programme yesterday said, with an apparently straight face, 'Cornwall is not England', I wonder whether the Cornish people (ethnic or immigrant) are prepared to put their principles where their wallet currently is, and assert their independence of the despised mother country?
Not at the moment, apparently.
When resources are so scarce that even the English language cannot be taught properly in our schools, Mr Clegg, in a repulsively cynical gesture, announced last month a grant of £120,000 to the Cornish Language Partnership, taking the amount spent on this since 2010 to more than £500,000.
The money is used by this quango to 'promote the use of Cornish'. No doubt if you stroll tonight into a bar in Helston you will hear little else.
Like Scotland and Wales, Cornwall is asserting the right of economically disadvantaged extremes of the British Isles to protest they are a victim of dictatorship from London, while being quite happy to take English money.
Cornwall's gross domestic product is around 24 per cent dependent on tourism, with some towns, such as Boscastle, saying they are 90 per cent dependent on it.
Figures suggest that five million tourists a year visit the county, with most of them from the rest of the UK. Since Cornwall strikes many as being Brittany without such good food, drink or weather, it is easy to see how vulnerable this economy is.
England now waits to see how the county will develop its national identity until the inevitable day when it calls a referendum on independence. No doubt there will be an imminent announcement about border controls near Launceston, and motor-boat patrols on the River Tamar to stop people escaping to where they might find something interesting to do.
No doubt the fishing fleets of Cornwall, largely idle since Mr Clegg's friends in Brussels sabotaged that industry, can be put out to sea again as the Cornish Navy. If they can't afford weapons, they can perhaps catapult rotting fish at any pleasure-craft that inadvertently strays into enemy waters from hostile ports such as Paignton.
The historical bogusness of this idiocy should be seized upon by other parts of the country keen to rake in sums of money in bribes from half-witted politicians.
I am from Essex, and if anywhere in Britain has an identity and a culture of its own, we have.
Nor do I refer to bull-necked, lager-swilling men, or enhanced women dancing around their handbags in Brentwood nightclubs. We have a culture just as ancient as the Cornish, and it is outrageous that it has not been formally recognised.
Indeed, we have two. Ancient tribes inhabited Essex long before the Romans turned up to wreck the place.
Our local tribe, the Trinovantes, had lived there since time immemorial, their capital being Caesaromagus (what we now call Chelmsford). Colchester was built by Ancient Britons and is the oldest recorded town in the country. Obviously, the supposedly even older people in Cornwall couldn't get planning permission to build one.
The Trinovantes teamed up in 60?AD with their neighbours, the Iceni, and staged a spectacular revolt against the Romans, who'd turned up 17 years earlier. The revolt was led by Boadicea, who came to a sticky end, but not before riding her chariot up and down what is now the A12, and defeating a Roman legion just outside Colchester.
Were the DNA of Essex men and women to be tested, Trinovantesian blood would be found coursing through the veins of many. Where is the money to support our link to our cultural heritage, to revive the sport of chariot-racing?
Then, a little later, in 527?AD, the kingdom of Essex was founded, named after the East Saxons who lived there. East Saxon is still widely spoken in the bars of Littley Green and Woodham Ferrers, though not always in mixed company, and it, too, awaits taxpayers' support.
It was not until shortly before the Norman Conquest that our ancient Kingdom was incorporated into what the Cornish now say was the alien entity of England. Yet no one gives a stuff about our identity.
We East Saxons are not like those Mercians or Northumbrians, with their strange ways. Middle Saxons, South Saxons and West Saxons did things differently from us; and we're unlike anything to be found in Kent.
And as for prejudice against us, just read some of the jaundiced reviews of the TV reality show The Only Way Is Essex. We are a minority that cries out for protection; and, indeed, to be allowed to establish our own Protectorate.
Back in the English Civil War, because of our bloody-mindedness, we declared for Oliver Cromwell. I can see no reason for us not to assert those qualities again, and be funded to stand out from the rest of the country. And, setting false modesty aside, should Essex then decide to appoint its own Lord Protector, I can think of just the man to do the job.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140424ea4p0000h
