{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1570"}
____
  
News
IN A FEISTY TELEVISED DUEL, UKIP CHIEF GETS THE PUBLIC VOTE AS HE TAKES ON CLEGG OVER MIGRANTS, EU AND JOBS
BY JAMES CHAPMAN AND JASON GROVES   
917 words
27 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
12
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A SNAP poll last night suggested Nigel Farage won a live televised debate with Nick Clegg over Britain's future in the EU, which saw the two party leaders clash angrily over jobs and immigration.
A YouGov survey of 1,003 viewers found that 57 per cent thought the Ukip leader had performed better, with 36 per cent backing the Deputy Prime Minister.
A tracker analysis of viewers' and listeners' responses by Blurrt, however, suggested the hour-long debate had been much closer.
Mr Clegg was viewed positively by 24 per cent and negatively by 32 per cent, Mr Farage positively by 25 per cent and negatively by 32 per cent. The pair will face each other in a second televised debate next Wednesday.
The Ukip leader's most effective attacks during the LBC debate hosted by radio presenter Nick Ferrari centred on immigration, in which he warned that EU rules meant Britain's borders were open to 485?million people from across the Continent. They had a 'total, unconditional right to come to this country' which could be amended only if Britain left the EU, which he branded a 'failed project'.
Mr Clegg hit back by insisting he wanted to live 'in Great Britain, not Little England'. He brandished a Ukip election leaflet suggesting 29?million Bulgarians and Romanians would come to Britain once the countries joined the EU and immigration controls were lifted at the beginning of this year. 'There aren't even 29?million Romanians and Bulgarians living in Romania and Bulgaria. It's simply not true,' he said.
'Let's not scare people by claiming things that are not true which would have the consequence of making us poorer and putting more people out work.'
Mr Farage said two million people had already left the two countries to work elsewhere, but conceded most had 'gone to Italy and Spain'.
Mr Clegg said the Government had 'significantly tightened up the rules' and that of the jobs created under the Coalition in recent years, nine out of ten had gone to Britons. He said 1.5?million Britons had taken advantage of EU freedom of movement rules and were working in other EU countries, and might be ejected if the UK left the EU.
The Lib Dem leader said three million jobs in Britain depended on the EU, arguing that multi-national companies would pull investment out of the UK if it left the EU.
'That would be devastating for the UK economy,' said Mr Clegg. 'Why would we pull ourselves out of the world's largest economy when 50 per cent of our exports go to Europe?'
But Mr Farage dismissed Mr Clegg's comments as scaremongering. 'I remember, Nick, you and all your gang - all the big corporates - all telling us 12 years ago that if we didn't join the euro, all inward investment would cease, the City of London would disappear,' he said.
'All I can say is thank God we didn't listen to you, otherwise we would have been in one hell of a mess.
'This debate is between a tired status quo defending a crumbling EU that frankly isn't working any more, and a fresh approach that says, let's be friendly with Europe, let's trade with Europe, but let's not be governed by their institutions.'
The Ukip leader, who broke out in a sweat as the debate went on, struggled when challenged over why he uses taxpayers' money to pay his wife, having previously pledged not to do so.
He said his German spouse, Kirsten, had worked for years for him for no salary and he had decided to put her on the payroll because he worked long hours and needed help.
He also raised eyebrows by claiming the EU had 'blood on its hands' over Ukraine, suggesting it had egged on Vladimir Putin's invasion, and was seen to have blundered by suggesting that cars from the rest of EU were of better quality than those made in UK.
Mr Clegg's worst moment came when he was challenged over the Lib Dems' previous support for a referendum on Britain's membership of the EU, when Labour was about to sign up to the Lisbon Treaty. A squirming Mr Clegg said voters should have looked at the 'small print' of the party's pledge.
A Ukip spokesman said: 'What we achieved was for Ukip to take the leadership of the great Eurosceptic majority. The big loser was (David) Cameron, who didn't have the guts to turn up.'
A Lib Dem spokesman said it was clear Mr Clegg had been 'more in control of himself'. Former Tory deputy chairman Lord Ashcroft, now a leading pollster, said: 'One reason Nigel Farage was a winner tonight, irrespective of how the two performed, was simply his exposure to a wide audience.'
Both Mr Cameron, who has pledged to hold an in/out referendum on the EU if he wins next year's General Election, and Labour leader Ed Miliband were invited to take part in the debate, but declined.
The Prime Minister affected nonchalance about last night's clash. Aides said he would not be tuning in and had more important things to do, including a meeting with the Queen.
j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140326ea3r0009w
