{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1282"}
____
RightMinds
SIMON HEFFER: Dave is utterly deluded if he thinks the Iron Chancellor's going to help end his Euro nightmare
SIMON HEFFER   
1,332 words
28 February 2014
02:05
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Angela Merkel was treated like an empress on her visit to London yesterday, and indeed she showed all the resolve of an absolute monarch.
Her determination that Germany should continue leading the EU according to her iron-rod agenda was predictable to all — except, it seems, to a few wildly optimistic souls briefing on behalf of David Cameron.
The German government has a clear vision of Europe as a united superstate and, since it is the richest and most powerful nation within it, Mrs Merkel has no intention of seeing that vision compromised.
When she said that those who expected her speech in Westminster yesterday ‘to pave the way for fundamental reform of the European architecture which will satisfy all kinds of alleged or actual British wishes. . . are in for a disappointment’, she certainly meant it.
Mr Cameron put the most positive face on her speech, almost to the point of being in denial about what she actually said.
At their joint press conference, he said he hoped to put to the British people a reformed EU on which they could vote in an in-out referendum at the end of 2017 — something he needs to placate many in his own party, and to stop Ukip from making further inroads into the Tory vote.
It is far from certain, of course, that Mr Cameron will still be PM and have the power to call that plebiscite, because first he has to get through a General Election in May next year.
Indeed, German diplomats will have kept Mrs Merkel informed about the slim chances of his winning — and so she may feel she need only mark time until, perhaps, Mr Cameron’s demands for a renegotiation disappear with him.
He was able to say, doubtless truthfully, that he and Chancellor Merkel agreed on much. And, indeed, she was able to help him out by saying that she, too, was worried about immigrants using EU freedom of movement to come to Germany and milk its benefits system.
But vitally important though the question of controlling our own borders is, it is far from being the only crucial issue at stake.
And Mrs Merkel made it quite clear that any developments in Europe will take place within existing, unreformed, institutions.
T  o judge from rhetoric within her government about solving the continuing problems in the eurozone, the prevailing German view is that only by countries’ further sacrifices of sovereignty and a unified approach to economic policies will the most deep-seated problems be ironed out.
Although many Germans fear — not least for historical reasons — being seen as imposing their will on other countries, running the eurozone efficiently without controlling the taxation and spending policies of the countries within it will prove impossible.
For when it comes to dealing with widely disparate national economies, one size does not fit all.
Mrs Merkel made two further, telling points before she went for tea with the Queen at Buckingham Palace.
The first was that changes could only be made to EU treaties if all 28 countries in the Union agree. There is already resentment, particularly in France, at some of the opt-outs enjoyed by Britain (such as exclusion from the euro), and it is hard to imagine all 27 other countries lining up to give us any more concessions.
This is particularly true if they could be seriously disadvantaged by them, as would be the case with Eastern European nations whose citizens wish to retain freedom of entry to the UK.
Mrs Merkel is a formidable stateswoman who deserves respect for her achievements on behalf of Germany and for sticking to her guns to get what she wants. She is also rare in European politics in being a head of government who is neither corrupt nor incompetent.
Mr Cameron is right to cultivate good relations with her. Even if very little progress in Europe is possible with her, nothing would be possible without her.
But if he thinks this wily German is going to provide him with a promise of serious EU reform that he can take into the election campaign next year, and then use to persuade the electorate to vote ‘yes’ in a referendum in 2017, he is utterly deluding himself.
It is not the first time he has made such a mistake.
Running for election as Tory leader in 2005, he promised immediate withdrawal of Conservative MEPs from the ultra-federalist European People’s Party (the alliance of mainstream Centre-Right parties at Brussels).
It turned out this could not happen until the next European elections, which meant waiting nearly four years.
He then, as Leader of the Opposition, promised to repeal the unpopular Lisbon Treaty, which Gordon Brown signed in 2007, ceding yet more sovereignty to Brussels.
However, Mr Cameron was still making this claim long after senior diplomats had advised him and his foreign affairs spokesman, William Hague, that repeal was not possible because of how the treaty had been incorporated into law. To repeal it through the British Parliament would entail repealing all the legislation that bound us into the EU in the first place.
N  ow, desperate to appease backbenchers who want more urgent action on reform of the EU, and to ward off the relentless march of Ukip, he pinned his hopes on Mrs Merkel agreeing not just to support the sort of ‘fundamental’ renegotiation he wants to put before the British people, but also to use her influence to persuade the other member states to go along with it.
This was the real reason the German head of government received the sort of welcome yesterday that would normally be reserved for a head of state.
With no renegotiation worthy of the name in prospect, Mr Cameron has a grave problem.
He set the date of late 2017 for a referendum, he claimed, because it would allow time for such a renegotiation, and for its results to be placed before the electorate. He also did not want a referendum before then because of the serious possibility of the vote going, from his point of view, the wrong way, and the public voting to leave the EU.
But unless Mrs Merkel should radically change her mind, the excuse for delaying the vote has disappeared.
It may be that Mr Cameron genuinely thought Germany, and the rest of Europe, would pay any price to keep the UK inside the tent. If so, he was wrong about that, too, because Mrs Merkel said yesterday there was no such blank cheque.
As she also said, with a humility that was worthy of respect, she came to London on the centenary of the outbreak of the Great War, and the 75th anniversary of Hitler’s war.
The haunting memories of both, and the enormous crimes against humanity perpetrated by Germans, impels  her to seek a Europe so united that, as she said, it is unthinkable that two countries could go to war with each other.
Germany’s main collaborator, ever since 1950, has been France. But France is now a socialist basket case, its international credibility shot to pieces, and relations between Mrs Merkel and its president, Francois Hollande, are dire.
That is undoubtedly part of the reason why she is keen to maintain such good relations with Britain, at least until France comes under better management. But she will not compromise herself solely to maintain those relations.
However brave David Cameron’s face yesterday, this key part of his European strategy is in tatters. He may get crumbs from the table,  but to hope for anything more is a fantasy.
Unfortunately for him, Tory backbenchers understand this, and Ukip will ruthlessly exploit such weakness.
Holding his party together, particularly after the dismal European election results that the Tories now expect in May, is about to become very much more difficult.
Document DAMONL0020140228ea2s0026c
