{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2703"}
____
RightMinds
DAILY MAIL COMMENT: EU migrants and the need to curb benefits
DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
614 words
2 April 2014
01:54
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Today the respected Migration Watch think tank predicts that net immigration to Britain by EU citizens – who, under Brussels law, we are powerless to turn away – will soon reach 130,000 a year.
This extraordinary number is in addition to the tens of thousands of non-EU workers arriving here legally – plus, as we so graphically illustrate on Page One, the countless illegal migrants risking their lives at Calais leaping on to vehicles in a bid to evade border checks, a desperation that killed four in one week alone.
The upsurge in EU migrants has left David Cameron’s promise to reduce net migration to the ‘tens of thousands’ in tatters. But, given Britain’s ample system of in-work benefits, it should hardly come as a surprise to the Prime Minister.
For, thanks to tax credits, housing benefit and other handouts, a migrant earning just the minimum wage can expect to receive more than £28,000 annually if he has a partner and two children – two-thirds of which is a subsidy from the State.
It is this generous welfare package – an income nine times higher than on offer to a household in Romania, for example – that is such a potent lure.
Migration Watch is now predicting 50,000 arrivals a year from Romania and Bulgaria and 40,000 from the rest of Eastern Europe – hugely more than ministers originally expected.
No one can blame people for wanting to better their lives. But it’s also surely not unfair to expect them first to pay into  the tax system for five years before starting to take money out in the form of tax credits.
Yes, the European Commission will squeal about discrimination. But, with Germany also seeking to crack down on migrant benefits, Mr Cameron has a potentially powerful ally.
He should make clear to Brussels this is nothing to do with race.
It’s the vital question of how our welfare state, NHS, schools and housing can be expected to cope with EU migrants adding a new city the size of Manchester to Britain’s population every four years.
Britain grounded
Historically, it is a momentous development. For three months in a row, Dubai International Airport has carried more passengers than Heathrow – signalling an end to the 350-year period in which Britain has been home to either the world’s largest sea port or airport.
Willie Walsh, chief executive of the parent company of BA, said: ‘We have squandered our No.1 world ranking through a total lack of political vision for Britain. This country has no aviation policy.’ He is absolutely right.
With hundreds of thousands of jobs dependent on Britain being a global airport hub, ducking the desperate need to expand Heathrow or Gatwick is an act of political cowardice that future generations will judge to be a scandal.
Blair’s disastrous war
Yesterday, after 13 years of horrific bloodshed that claimed the lives of 448 of our troops, British-led combat operations in Afghanistan officially ended.
The politicians may risibly claim that it is ‘mission accomplished’.
But, for all the heroism of our at times appallingly-equipped troops, Tony Blair’s ill-starred war in Afghanistan – just as in Iraq – has been a disaster.
Warlords and corruption are rampant. Production of opium, which destroys lives in Britain, is at record levels. The indigenous army is woefully inadequate, the Taliban resurgent and neighbouring Pakistan further destabilised.
Truly, history’s verdict on Mr Blair and his hubristic colleagues – ex-Defence Secretary John Reid predicted not a shot would be fired in Helmand – will be damning.
Document DAMONL0020140402ea420002t
