{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"2339"}
____
  
News
'Don't build houses - just kick people out!'
945 words
20 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
37
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
once again the politicians answer to all our problems is "build more houses". Once again they are ignoring the real problem, which is, too many people. Leave England's green and pleasant land alone! CHARLTON GARRY.
so mark carney warns "housing boom will break uk"........well mr carney its not houses the uk need its a smaller population actually! paul lancs
Boss says housing boom will plunge Britain back into economic crisis. Another load of b******s the only thing which is pushing Britain back into another Crisis, is all money going Abroad and all Sponging Parasites being allowed into country to get free houses and everything else they can get their sticky fingers on. Plus all MPs on the fiddle. Colin
Here we go again labour NOW CLAIM TO BE WORRIED ABOUT THE CHEAP FOREIGN LABOUR BEING EMPLOYED BY BRITISH BOSSES. PITY THEY DIDN'T CARE ABOUT IT BETWEEN 2004 & 2010. BUNCH OF HYPOCRITE. Dezza
Re sandy. The bankers and the rich are not to blame for amount of immigrants that came here under blairs open door policy on immigration u dork. decker
We cant afford cancer drugs, but can afford for immigrants to be put up in 4*hotels. They won't have to rely on food banks. Bring on Ukip. diz
Schoolkids lives put at risk to save £3k, well its only to be expected with the s*** who are running this country. Everyones lives in Britain are in Danger because this Government are letting all terrorists and s*** from abroad enter country. cse
it was the bankers that caused the recession now private landlords with the exhorbitant rents are forcing people to try and buy houses causing a housing bubble will the tories ever learn sandy
The leaders of the 3 main parties wonder why UKIP is so popular. it is because Nigel Farage speaks the truth and answers questions not treating public like idiots. Irate Pensioner
listen head in the sand clegg @ miliband farage is correct about romanians, just go 2 page hall in sheffield. b jay
If Scotlands PM Alex Salmon really does love his country and its people why did he let the lockerbie bomber out of prison. Paddy O'Neil
Not surprised the US may hav shot down that missing plane. They're so frightened of world overpopulation & the problems that'll cause, they deliberately kill large groups of innocents to try to curb it. It's a secret agenda most Governments agreed to. David G
Sarah Jane, a lasting legacy for the young man, Mr Stephen Sutton would be for the government to OUTLAW operators of charities from taking 'wages', 'a cut of the donations' whatever you want to label the abuse, yes abuse! Money donated for the benefit of people not in a position to live their lives as it should be lived MUST not be used to line the pockets of so called do gooders. Genuine charities GIVE not keep. Bigchef
All other countries flying to serbia to help with floods. Dont remember that when we had floods in feb. CFC1
Stockton Bob, re Scotch broth: Make or get someone to make a big pot and freeze it. Its easy and much nicer than that tinned stuff AND you know whats in it. lou, yorks
re: paul, e likes wearin tights,well mate u want 2 try stockings n suspenders, much easier wen u go 4 a wee, and a lot sexier 2 wear. Royski
Who kills Tina? Corrie. Tony. Jasons dad. U saw it here first. Momma Towel
IF THE GINGER TOY SOLDIER DID BUY THAT PUB WOULD HE SERVE ROY ALE. POLISH PADDY BELFAST PS HELLO KIDS CHLOE BOBBY JAMES WIFE TERESA.
two minutes in a sauna feels like a lifetime man PUBLUNCH Just found outthat the Rubik's cubeis forty years old today.I have had one allthat time and I amstill no closer tosolving the bloodything.Stevo in Stirling. TEXT OF THE DAY Don't build houses - just kick people out! For legal reasons, we are unable to respond to text messages. If you have a query that needs a reply, write to: Daily Star, 10 Lower Thames Street, London EC3R 6EN
so miley thinks Birmingham is the sluttiest city? well the girls of Cardiff, Newcastle, Liverpool and Glasgow won't just lie down and take it! Wile. E.coyote
whatever else you say about miley cyrus, at least she will be able to look back on her career and say, 'boy, I had class'. Oh, hang on... tony
How can a "hologram" of Michael Jackson exist to perform a song not released til after his death?? Only one answer - the man is still alive, faked his death, & is secretly recording & filming new stuff!! Anon
Just witnessed the most energetic new band doing the rounds , if you like The Jam & Clash then you'll be blown away by THE SPITFIRES. Andy Blyth
at last suz is showing those beautiful legs briefly before being hidden behind that desk again but the prog itself is lame to the extreme robtin
that program viral tap cud b made amusing by having a couple of comedians on the panel. Johnny 7, hull
So a surgeon escaped punishment when he removed the wrong testicle. How come he avoided getting the sack? LEO, LEEDS.
How can it be grim up north when leo, leeds lives there? DAVE YOU'RE
TEXT OF THE DAY
Just found outthat the Rubik's cubeis forty years old today.I have had one allthat time and I amstill no closer tosolving the bloodything.Stevo in Stirling.
Document DAISTA0020140520ea5k0001s
