{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2955"}
____
  
Features
LITTLEJOHN'S LOST WORLD
BY RICHARD LITTLEJOHN   
2,095 words
10 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
16
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
On January 18, 1954, Bill Littlejohn found himself in the garage of his parents' end-of-terrace house in Ilford, Essex. It was bitterly cold and he was painting a midwife's bike.
His wife, Margaret, had gone into labour and was about to give birth to their first child. Bill was banished from the makeshift maternity ward in an upstairs bedroom. Nothing to see there.
Having made himself scarce, he decided he might as well make himself useful. The midwife said her bike would benefit from a lick of paint. Bill figured it was the least he could do.
It was obviously going to be a long haul. In those days, most babies were born at home, not in hospital. The midwife was summoned early and Margaret was attended by both her mother and her mother-in-law. And probably, if truth be told, by an assortment of aunties and most of the women in the street, clucking in anticipation.
Kettles were boiled.
Back in the 1950s, the arrival of a child was considered women's work. Fathers were not wanted on voyage, unlike today when they are expected to do everything other than physically giving birth.
No doubt, modern equality campaigners are already working on that. Prosthetic wombs and artificial insemination for men on the NHS? Remember, you read it here first.
They weren't kidding when they said Margaret was carrying a big baby. I weighed in at 10lb 8oz. Mum said it was like giving birth to a Christmas turkey.
If this sounds like a scene from Call The Midwife, the BBC series set in the Fifties, that's because it was. I was born into a lost world. It wasn't just another century, it was another country.
Wartime rationing was still in force. There was no suffocating elf'*'safety culture, no computer games and no one suffered from now-fashionable food allergies. Milk came from cows at the local dairy, not supermarkets. Beef dripping was good for you.
Holidays meant a trip to Southend in a Ford Anglia, which went from 0-60 in about three weeks. Children who grew up in the Fifties and Sixties ran free and wild. We were always outdoors and played in cornfields, on building sites and in air-raid shelters.
Instead of the internet, there were libraries. Instead of 24-hour satellite television, there was the anarchic free-for-all of Saturday morning pictures and the Under The Bedclothes Club on Radio Luxembourg. Few people had a phone or a fridge.
Sherbet lemons, Jubblies and even National Health orange juice contributed to widespread tooth decay. A visit to the school dentist was like entering Torquemada's torture chamber.
Men and boys all wore shirts and ties — even at weekends. Families looked after their own.
Divorce was uncommon, immigration was minimal.
When I set out to write my new book, Littlejohn's Lost World, I didn't want it to be just another memoir. No one's interested in the mundane details of my early life, I figured.
But then I realised that it wasn't just my story, it was in many ways the story of millions of my fellow countrymen and women. Our way of life has vanished for ever.
Britain has changed irrevocably, and not always for the better.
One of my favourite novels is Holding On, by Mervyn Jones, a saga of three generations of the working-class Wheelwright family which traces their journey from the 1880s to the 1960s, from the docks in London's East End to white-collar, middle-class respectability.
When I first read Holding On, I was struck by how much it could also have been the story of my own family.
Generations of Littlejohns worked the Royal Docks. Had World War II not intervened, my dad may well have become a stevedore like his own father, also Bill. The eldest son of the eldest son was always christened William Henry, until they got to me. Mum put her foot down. Other branches of the Littlejohns also favoured the name William. And a couple of my grandad's sisters had married men called Bill.
I would have been William Henry VIII, but the only derivative of William left by the time I entered the world was 'Willie'. And Mum was determined — much to my subsequent relief — that her first-born son wasn't going to be called Little Willie.
To say Grandad wasn't best pleased would be an understatement.
There's a popular misconception of dockers as stroppy, strike-happy, card-carrying communists.
That didn't apply to my family. The Littlejohns were part of the aspirant working class, determined to get up, get on and get out.
Half a century later these were the kind of people, the so-called C2s in marketing speak, who had once supported Labour but who switched to Mrs Thatcher and the Conservatives in search of a more affluent tomorrow.
Their exodus from the East End to Essex, from the inner city to the suburbs, was the beginning of a trend which began in the late 1920s, accelerated after the war and continues to this day.
They owned their own home and Grandad bought himself a Wolseley — an exclusive marque usually associated with middle-class doctors and solicitors, not hairy-arsed manual workers.
My paternal grandmother, Min French, grew up in Poplar, East London, and after leaving school at 14 went into service, like so many women of her class and generation. Her father was the butler and sometime food taster for a rich American sewing machine manufacturer who kept a house in Belgravia. Family legend has it that he died after tasting poisoned food intended for his master.
Whatever the cause of his premature death, he was given a full East End 'state funeral' cortege complete with plumed horses and elaborate floral tributes.
It was way beyond the modest means of the French family and was the kind of send-off later reserved for bare-knuckle fighters, 'diamond geezers' and East End gangsters such as the Kray Twins.
This wasn't the first tragedy to befall the French family.
Min's grandfather ran a fleet of horse-drawn hackney carriages, which provided him with a comfortable income in the mid-to-late-1800s. But as fate would have it, one night the stables in Fulham burned down, destroying all his cabs and killing the horses.
Critics of my column in the Daily Mail probably won't be surprised to discover that I'm descended from a family of London cabbies.
My mum came from a railway family, the Sparkes. Her dad, Bert, was a white-collar union official in East London. Her mother, Hilda, worked in a lampshade factory. Mum followed Bert on to the railways — which is where she met my father after he started work there in 1948.
Bill joined the police after the war, but a couple of years later tired of the discipline and the uniform. He'd already spent five years in the Royal Navy.
It was the beginning of a journey which would take him out of London to provincial Peterborough and eventually to America. But it wasn't always plain sailing.
In the 18 months after VE Day, nearly four and a half million servicemen and women were demobbed. Most returned home to an uncertain future. Bill was no exception. Before the war, he had hoped to go to art college and become a graphic designer, an ambition he never realised.
By 1945, it was bit late. His father offered to fix him up with work as a docker, but Dad had other ideas and decided to pitch himself to printing firms and advertising agencies in the City.
Every morning, he would set out to walk the eight and half miles into the City in search of gainful employment. He even told his parents that he had found a job rather than admit that he was still unemployed.
It was a pretence he kept up for months, leaving the house suited and booted, trudging into London, knocking on doors, returning home every evening after a fruitless 17-mile round trip hike and paying his mother housekeeping out of his demob money.
One day, he saw a recruiting poster in the window of Ilford police station. He walked in, signed up and Young Bill became Old Bill.
I shudder to think what Dad, who died in 1995, would have made of modern Britain, where the Welfare State has shamelessly institutionalised idleness as a way of life and six million people sit at home claiming an assortment of out-of-work benefits, while jobs they could be doing are filled by foreign immigrants imbued with the work ethic.
Mum and Dad were engaged for three years, saving for their own home and collecting for Margaret's 'bottom drawer'.
On reflection, it seems strange writing that last sentence, which really does belong to another world.
How many couples are 'engaged' for three years these days before getting married? Does anyone get engaged any more? And if they do, they remain engaged and don't bother getting married.
I suppose it saves them joining the 50 per cent of modern married couples who end up getting divorced after about five minutes.
When Bill and Margaret came home from honeymoon, they moved in with Dad's parents. We moved out when I was four months old. As for a 'bottom drawer', that's probably where most young women keep their Rampant Rabbits today.
My early years were dominated by women. Although the men were the breadwinners, they were largely absent except at weekends. Whatever modern feminists tell you about the oppression of women, family life in Fifties Britain was a de facto matriarchy.
My world revolved around my mother and my grandmothers, who were regular visitors to our new home in Shenfield, Essex.
Despite having little formal education, both nannas devoured books, had beautiful handwriting and an immaculate grasp of grammar, which they were determined to pass on to me.
The three of them would take turns reading to me from the moment I could sit up in my cot. Mum would spend hours teaching me phonetics — A is for Apple, B is for Ball, C is for Cat, D is for Dwarf, etc.
I could recite the alphabet when I was two years old. By the time I went to nursery school, before my fourth birthday, I had the reading age of a much older child.
One of the greatest scandals of my lifetime was the abandonment of phonetic teaching by the educational establishment in favour of the trendy 'word recognition' method, which betrayed millions of schoolchildren, condemning them to leave school virtually illiterate.
Thanks to my mother and grandmothers, when I started primary school I had a greater level of literacy than many 16-year-old comprehensive school-leavers in the late 20th and early 21st century.
Glib politicians who boasted that their priorities were 'education, education, education', in that order, robbed generations of youngsters of the vital tools of self-expression and comprehension. I was taught how to write 'thank-you' letters before I started school.
They didn't mind what I read, either. Books or comics, every printed word was equally valid.
Any success I have enjoyed as a journalist, I owe to them.
Writing the book, which the Mail begins serialising on Monday, I have revisited my childhood haunts, a tour which reinforced just how much the world has changed.
For instance, the old covered market in Ilford is now a 30-storey, Dubai-style skyscraper. My former junior school in Peterborough now 'celebrates' the fact that its pupils speak 20 different languages as their mother tongue.
The book covers the Fifties and Sixties and goes from Muffin The Mule to Jimi Hendrix at the Isle of Wight pop festival in 1970. I hope it strikes a chord with many of you, but it isn't just a sentimental wallow in nostalgia.
I can remember teasing that brilliant journalist and broadcaster Michael Parkinson about the amount of time he seemed to be spending down Memory Lane.
'Nowt wrong with that,' said Parky. 'You meet a better class of person down Memory Lane.'
* Extracted from Littlejohn's Lost World by Richard Littlejohn, to be published by Hutchinson on May 22 at £18.99. © 2014 Richard Littlejohn. To order a copy for £16.99 (incl p&p), call 0844 472 4157.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140509ea5a0000j
