{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3046"}
____
  
News
'WE NEED MORE TIGER-PARENTS TO PUSH PUPILS'
BY LAURA CLARK    
532 words
8 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
5
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
BRITISH teenagers are falling behind those in high-performing East Asian countries because too many parents in the UK believe that ability is inherited rather than the result of hard work, an expert warned yesterday.
Sir Michael Barber, chief education adviser to publishing giant Pearson, suggested that higher expectations from 'tiger parents' in the UK could boost school performance.
'In the Pacific Asian cultures, there is a strong belief that effort will be rewarded,' said Sir Michael, who advised Mr Blair on education and policy delivery.
'If you try harder, work harder, you'll achieve higher standards, whereas in Britain and America, particularly, there is a perception that you are born either bright and the education system pulls that through, or doesn't. That has a big impact on attitudes.'
His remarks raise the prospect of a rise in 'tiger mothers' such as Amy Chua, who described how she chivvied her two daughters to academic success Chinese-style in a best-selling book which provoked fierce debate in Britain.
Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother, published in 2011, was described by the US law professor, whose parents were 'very strict, Chinese immigrant parents' as 'the story of my family's journey in two cultures'.
Sir Michael made his remarks as the UK came sixth in an international league table of education systems, behind South Korea, Japan, Singapore and Hong Kong.
He said parental expectation in those Asian countries is 'very high', with mothers and fathers spending 'long evenings' helping their children with homework.
'There is a contrast between those attitudes and here, where some parents don't exert that kind of pressure for achievement, don't expect effort to be rewarded and do think that either their child is really clever or isn't - and sometimes reinforce that in a way that is unhelpful,' he added.
'Overall, there is a contrast that is deeply embedded in cultures.
'The rise of Pacific Asian countries, which combine effective education systems with a culture that prizes effort above inherited "smartness", is a phenomenon that other countries can no longer ignore.'
Britain's position in the latest Global Index of Cognitive Skills and Attainment, published by Pearson and compiled by the Economist Intelligence Unit, remains unchanged since the rankings were last produced, in 2012.
East Asian countries tightened their grip at the top of the table featuring 39 nations, while Finland slipped to fifth. A report accompanying the index found that 'parental expectations have a measurable impact on student motivation'.
Sir Michael said the message needed to be 'spelled out' that there were risks associated with failing to gain a good education.
He added: 'Changing culture is an extremely difficult thing to attempt.
'It is something that everybody involved in education needs to contribute to - it's not a job just for government.
'The way schools relate to parents about their individual child is really important. That's an area where you can significantly change culture.
'But in the end, it is about communicating with people about how different the 21st century is going to be from when they went to school.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140507ea580001a
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:21
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
