{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2148"}
____
News
A nanny from Nepal and a Belgian 'lady': Cameron and Clegg under fire for taking on foreign help to work in their homes
JACK DOYLE and JAMES SLACK   
638 words
7 March 2014
00:21
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Row erupted after immigration minister said uncontrolled immigration benefited only ‘wealthy metropolitan elite’ who wanted cheap labour
* Labour MP John Mann demanded the whole Cabinet come clean on their use of foreign workers
* Downing Street refused to answer questions about Mr Cameron’s nanny
* Mr Clegg was asked about his arrangements on his regular LBC radio phone-in
David Cameron and Nick Clegg were dragged into a row over immigration last night after it emerged that they both employ foreign domestic staff.
The row erupted after the new immigration minister, James Brokenshire, said uncontrolled immigration benefited only the ‘wealthy metropolitan elite’ who wanted cheap labour.
But his comments backfired after critics pointed out that the Prime Minister currently employs a nanny from Nepal and previously hired an Australian.
The Deputy Prime Minister admitted hiring a Belgian ‘lady’ as a ‘home help’.
Labour MP John Mann demanded that the whole Cabinet come clean on their use of foreign workers.
‘We need every Cabinet minister to declare what staff they have employed from abroad,’ he said.
‘They should be seeking out British staff. It is total hypocrisy. They need to make up their minds on this.’
In his first speech in the job, Mr Brokenshire told the Demos think-tank: ‘The immigration system we inherited was not designed to benefit this country or the people who live here.
‘For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services, but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country.
‘Those who tend to lose out most when there is uncontrolled immigration are manual and low-skilled workers who have to compete with an influx of people from poorer countries who are willing to work for less.’
Downing Street refused to answer any questions about Mr Cameron’s nanny.
But it is understood Mr Cameron and his wife Samantha employ a Nepalese woman, Gita Lima. She was recruited from a charity, Kalayaan, which helps immigrants seeking to escape abusive employers.
Originally from Nepal, she is now a British national. A second woman, Australian Sammi Strange, has looked after Mr Cameron’s children in the past.
Mr Clegg was asked about his arrangements on his regular LBC radio phone-in. He insisted he would not ‘get into’ details of his home life but later told listeners: ‘I have a lady who has a Belgian passport who helps us.’
The Home Office said Mr Brokenshire ‘manages the household with his wife’ and does not employ a nanny or cleaner.
In his speech, the Immigration Minister attacked the BBC for giving huge prominence to a report about the impact of mass immigration on the jobs market – without having read it. The BBC’s Newsnight had claimed the study by civil servants would undermine the Tory party’s case for stricter border controls.
In fact, when the previously secret report was published yesterday it said that officials found that some British workers had been ‘losers’. The group hardest hit was ‘low-skilled natives’.
The study – written jointly by the Home Office and Business Department – said: ‘Overall, our assessment is that there is relatively little evidence that migration has caused statistically significant displacement of UK natives from the labour market in periods when the economy has been strong.
‘However, in line with some recent studies, there is evidence for some labour market displacement in recent years when the economy was in recession.’
Mr Brokenshire said the study vindicated Conservative claims that immigration had damaged the job prospects of unemployed Britons, particularly those looking for low-skilled jobs.
Document DAMONL0020140307ea3700164
