{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3654"}
____
Reviews
Great art? Nope. But big theatre. QUENTIN LETTS reviews the first night of Miss Saigon
QUENTIN LETTS   
473 words
22 May 2014
13:07
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Miss Saigon (Prince Edward Theatre)
Verdict: Saved by the helicopter – and the Statue of Liberty!
[reviewStars]
Sir Cameron Mackintosh’s revival of the 1980s musical Miss Saigon is staged with such insistent extravagance that it bludgeons its way to success.
Great art? Nope. But big theatre.
The evening has one real show-stopping number, The American Dream, and one gasp-inducing coup de theatre – the arrival of the chopper. They are just about enough.
Impresario Sir Cameron red-carpeted a street in London’s Soho for last night’s opening.
Every painted eyelash in town was there, m’dears. And naturally they spanked their unguent-scented palms in fevered adoration.
But paying punters, at least for the first hour, may wonder what all the fuss is about.  
Director Laurence Connor has plainly drilled his troops like a Viet-Cong sergeant-major.
The big power scenes are as efficient as the opening ceremony of the Peking Olympics. 
A vast bust of dictator Ho Chi Minh (or is it Comrade Mackintosh?) stares down at us.
Communist banners and soldiers and red-bandana tumblers and peasants in upturned-wok hats, we got ’em, along with Claude-Michel Schonberg’s soupy chords. 
The music and recitatif is inoffensive but to the 21st-century ear may sound formulaic.
The lyrics of Richard Maltby and Alain Boubil are prosaic – until that American Dream.  
Things get off to a slow and screechy start in the 1975 Saigon girlie bar run by Engineer (Jon Jon Briones). Virginal Kim (Eva Noblezada) arrives from a distant village and meets and marries American GI Chris (Alistair Brammer).
If the intention is simply to create the clamour and moral haze of US-occupied Saigon, fine, but the show could do with a clear emotional number early on.
For that we have to wait almost an hour. It comes with I Still Believe, a duet between Kim – now abandoned in communist Ho Chi Minh city – and Ellen, Chris’s new wife back home in America.
The second half begins with a song about the forgotten children of American-Vietnamese love affairs.
Some will love this. I was put off by a cheaply emotive video film of babies.
With all the narrative clutter of the swanky staging and a fiddly-diddly score, the performers have little chance to establish themselves.
But then comes Engineer’s greedy, gaudy (and arguably ungenerous to immigrants) fantasy of emigrating to America. Mr Briones finally hits the mark with a delivery of acid satire.
Liberty rises from the gubbins of the stage, in comes a gas-guzzling car, majorettes – and the show finally has artistic lift-off, just like that whirlybird from the US embassy roof in Saigon in 1975. A close-run thing.
Document DAMONL0020140522ea5m000jm
