{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3692"}
____
  
News
RUSSIA'S FURY AS CHARLES STORM GROWS
BY JAMES CHAPMAN, REBECCA ENGLISH AND DANIEL MARTIN   
1,050 words
22 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
1
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
ANGRY Russian diplomats will today demand an official explanation for Prince Charles's likening of Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler.
Amid international controversy over the prince's remarks, Whitehall sources say Moscow has insisted on face-to-face talks at the Foreign Office.
'The Russians have said they want to discuss this issue,' said an insider. 'We will have to see how they decide to play it.'
Britain's three main party leaders have defended Charles's right to speak out following the Mail's revelation that he had compared the Russian president's actions in Ukraine to Hitler's seizure of territory in Eastern Europe in the 1930s.
But the remark has caused outrage across Russia. A Kremlin source said it was 'deeply insulting to the leader of a country that lost almost 30million lives defeating the Nazis'.
And Denis Pushilin, a Russian separatist leader in eastern Ukraine, said it was just as offensive 'to ordinary Russians - after all, Mr Putin represents the country which defeated fascism'.
On a dramatic day of reaction:
* There were fears of a possible showdown after officials said Charles and Mr Putin
are both due at D-Day anniversary ceremonies in northern France next month;
* A former UK ambassador to Moscow also said the Hitler comparison 'could hardly be more insulting' for a Russian;
* Moscow's pro-Putin media dredged up the Royal Family's links to the Nazis;
* Senior Labour MPs suggested Charles should 'abdicate' and stand for election if he wanted to express political views;
* But their leader Ed Miliband insisted Charles 'had a point' about Mr Putin.
Charles's remark was made to a volunteer during a tour of the Museum of Immigration in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Marianne Ferguson, 87, told him she had fled to Canada shortly before the Nazis annexed her home city of Danzig - now Gdansk in Poland.
She said the prince replied: 'And now Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler.'
The comment comes just over a fortnight before a possible encounter between Charles and Mr Putin at the 70th anniversary commemorations of the liberation of France.
Charles and Camilla are due at Colville in Normandy on June 6 and royal sources say Mr Putin may be there too.
'The only event where they might be both be present is the ceremony of remembrance, at Colleville-Montgomery-Plage - Sword Beach - to commemorate the Allied Normandy landing,' a royal source said.
'It is an outdoor event and the format is such that guests will be seated for the entire ceremony. The prince will leave immediately afterwards as he has another event to attend.
'There have never been plans for the Prince of Wales to meet President Putin in Normandy next month.'
Royal aides refused to be drawn on whether Charles would be willing to shake the hand of the Russian leader. One senior royal source said the Prince did not deny making the remark about Mr Putin, but was frustrated the row had overshadowed his tour.
'It was an off-the-cuff comment made out of empathy and not a political statement,' the source said.
Asked three times on the BBC about the comments, David Cameron said: 'I'm not going to comment on the private conversations of anyone, least of all Prince Charles.'
But he insisted: 'Of course, everyone's entitled to their private opinions.'
Mr Miliband went further, insisting: 'He has got a point about President Putin's actions and he is absolutely entitled to say that there are real concerns about that.
'Lots of people across the country will share Prince Charles's concern about President Putin and his actions in the Ukraine.'
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, who chairs the Privy Council, the ancient body which advises the Queen, insisted Charles was 'free to express himself'.
'I have never been of this view that if you are a member of the Royal Family, somehow you have to enter into some Trappist vow of silence,' he said. 'He is entitled to his views.
'The behaviour of Putin is not only menacing to Ukraine but it is very destabilising for Europe more generally.'
Former Conservative defence minister Sir Gerald Howarth said he had 'great sympathy' for Charles's comparison of Mr Putin to Hitler.
But Sir Tony Brenton, the former British ambassador to Moscow, told the BBC: 'You can't be much more insulting about a Russian than to compare them to Hitler, who killed 26 million Russians. I suspect he [Mr Putin] will be rather angered.'
But Ukip leader Nigel Farage, who has said he admires Mr Putin more than any other world leader, insisted Charles was wrong to compare the Russian leader to Hitler. He blamed the EU and Nato for pursuing an expansionist foreign policy in eastern Europe.
Labour MP Mike Gapes said of Charles: 'If he wishes to be in public life speaking out, saying what he thinks on every issue then unfortunately he should abdicate and stand for election.'
Russia's minister counsellor in London, Alexander Kramarenko, will insist on answers from senior Foreign Office officials today.
The Whitehall source said: 'We will follow the guidance of Clarence House which is that we are not getting into private conversations.
'We will press the Russians on their policy and their actions in the east of Ukraine.'
Moskovsky Komsomolets, a pro-Putin newspaper, warned of a threat to 'already far from cloudless relations' between the two countries. Dmitry Peskov, Mr Putin's spokesman, said the Russian leader was 'not commenting right now'.
Sources said he wanted to focus on his trip to China and not detract from its strategic importance.
Mr Pushilin, who is the self-styled leader of the Donetsk People's Republic, said: 'The comparison with Hitler is totally absurd, groundless and unfair.'
Some news outlets were personally abusive in their coverage of the heir to the throne's 'moronic' words. An online business magazine, business-ru.com, lambasted the 'geriatric Prince of Wales, the oldest heir in the history of Great Britain, who failed to control himself and follow etiquette'.
It said the remarks were especially unfortunate given 'his uncle Edward VIII clearly sympathised with the Nazis'. 
Comment - Page 14
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140521ea5m00011
