{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3691"}
____
  
News
HEART-RENDING TALE OF WOMAN WHO CONFIDED IN THE PRINCE
BY TOM LEONARD   
424 words
22 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
6
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
PRINCE Charles was prompted to compare Putin with Hitler after hearing the heartbreaking life story of a Jewish survivor of the Second World War.
Marianne Ferguson was forced to flee to Canada with her family when she was just 13 to escape the advancing Nazis.
The 87-year-old is now a museum volunteer and told her incredible story to Charles as she showed him the exhibits.
Mrs Ferguson was born in Danzig, now the Polish city of Gdansk, which was a key flashpoint in the war.
As a free city under terms agreed after the Great War, it had attracted a large number of Jewish residents and so was an obvious target for the Nazi party, which took it over in 1933 and began to intimidate the 11,000 Jews.
Yesterday, Mrs Ferguson said that sometimes the Nazis would take away the head of the household. The following day, his family would 'get a little gift... a dainty little parcel, mostly a box, wrapped in tissue paper and tied with a brightly-coloured ribbon', she said.
'When it was opened, one found in the box the remains or ashes of the person who had disappeared the night before. Also a little card was enclosed, a card of sympathy.'
The girl, known then as Marianne Echt, was shocked when the priest at their local church found a mutilated cat, cut in half and hanging from a miniature gallows, on his door step. An accompanying note read: 'Today the cat, tomorrow you.'
Many Danzig Jews tried to escape but nearly 2,000 were sent to concentration camps. They included some of her own family. The Echts were lucky. As a pharmacist and farmer, Mr Echt was the sort of immigrant Canada was seeking to attract.
Only 5,000 were allowed into the country during the Hitler years. The family sailed to Halifax in Nova Scotia in 1939 and disembarked at Pier 21, site of the immigration museum where she met Charles at the reception on Monday.
In 1946, she married a local Jewish man, Lawrence Ferguson, who died in 2012. They have three children and four grandchildren. Ever grateful to the 'free' country which welcomed her so warmly, Mrs Ferguson continues to do voluntary work at the immigration museum.
Yesterday she said she agreed with the prince's remark and never meant to make any trouble. 'I didn't think it was going to make such a big uproar.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140521ea5m0001g
