{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1618"}
____
  
Features
EMMA WANTS A BIT OF DRAMA
BY BAZ BAMIGBOYE   
2,153 words
28 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
52
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Emma Watson said that she will be free to take on 'new challenges' — such as making her stage debut — after she has graduated from university this summer.
The 23-year-old actress told me that while she has no immediate plans to tread the boards, she's on the lookout for theatre projects.
We were chatting at the swanky after-party in the awesome Loeb Boathouse in New York's Central Park, for the big-budget epic Noah, in which she plays Ila, a young girl rescued by Russell Crowe's title character.
The former Harry Potter star, who has shown off her acting ability in a series of movies since she moved on from Hogwarts, graduates from Brown University in Rhode Island in May.
'It frees me up to consider doing theatre, and I would love that opportunity,' Emma told me.
But first she has to scoot off to Toronto, straight after Monday's London gala for Noah, to film Alejandro Amenabar's psychological thriller Regression.
She wouldn't give too much away about her role, but said she wants Amenabar to stretch her, the way he did Nicole Kidman in The Others. Emma is terrific in director Darren Aronofsky's Noah, which is a compelling, cautionary tale. She has one powerful scene with Crowe, in which Noah tries to kill her babies. She does this silent scream, as Noah confronts her. 'I was like Mama Bear trying to protect her young. It was very intense to shoot that,' she confided. Emma and Douglas Booth, as Noah's son, are certainly the best-looking couple ever to walk up the gangplank into the ark.
There has been opposition of Biblical proportions to the film — mostly by people who haven't seen it. I hold no religious brief, but I didn't find it blasphemous (although I did find it a tad long).
Emma doesn't know yet what she'll do after Regression, though she expressed interest in The Little Mermaid, a film that Sophia Coppola, who directed her in The Bling Ring, will make later this year.
I was impressed with Emma's fashion style on the night, too. On the red carpet at the premiere, she wore a backless, black Oscar de la Renta number and sexy Christian Louboutins.
But she change into a black Erdem cocktail dress with a floral motif (pictured) for the party. It certainly made it easier for her to move around the room.
 
***
Cameron Mackintosh is moving forward with plans to make a new film version of Lionel Bart's musical Oliver! The 1968 movie won five Academy Awards, including best picture.
Mackintosh, who controls most of the stage rights, has spent more than a year trying to discover exactly who owns the motion picture rights, and who can give him permission to make another version of the movie, based on Charles Dickens's Oliver Twist.
'Every time I think I've unravelled the complex web of film rights, someone else comes out of the woodwork, saying they own this or that aspect,' the producer told me in New York last Sunday.
The original film was made by British producer John Woolf, through his Romulus film company, and released by Columbia Pictures, now owned by Sony. Some rights were also owned by Bart, but he sold a portion to Max Bygraves — who then sold them to someone else.
Clearly, more pockets to pick . . . And I was left with the sense that a screen version of Miss Saigon could happen before Oliver! A new stage production of Miss Saigon begins performances at the Prince Edward Theatre in London on May 3.
GENIUS OF THE GENIE
There are more baubles, bangles and bright shiny beads in the musical Aladdin than there are in, well, anywhere!
That's OK. This Aladdin, from the souk of Disney at the New Amsterdam Theatre on 42nd Street, glitters and gleams and (to steal even more lines from the Baubles, Bangles And Beads song from Kismet), sparkles, spangles — and everybody sings, sing-a-ling-a!
The show, directed by Casey Nicholaw, who also directed the Olivier-nominated The Book Of Mormon, features songs written for the Disney film by Alan Menken, Howard Ashman and Tim Rice, with some new lyrics by Chad Beguelin.
Nicholaw throws everything he's got at it, including a flying carpet that really flies and a genie (James Monroe Iglehart, above).
About 68 minutes into the first act the audience goes absolutely nuts with cheering, applause and (at least when I was there on Tuesday night) a standing ovation. This all happens following Iglehart's outstanding version of the song Friend Like Me.
It's an incredible number, with a seemingly endless chorus line, going through seemingly endless costume changes, helping Iglehart (though he needs little help) to put the number over.
That scene, and one featuring Adam Jacobs and Courtney Reed as Aladdin and Princess Jasmine, singing A Whole New World while hovering high up on the carpet, are the highlights of this fabulously exhausting Broadway musical — along with Bob Crowley's sets.
No doubt it will wend its way to London (by magic carpet!), as long as Disney can find enough baubles, bangles and bright shiny beads.
***
 
Ramin Karimloo, who had to be talked into making his Broadway stage debut in Les Miserables.
The actor — right with Caissie Levy, who plays Fantine — told me that, initially, he was reluctant to play Jean Valjean in the powerful new production of the Alain Boublil, Claude-Michel Schonberg and Herbert Kretzmer musical.
'I played Valjean for so long in London that I wasn't interested in playing him again — plus, I didn't want to be away from my family,' Ramin said at the post-first-night party.
Now, however, he's very pleased he allowed himself to be persuaded. Fans treat him like a rock god, and some even sing outside his dressing room. It's good to see a new generation taking the show to its heart.
I was pretty shocked, though, when Ramin — an Iranian-born Canadian — told me that whenever he flies into the U.S. or UK, he's questioned and his bags are always searched.
I suggested he invite immigration chiefs to the show, so they can see what he does.
***
 
Claire Forlani (pictured), Alice Sanders, Patricia Potter, Isabella Calthorpe, Charlotte Parry and Ronke Adekoluejo, who will star in Adam Bock's new play The Colby Sisters Of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania about five 'It Girl' sisters who are slightly past their time.
The play begins performances at the Tricycle Theatre in north-west London from June 19, directed by Trip Cullman. British-born Forlani has spent a long time working in the U.S. on TV dramas and movies such as The Rock and Basquiat.
Incidentally, the Tricycle's award-winning play Red Velvet, written by Lolita Chakrabarti and starring Adrian Lester, opens officially at St Ann's Warehouse Theatre in Brooklyn on Sunday.
***
 
Alexandra Burke, winner of The X Factor in 2008, who will take over from the fantastic Beverley Knight in The Bodyguard at the Adelphi Theatre on June 2, after Ms Knight's last performance on May 31.
Ms Burke (right), who sang Whitney Houston's Saving All My Love For You at her X-Factor audition, was approached by producers David Ian and Michael Harrison when Knight said she was leaving to join the musical Memphis.
Burke had been taking acting lessons and expressed an interest in doing more than just singing. 'We saw her, and our creative team met her, and she was fabulous and knocked the songs out of the park,' Ian said.
Burke will stay with The Bodyguard till the end of its run on August 30.
Ian added the show had explored the idea of going into the Aldwych Theatre after the RSC's Wolf Hall ends its run there, but the Aldwych has 350 fewer seats than the Adelphi, and that would have caused problems.
However, he revealed that a tour of The Bodyguard would begin in Manchester in August 2015.
WILL SOPHIE DANCE OVER TO LONDON?
Sophie Okonedo is making her Broadway debut in the classic American play A Raisin In The Sun. I've seen it many times over the years and thought I knew it well, but as I sat watching a preview in the Ethel Barrymore Theatre I had a blinding sense that I was witnessing Lorraine Hansberry's 1959 drama for the first time.
Perhaps there was a post-'12 Years A Slave' imperative that made me pay more attention. Or, more likely, I had simply never seen it played with such searing authenticity before.
Ms Okenedo, who lives over the hill from me in North-West London, plays Ruth Younger, a woman married to the feckless Walter Lee and forced to share a roach-ridden, bathroom-less apartment with her husband, son, mother-in-law and sister-in-law.
Ruth deserves better in life — certainly from a husband who's too busy chasing unattainable dreams. Walter Lee is played by Denzel Washington, returning to the stage after appearing in August Wilson's Fences a few seasons back.
When I heard he was going to play Walter Lee, I thought the 50-something Washington would be too old. But I was so immersed in the drama that I didn't even care. The actor made you believe he was 40.
Anika Noni Rose, Latanya Richardson Jackson and Bryce Clyde Jenkins are also powerful forces in the play.
The Younger family go through major trials and tribulations, but as Sophie's Ruth puts it: 'There's always something left to love.'
Actually, that line was originally spoken by the matriarch in the play, but Hansberry shifted it to Ruth when she wrote the screenplay for the 1961 film, and now it's in director Kenny Leon's version at the Barrymore.
I echo what Scott Rudin, the show's producer, noted about Sophie: 'She's always been one of the very greatest actresses, anywhere. It's time she was seen on Broadway.'
It's too much to dare to hope that this ensemble could bring A Raisin In The Sun to London, but Rudin gave me at least a crumb of comfort.
'Nothing would make me — and the cast — happier than a London run,' he said. 'I'd be thrilled, and they would be thrilled, too.'
I remember that Rudin wanted Denzel and Viola Davis to come to London with Fences (they were keen, too) but neither actor was available.
'I hope we can try again this time,' he said.
Amen to that.
***
 
Toni Collette, Michael C. Hall, Tracy Letts and Marisa Tomei, who are in a new play by Will Eno that gets old pretty fast. Watching The Realistic Joneses is like being trapped in a hellish sit-com. If that's your thing, then race to the Lyceum Theatre. Some foolish producer will fall in love with it and bring it to London, though I pray that doesn't happen.
BULLETS SHOOTS FROM THE HIP
It's a perilous business covering entertainment. I nearly choked to death at a Bafta dinner recently, and on Wednesday I thought I might die laughing as I watched the great musical Bullets Over Broadway that Woody Allen and Susan Stroman are putting together at the St James Theatre.
It's based on Allen's 1994 picture about a struggling Twenties playwright forced to cast a gangster's moll — whose theatrical roles until then have been limited to 'wiggling' at risqué revues — in order to get his play staged on Broadway.
Zach Braff plays David Shayne, the rather precious writer, with Helene Yorke as Olive Neal the 'wiggler'.
Stroman explained that Marin Mazzie, who plays diva Helen Sinclair, was off with a flu bug the day I went, but I'm hoping to catch her before I leave town.
The show is in previews and still being tinkered with, but I got the general idea — and I had a ball.
One of my favourite moments involved Ms Yorke (pictured left with Braff) singing a deliciously salacious old vaudeville song called I Want A Hot Dog For My Roll. 'I want a Hot Dog without bread, you see,' pouts the wiggling Olive. Performed by Ms Yorke and choreographed by Stroman, it made me laugh so much I thought my heart was going to cease functioning.
I keep hearing that the musical has been polarising audiences — I have no answer for that. Some supposedly funny shows leave me stony-faced, but not this one. For me, Bullets fires on all cylinders.
Stroman's heading back to London in the autumn to usher the Young Vic's landmark, Olivier-nominated Kander and Ebb musical The Scotsboro Boys into the Garrick Theatre in the West End.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140327ea3s00011
