{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"1692"}
____
  
News
Swig Brother
TAMMY HUGHES   
645 words
18 April 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
6
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
NIGEL PUTS BRITS FIRST FARAGE'S TV SHOW AMBITION
NIGEL Farage went to lunch with the Daily Star yesterday and showed he was a man of the people by downing two pints in 20 minutes.
The Ukip party leader spoke about drugs, booze and his hated European Union in an exclusive interview in the boozer.
And he revealed he has one burning ambition: an appearance in the Celebrity Big Brother house.
He said: "I wouldn't do it while I'm doing this job. Afterwards I might think about it.
"I've been asked before." Enjoying two jars of real ale at the Walrus And Carpenter, one of his old haunts in the City of London, he said he regularly knocked back a few drinks at lunchtime.
But he said he had never taken anything stronger than traditional bitter.
He said: "Do you know I've drunk so much of it over the years that I've had no time for anything else. I have made a lot of mistakes in my life, but the one mistake I haven't made is drugs."
Nigel worked as a high-earning trader in the City for 20 years and seems to have acquired legendary status.
Pub staff asked for pictures, while drinkers asked to shake his hand as he was mobbed like a rock star.
Close up I could see why people fell under his spell as he oozed old-fashioned charm, confidence and charisma.
Nigel's public approval exploded after his EU television debate with Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, 47, last month.
Opinion polls showed the Ukip leader to be the clear winner with 69% of viewers saying he had performed the best.
And he said he did not feel the slightest bit sorry for humiliating LibDem leader Clegg, or "Cleggers" as he calls him.
He said the public were behind him on immigration and added: "The thing that killed Cleggers in that debate was when I made the point that we have opened the door to 485million people.
"Many come from very poor countries like Romania and there is no limit on who can come in.
"Once we've got back control we can decide who comes but we should only take people who have something to offer. We shouldn't take people with life-threatening diseases, we should put our own people first."
Nigel, 50, is expected to stand as an MP at the next election, but is concentrating on winning Euro elections which take place in May.
He said: "What matters to me is not what rank I hold but that we change things."
Branding the current crop of Westminster politicians "college boys", he blasted the Coalition for having "no idea".
He said while supping his ale: "They have no experience of real life. Never had a job in the proper world.
"They have absolutely no understanding of what it's like out there for ordinary families."
This week Nigel has dodged allegations about misusing taxpayer cash from the European Union and yesterday he dismissed the expenses row as a smear campaign to try to derail the Ukip express.
He added: "The establishment are scared. We have a British establishment that said 40 years ago that Europe was our future and they are still wedded to that position.
"They know that I'm leading the rebel political party and they're terrified of us.
"They are terrified of our arguments and they are really scared." Nigel also revealed he is a regular reader of the Daily Star, which always puts him in a good mood.
He added: "What the Star gives people is the news but it puts a smile on their face as well, which I hope to a little extent is what I've tried to do in politics."
tammy.hughes@dailystar.co.uk
Document DAISTA0020140418ea4i0003u
