{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"247"}
____
Nigel Farage says over-70s are uncomfortable with homosexuality and gay marriage
Sophie Alexander   
394 words
12 May 2014
13:05
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
UKIP leader Nigel Farage has said that most over-70s still feel uncomfortable about homosexuality.
Nigel Farage
Farage made the claim after defending Roger Helmer, the Ukip by-election candidate in Newark, who has stated that the public should be able to freely dislike gay people, like you would different sorts of tea.
Helmer has also said in a phamplet from 2000 that homosexuality is "abnormal" and "undesirable".
He also questioned whether homophobia was real, that homosexuality was not worthy of respect and likened same-sex marriage to legalising incest.
Farage was defending Helmer on the Sunday Politics show and said: “Roger Helmer is fighting this by-election for us. He’s somebody of 70 years of age who grew up with a strong Christian Bible background.
"He grew up in an age when homosexuality was actually imprisonable, and he had a certain set of views which he maintained for many years which he now says he accepts the world’s moved on and he’s relaxed about.
“And actually, if we asked the 70s and over in this country how they felt about it, most of them still feel uncomfortable.
“There are a lot of people in this country who are disconcerted by the change in the traditional meaning of marriage, and I think in a tolerant society we understand that some people have different views.”
Helmer has said he now accepts gay marriage and told the Guardian last week he had modified his views after "catching the zeitgeist".
Ukip's views on same-sex marriage are somewhat blurred and Farage recently retracted a statement from his party saying it would not repeal the Marriage Act of 2013.
Ukip candidate Winston McKenzie, 60, recently said the party is not racist, but he thinks gay adoption is "child abuse".
Douglas Denny, 66, a Ukip candidate in Portsmouth, recently said gay sex is "disgusting" and that gays are "abnormal".
During the Sunday Politics show Farage was keen not to talk about individual candidates but the European election which he believes will prove to be "interesting".
Related articles Protestor who egged Ukip leader Nigel Farage charged with assault Oops! Ukip accused of using immigrants to hand out anti-EU leaflets That stinks! Ukip forced to stop Freepost service after being sent faeces
Document DAICO00020140512ea5c0015p
