{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3655"}
____
TV&Showbiz
So THAT's where she gets it from! Marion Cotillard wows Cannes in pleated gown while her mother Niseema Theillaud is just as glam in black frock
ELEANOR GOWER   
424 words
22 May 2014
12:25
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
She is one of the most beautiful women in the world, and it was clear on Wednesday just where Marion Cotillard gets her looks. 
The 38-year-old French actress was joined at the Cannes Film Festival by her glamorous actress mother Niseema Theillaud.
Marion looked typically stunning in a pale grey pleated strapless midi-dress and sparkling heels, while her brown hair was pulled into an intricate updo.
Her mother - an actress and drama teacher, sported a pair of fashion forward vertiginous high heels and a black shift dress teamed with a chunky hold necklace.
The mother and daughter duo were lending their support to Marion's husband Guillaume Canet at the evening screening of his new movie In The Name Of My Daughter.
The French film, which co-starsCatherine Deneuveis screening out of competition at the festival.
Marion's most recent film The Immigrant opened in the U.S. last week.
In it, she plays Ewa, a Catholic Polish woman who arrives at Ellis Island in 1921 and is almost deported before being taken in by a theatre owner played by Joaquin Phoenix and working as a prostitute.
The star recently discussed working with Phoenix saying they spoke at length about the relationship between their characters.
'The thing is, these are very complex characters, and they have a very complex relationship, so we really needed to talk about it, because they don’t talk too much to each other,' she told the New York Times.
'So we really needed to create this very singular bond between them. And Joaquin has a very strong instinct, like an animal. He’s a wild animal.'
The mother of one also revealed her extreme happiness to be 'living my dream.'
'When I was a teenager, I was not happy and I hated my life,' she revealed. 'And even later on, it took me a long time to try to love myself. That was something I thought would never happen. But thanks to my parents, I have the capacity to feel happy.
'I’m living my dream, and I still dream about this dream, and I still have a lot of dreams within this dream,' she added. 'And also just my evolution as a human being, and the people I meet, and the connection I have with myself and others, is getting stronger and stronger.'
Document DAMONL0020140522ea5m000gu
