{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2406"}
____
  
Features
MAKES YOU ASHAMED TO BE BRITISH! COLUMN
BY RICHARD LITTLEJOHN   
1,639 words
15 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
17
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
The famous story goes that when Winston Churchill was Prime Minister, he was woken one freezing February morning by a Downing Street aide bearing the shocking news that a male Tory MP had been caught having sex with a naked guardsman in St James's Park.
Noting that it had been the coldest night of the winter, Churchill is said to have remarked: 'Makes you proud to be British.'
Even if this wonderful anecdote isn't true, it ought to be. Churchill's reported reaction epitomised the ironic essence of Britishness: an amused tolerance, admiration for the determined triumph of perseverance over adversity, and a celebration of the fabled stiff upper lip.
As a definition of old-fashioned, understated British values, Churchill's quip is right up there with: 'I am just going outside and I may be some time' — the last words of polar explorer Captain Oates.
While Churchill, like Mrs Thatcher, was privately relaxed about individual foibles, he was intensely patriotic, a quality which sustained the nation during World War II and ensured our survival. Today, patriotism is sneered at. According to a new survey, just one-third of people say they are 'very proud' to be British.
Whether or not that figure is accurate, or simply made up like most of the other 'surveys' which masquerade as news stories these days, it certainly speaks volumes about the prevailing mood. Even if people are patriotic, they are afraid to say so publicly for fear they will be howled down as 'racists' or 'xenophobes' or 'Little Englanders'.
The offensive smear 'Little Englanders' is especially relevant in this context. While Scottish, Welsh and Irish nationalism is revered in fashionable circles, any indication of English patriotism is considered conclusive evidence of head-banging BNP sympathies.
Just look at the way in which anyone who believes Britain should be an independent, sovereign nation is damned as a swivel-eyed 'extremist'.
When New Labour came to power it set out to eradicate traditional notions of Britishness and Englishness in particular. Tony Blair claimed ludicrously that the nation which gave birth to Magna Carta and built one of the greatest, most benign empires the world has ever known was a 'young country'.
Despite our having a settled population for almost a millennium, he pretended we were a 'nation of immigrants' and set about creating one by dismantling our borders.
This was the culmination of a deliberate plan to eliminate our national identity, which began in the Sixties.
Britain has always had a proud record of welcoming immigrants and providing a safe haven for genuine asylum seekers. People came here because they wanted to be part of what we had to offer and to make their own valuable contribution.
Of course, there have been problems, but when I was growing up those most proud to be 'British' were new arrivals from the West Indies, Polish servicemen who had settled here after fighting for the Allies, and the archetypal Indian in cravat and blazer, like Mr Mukerjee, the shopkeeper from central casting, played by Saeed Jaffrey in Minder.
Instead of assimilation, and uniting people around common values, Labour embarked on a path of divide and rule. The pernicious policy of 'multiculturalism' and state-sponsored separate development encouraged racial and religious apartheid, and created ghettoes in our inner cities.
We were told officially that all cultures were equally worthy of respect, even those which oppressed women, persecuted gays and preached hatred against other religions.
Simultaneously, British traditions and achievements were trashed and denigrated. Children in state schools have been taught to be ashamed of our history.
It is hardly surprising that in the last survey, only one in five young people aged between 18 and 24 say they are proud to be British. They are the generation subjected to Blair's warped 'education, education, education' policies, which concentrated on social engineering rather than learning.
Politicians appear to hate the people they are elected to represent. Consider Gordon Brown accusing a woman who questioned him about immigration of being a 'bigot', or the fact that our preening Deputy Prime Minister owes his allegiance not to Britain, but to that anti-democratic, artificial edifice the European Union.
Our magnificent armed forces have been run down shamefully. British justice, once the envy of the globe, has been destroyed by the weird foreign cult of 'human rights' and the pursuit of prosecutions for political reasons.
The Lottery Commission, set up to support our culture, doles out money to Colombian guinea pig farmers, Romanian gipsies and African performance artists, but refuses to give a penny towards the new Bomber Command Memorial.
Labour-run town halls, police stations even, proudly fly the gay rights 'rainbow' flag, the EU flag and the flag of the ANC, but recoil in horror at displaying the Union Jack.
I've never been one for jingoism and have always liked the way most of us wear our patriotism lightly and with a certain self-deprecation.
Much as I admire America, I find their overt, chest-pounding 'Yew-Ess-Ay' displays of allegiance completely over the top.
But in what country in the world, other than in England, would flying the national flag be considered an act of 'racism'?
I've never been opposed to immigration, simply the sheer, uncontrolled scale of the influx over the past 15 years. I'm proud of our British tolerance and the fact that we are one of the least racist nations on Earth, let alone in Europe. I like living in a multi-cultural society, too. It's just the zealously enforced 'multiculturalism' I can't abide.
As I've said before, the most intolerant people in Britain are those who preach 'tolerance' the loudest. They are the real bigots who attempt to stifle free speech and refuse to accept any opinion which doesn't fit their own rigid set of political prejudices.
We have ended up not with moral equivalence, but in a quagmire in which people are stripped of their history and national identity and anything goes, provided it fits with the prevailing dogma.
Against this background, I've been trying to imagine how a modern-day prime minister would react to being told that one of his colleagues had been discovered in a royal park with his trousers round his ankles, embracing a member of the Household Cavalry.
He wouldn't know whether to issue a statement celebrating diversity and emphasising that all relationships are equally valid, even those which involve homosexuals playing brass monkeys with complete strangers in public, or send for the Nigel Evans squad.
Makes you proud to be British.
 
When the Government decided to make car booster seats compulsory for children under 4ft 5in (135cm) tall we were told it would be a major contribution to road safety, not just another excuse for the police to harass motorists.Anyone who imagined the Old Bill would start setting up road blocks and conducting random height checks (moi?) would have been accused of scaremongering. So I was intrigued  to hear from reader Ken Ransome, who writes to tell me that his son-in-law, who manages an under-nines football team, was recently pulled over on the A249 near Sittingbourne in Kent.He was driving Ken's grandson and another boy to a match, when he spotted a patrol car in his rearview mirror. The policeman flagged him down and asked if he was aware of the minimum height for children allowed to travel without a booster seat.Ken's son-in-law said he was and pointed out that the boys were both wearing seat belts, but the officer wasn't satisfied. They were made to get out of the car and stand by the side of the road while the cop returned to his vehicle to retrieve a tape measure. He then measured the boys, only to discover they were the required height and no offence was being committed.As a result of this, the kick-off was delayed. What do I keep telling you about giving anyone any kind of authority? Mind how you go. MANOEUVRES IN THE DARKBack in the Seventies, Private Eye coined the expression 'Ugandan discussions' to describe sexual shenanigans.It arose from a report that a prominent female journalist had been discovered in the arms of a Ugandan cabinet minister during a party. Her innocent explanation was that they had been 'discussing Uganda'.It may be time to update this well-worn epithet. The wife of Tory MP Andrew Bridgen has asked for a divorce after it was alleged he sexually assaulted a former aide to UKIP leader Nigel Farage, something he strenuously denies. The woman, Annabelle Fuller, claims he stuck his hand up her skirt in his Central London flat following a drinking session in a Westminster pub.She says she agreed to repair to his flat after midnight to continue 'a discussion about military charities'.As you do. How long before 'discussing military charities' replaces 'Ugandan discussions' as Westminster shorthand for hanky-panky?POTTYBOROUGH MK II Osteopath David Longstaff put a decorative pot plant outside his clinic in Peterborough city centre to brighten the place up.The dustmen mistook the floral display for rubbish, but instead of taking it away slapped a sticker on the pot explaining that it couldn't be collected because it was in the 'wrong' kind of container.Years ago, I dubbed the city 'Pottyborough'. They seem determined to prove me right.Speaking of rewriting history, Carol Owen emails from Chorley, Lancs, to ask if I'd noticed that a number of BBC programmes, including the last Antiques Roadshow, have started referring to World War I as the 'European Conflict'. I hadn't, Carol, but it doesn't surprise me.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140414ea4f0000h
