{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"3319"}
____
Number of Bulgarians and Romanians employed in UK goes DOWN
Jaymi McCann   
542 words
14 May 2014
13:34
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE tidal wave of migrants expected when restrictions on Romanians and Bulgarian workers were removed has not surfaced – and the number employed here has actually gone down.
Some 140,000 workers from the two countries were employed in Britain in the first three months of 2014.
The figures – released by the Office of National Statistics – actually show a DROP as 144,000 were employed in the last three months of 2013.
This comes as UK unemployment falls to a five year low and the Bank of England said the economy is finally “heading back to normal” after years of crippling recession.
Year-on-year there has been an increase of 25% as 112,000 were employed in the UK in the first quester of 2013. Restrictions to the labour market were lifted for Romanians and Bulgarians on January 1, prompting warnings of a looming surge of immigration from the two countries.
A range of polarised reports emerged in the run-up to the lifting of controls, including a predicted surge in pickpocketing, mugging, beggars on the streets and rioting.
Other reports suggested citizens from the two eastern European countries would attempt to sell their babies when they arrived in Britain.
Claims of fully booked flights and coaches from Bucharest and Sofia at the turn of the year were incorrect and retracted.
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of Migration Watch UK, said: "These quarterly statistics always fluctuate.
"The latest annual figures show an increase of 28,000, in a period when restrictions were in place for nine months.
Related articles Romanian police search for man filmed KICKING pregnant dog VIDEO: Thug who spun terrified old lady around to be fined just £30
"We believe they are consistent with our estimate of a 50,000 population increase from Romania and Bulgaria for each of the next five years."
The Home Affairs Select Committee earlier this year blasted the Government for failing to commission estimates of the numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians who would come to Britain after the controls were lifted.
In a damning report, the committee said the Government's decision not to obtain official estimates played into the hands of those who "wish to inflame tensions about immigration for political gain".
Prime Minister David Cameron rushed through new measures at the end of last year to ensure EU migrants will be unable to claim out-of-work benefits for their first three months in the UK.
In addition, those found begging or sleeping rough could be deported and barred from re-entry for 12 months unless they can show they have a proper reason to be in the UK, such as holding a job.
Other proposals previously announced in the Government's Immigration Bill will see migrant access to the NHS restricted, while landlords, employers, bankers and DVLA staff will be expected to take part in checks for illegal immigrants under tough reforms.
An extension of the NHS charging regime was unveiled, which will see overseas visitors and migrants charged for accident and emergency treatment in England.
Migrants will also have to pay for primary care services such as minor surgery carried out by GPs, while prescription charges will be extended.
Document DAICO00020140514ea5e001gt
