{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3582"}
____
News
Hard at work in... Mexico: Ed Miliband's flood supremo basks in 85C on sun-kissed jolly as Britons count the cost of the deluge
SIMON WALTERS   
3,531 words
22 February 2014
23:17
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Shadow Floods Minister Barry Gardiner flew out to Mexico last week
* Red Ed's 'special envoy on climate change' basked in the sun as thousands of British families faced the impact of the devastating floods
* MP was guest of multi-millionaire pharmaceuticals boss, Labour supporter and friend of Mr Miliband, Bharat Shah
* Mr Gardiner and his wife Caroline enjoyed a stay at the Cancun's luxury Moon Palace Resort - and the bill came to £3,650
The senior MP in charge of Labour’s response to the floods crisis spent last week on an  all-expenses-paid junket to a luxury resort in sun-kissed Mexico.
As Britain struggled to recover from the devastating deluge, Shadow Floods Minister Barry Gardiner – who is also Ed Miliband’s ‘special envoy on climate change’ – jetted off to Cancun with his wife.
The £3,650 jolly was paid for by pharmaceuticals tycoon Bharat Shah, a multi-millionaire Labour supporter and friend of Mr Miliband.
Former Minister Mr Gardiner’s decision to go ahead with the free trip is all the more remarkable after Mr Miliband cancelled his own scheduled political trip to India, because of the floods in Britain.
Mr Gardiner is a contender for Parliament’s King Of The Junkets.
A Mail on Sunday investigation has established that since he was elected in 1997, the MP has spent an astonishing 157 days on all-expenses-paid foreign trips to exotic places in six  continents, at a cost of well over £100,000.
It is the equivalent of spending an entire Parliamentary year abroad.
Much of his globetrotting has been paid for by the climate change lobby group, Globe International, which is part-funded by British taxpayers.
Most of the trips enjoyed by Mr Gardiner, who was a Minister in Tony Blair’s Government, have come in the four years since Labour lost power.
Since 2010, when MPs were forced to declare the costs of such jaunts – officially called fact-finding trips – he has racked up 103 days overseas at a cost of £74,125. In 2011 alone, he spent 35 days abroad on free trips.
MILLIBAND'S MILLIONAIRE HOST
The man whose company has paid for Barry Gardiner’s stay in Cancun is Labour-supporting Anglo Indian multi-millionaire Bharat Shah, a friend and admirer of Ed Miliband.
Mr Shah’s family-run Sigma pharmaceutical giant has given nearly £8,000 to Labour. After David Cameron came to power, he claimed Tories raised the threat of ‘NHS privatisation’.
In November, Mr Shah sponsored an event at Labour’s London HQ to celebrate the  Diwali festival. Mr Miliband was guest of honour and Mr Gardiner attended. 
Mr Gardiner was also at the previous year’s Diwali event, again sponsored by Mr Shah, where Shadow Chancellor Ed Balls was the main guest.
In 2005, Kenyan-born Mr Shah, 64, was among a number of top businessmen who wrote to the Financial Times urging people to vote for Tony Blair in thanks for ‘booming Britain’. 
The economy may have faltered since, but Watford-based Sigma has gone from strength to strength, turning over more than £200 million a year.
The company has given £1,420 to Labour’s central funds plus £6,500 to former Watford Labour MP and Minister Claire Ward. On losing her Commons seat 2010, she became chief executive of the Independent Pharmacy Federation lobby group. Sigma has funded the organisation and describes itself as ‘a long standing supporter’.
Mr Shah is a keen motorsports enthusiast who tries to attend three Grands Prix a year. He once said: ‘All the Formula 1 races take place in nice destinations. It’s quite nice to go to Rio, Abu Dhabi or Shanghai.’
The conference in Cancun was organised by the Sigma pharmaceuticals giant, run by respected Anglo-Indian businessman Mr Shah.
He was a cheerleader for Mr Blair, is a friend and admirer of Mr Miliband and his firm has given money to Labour coffers.
While politicians on all sides last week visited flood-hit towns and villages and discussed how to stop it happening again, 56-year-old Mr Gardiner left it all behind, flying 5,000 miles to the stretch of Mexico’s Caribbean coastknown as ‘the Mayan Riviera’.
The Brent North MP and his wife Caroline, a sculptor and poet, who is also paid £25,000 as her husband’s Commons ‘immigration adviser’, were ostensibly attending a pharmaceutical industry convention.
In exchange for giving just one hour-long speech on Tuesday, the couple got to stay in a lavish £325-a-night suite at the Sunrise Hotel within the Moon Palace resort.
The suite has a sunken two-person jacuzzi and views over a tropical garden.
But if Mr Gardiner had wanted to maintain a low profile as he lazed by the pool in 85F (29C) sunshine, his presence was revealed when some of the 460 other delegates at the Moon Palace tweeted about him.
On Friday, Mr Gardiner – in Hawaiian shirt and Panama hat – spent his last full day in Cancun swimming, eating and enjoying a romantic walk with his wife along the Caribbean beach.
Earlier in the week, the couple wore Indian-style clothing for a ‘Bollywood Night’ and on another evening Mr Gardiner donned a tuxedo for a black tie dinner in the ballroom.
Mr Gardiner is not breaking any Commons rules by taking the freebie, but asked why he had spent the week at the junket instead of advising Mr Miliband on the floods, the frontbencher said he had been invited to give a speech on waste.
Pressed to say if had considered cancelling the trip because of the floods, he said: ‘I’ve given my reply, thank you.’  
And asked to explain his connection to Sigma and the pharmacy world, he said: ‘I’ve just told you. I’m on parliamentary recess, OK?’
Mr Gardiner has shown no previous significant political interest in pharmaceuticals.
The Commons website lists his interests as ‘environment, climate change, economy, trade, education and foreign affairs’ – but no mention of pharmaceuticals.
As a leading light in Labour Friends of India, he does have links with Mr Bharat. In November, Mr Gardiner attended a Diwali celebration at Labour HQ sponsored by the tycoon. Mr Miliband was guest of honour.
Mr Miliband declined to comment last night.
'Tequila flows all night, no one bothers with lectures': A Bollywood bash and a lazy day by the pool... Labour flood boss's £325 a night freebie
* The Gardiner's enjoyed their stay at the luxury resort described as 'the most magnificent in all of Mexico'
* Their £325-a-night suite featured a sunken jacuzzi and lush garden
* The hotel boasts a six-mile private beach overlooking the Caribbean, a Jack Nicklaus-designed golf course and dozens of pools and restaurants
* One delegate said: 'This is about having a good time and networking... It's a schmoozfest' adding Mr Gardiner's talk was 'very boring'
* Mr Gardiner said: 'Very simply, I was asked to give a speech on waste and it's parliamentary recess'
Wallowing in the crystal clear water of a luxury hotel pool he could have been any holidaymaker enjoying a welcome respite from the relentless British weather.
However, this was no ordinary tourist, but Shadow Floods Minister Barry Gardiner. And as he slapped on the sunscreen and adjusted his Panama hat, he seemed to have not a care in the world.
He enjoyed romantic walks along the beach with Caroline, his wife of 35 years, and delicious meals at Cancun’s Moon Palace resort, including an all-you-can-eat buffet offering chilled lobster and a beachside seafood diner.
Earlier in the week, he wore an Indian-style shirt to celebrate ‘Bollywood Night’ and donned a tuxedo for a glittering black tie gala dinner.
The Gardiners were guests of Sigma boss and Labour party supporter Bharat Shah, who transformed his family-owned drug distributor into a multi-national company with an annual turnover of £206 million.
They stayed at the Sunrise Hotel in room 1945, a £325-a-night suite complete with a sunken jacuzzi overlooking a lush garden filled with palms and bougainvillea.
The Gardiners were among 460 delegates – mostly from the UK  – at the resort which is described  as ‘the most magnificent in all of Mexico’.
On Friday, as the temperature topped 85F (29C) in the shade, the Gardiners hit the pool. The MP wore a colourful Hawaiian-print shirt with blue floral swimming shorts incongruously paired with brown lace-up leather shoes. A Panama hat completed the look.
He and Caroline circled the pool before choosing two orange  sun-loungers nestled under a ‘palapa’ – a sunshade made from dried palm fronds.
Caroline leapt enthusiastically into the pool to join a water aerobics class while her husband smiled and tapped his feet to the music as he gazed appreciatively at the bikini-clad bathers around him.
After reading his Kindle he stripped off his top and waded out into the main pool. He occasionally submerged himself and did a few breast-strokes, but mostly wallowed in the pristine water, closing his eyes at one stage and leaning back to soak up the sun.
A spot of lunch at the beachside fish restaurant was followed by a stroll along the sand with Caroline before they returned to their  sun-loungers for the afternoon.
On Wednesday it was ‘Bollywood Night’ where the Gardiners tucked into a vegetarian buffet while Indian zither music played. A witness said: ‘Everyone was dancing and having a great time.’
On Thursday delegates enjoyed day trips to nearby Mayan ruins.
The Moon Palace resort occupies a six-mile stretch of pristine sandy beach overlooking the Caribbean. There is a Jack Nicklaus-designed golf course, dozens of pools and more than two dozen restaurants.
Each room is equipped with a free minibar offering full-sized bottles of vodka, rum, whisky and tequila.
The Sigma conference is all-inclusive and Gardiner wore a blue plastic wrist-band which also allowed him access to the spa, horseback riding and even the chance to swim with dolphins.
One resort employee said: ‘Everything is included, all the food and booze.
'The tequila has been flowing all night in the bars and we can tell who the English are because they are the ones who sit in the sun all day long and turn pink.’
A gentle ten-minute shower of rain caused consternation among the British.
One said: ‘Ugh, I came here to get away from this.’
'This is about having a good time and networking. No one bothers with the lectures... It's a schmoozefest'
- One delegate at the conference
Most delegates arrived last Saturday and were given Sunday as a ‘leisure day’ to recover from  jet-lag.
The conference – which was also attended by fellow Labour MP Sir Kevin Barron, former chairman of the Commons Health Select Committee – opened on Monday.
A delegate said few attendees bothered to go to the convention centre, which adjoins the Sunrise Hotel, at all.
He said: ‘This is about having a good time and networking. No one bothers with the lectures. You have to show your face over there at least once but most of the time the lecture hall is empty.
‘Business is done over drinks at the pool or cocktails in the evening. It’s a schmoozefest. We’re all chemists and this conference is something we look forward to every year. One year it was in China, another year at Phuket in Thailand, but Cancun is best of the lot because the weather is so awful back home.’
When asked what Mr Gardiner’s speech was like on Tuesday, the  man replied: ‘I have no idea. I fell asleep. It was very boring.’
Another delegate said: ‘I’ve put on half a stone. There’s nothing to do but eat, sleep and eat some more.’
'Very simply, I was asked to give a speech on waste and it's parliamentary recess'
- Barry Gardiner MP
When The Mail on Sunday approached Mr Gardiner in Cancun on Friday and asked why he was there instead of offering advice on floods in the UK, he said: ‘Very simply, I was asked to give a speech on waste and it’s parliamentary recess.’
Asked if he had considered cancelling the trip because of the crisis back home, he said: ‘I’ve given my reply, thank you.’
Pressed on who was paying for his trip, he replied: ‘You will see that in the [Commons] Register of Members’ Interests.’
Asked to explain his connection to Sigma and the pharmaceutical industry, he replied abruptly: ‘I’ve just told you. I was asked to give a speech on waste. I’ve done that. Thank you very much. I’m on parliamentary recess, OK?’
Mr Gardiner declined to answer further questions.
Junket King of Commons... flown to six continents over 15 years by green pals: How lobby groups have been bankrolling the enviable lifestyle of Labour's globetrotting frontbencher
* Barry Gardiner's globe-trotting has been bankrolled by international climate change group Globe International
* MP has spent 98 days travelling the world in style at a cost of £55,662
* First trip funded by the group was to Brazil in 2008
* In 2010 Mr Gardiner became Globe International's vice-president
The lion’s share of Barry Gardiner’s globe-trotting Commons career has been bankrolled by Globe International, an international climate change group.
It has paid a total of £55,662 for Mr Gardiner to spend 98 days travelling the world in style to push its agenda to combat global warming.
The MP was until recently chairman of the board of Globe International, a not-for-profit lobby firm that flies its supporters and experts club class to international summits.
It gets generous funding from the World Bank, private wealthy donors, green organisations, the EU and domestic governments, including the UK through the Department for International Development.
That is how it could afford to stump up £8,151 for Mr Gardiner to spend 16 days in Japan and China in 2010; £4,764 for him to spend eight days in Cape Town and Durban in South Africa in 2011; and £7,149 to spend 16 days at the United Nations summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 2012.
The MP for Brent North in London formed close personal and political links with the organisation over nearly a decade. Globe’s secretary general Adam Matthews spent three years running Mr Gardiner’s Commons office before leaving to head the organisation in 2005.
Mr Matthews also works as a Lords aide to former Met Office chief Lord Hunt of Chesterton, the father of Labour’s rising frontbench star Tristram Hunt. Lord Hunt has declared club-class travel to summits paid for by Globe.
Mr Matthews’ entry in the Lords Register of Interests declares: ‘Regular travel to the 16 major economies for meetings.  .  . cost of travel and accommodation paid by Globe International’.
Mr Gardiner’s first foreign trip paid for by Globe was to Brazil in 2008. But it was in 2010, when he became Globe’s vice-president, that he started travelling the world more regularly – and for free.
Also in 2010, Globe hired his daughter Bethany Gardiner-Smith as a policy adviser on marine life following a six-month internship, which started in the summer of 2009. Ms Gardiner-Smith now works for Mr Gardiner’s fellow frontbencher, Gloria De Piero, the former GMTV presenter who is Labour’s women and equalities spokesman.
A FAMILY AFFAIR: IN GARDINER'S WORLD YOUR WIFE IS ON THE PAYROLL AND YOUR DAUGHTER IS EMPLOYED BY A COLLEAGUE
Barry Gardiner has turned politics and climate change into a family affair – and a lucrative one at that.
The Brent North MP and wife Caroline live in a  large £1.2 million detached house in Chorleywood, Hertfordshire, which they bought for £700,000 in 2002. 
In addition to her work as  a sculptor and poet, Mrs Gardiner earns an estimated £25,000 as her husband’s ‘part time immigration adviser’, as his constituency has a large ethnic population.
In the five years since MPs have had to declare family members on their Commons payroll, it is thought she has been paid around £100,000. Until recently, their daughter, Oxford politics graduate Bethany Gardiner-Smith,  26, worked for Globe International, who funded most of her father’s foreign jaunts. She is now adviser to Labour MP Gloria De Piero, who serves alongside Mr Gardiner on Labour’s front bench as the Shadow Women’s Minister. 
In addition to all his free travel, Mr Gardiner has found other ways of topping up his £66,396 MP’s salary. 
From 2007 to 2010 he received about £17,000 a  year from Reynolds Partners, an investment bank, as its parliamentary adviser. Mr Gardiner was embroiled in the MPs’ expenses scandal in 2009 as he made a £198,500 profit on Westminster flat funded with £81,935 in second homes expenses – just £14 short of the maximum  – in four years. His claims included £11,000 for renovations, £235 on bed linen and £248 for a light. All were within Commons rules. 
Mr Gardiner was told to repay £174 for mortgage interest overpaid – although he voluntarily repaid £15,404.
Privately educated Mr Gardiner, who studied at Cambridge University and Harvard in the US, entered Parliament in 1997 and was appointed Northern Ireland Minister by Tony Blair in 2005 and Environment Minister in 2006. He stepped down the next year when Gordon Brown became Prime Minister but was given the unpaid post of ‘special representative on forestry’. 
Mr Gardiner gave up the role in 2008 when he joined calls for Mr Brown to resign.
After Ed Miliband became Labour leader, Mr Gardiner was made Shadow Environment Minister. 
The job includes the floods portfolio. He is also  Mr Miliband’s ‘special envoy on climate change’.
Globe – or, in full, the Global Legislators Organisation for a Balanced Environment – was founded in 1989 ‘to support ambitious political leadership on issues of climate and energy security’.
It received a huge boost from Tony Blair in 2005 when the then-PM helped to inaugurate a tradition of twice-yearly Globe summits, bringing together 100 legislators from around the world. It now spends up to £500,000 a year flying supporters like Mr Gardiner to international summits.
They have included ex-Labour Ministers Elliot Morley and Stephen Byers, both Globe presidents. Morley was jailed for expenses fraud, and Byers was suspended as an MP after an undercover sting into parliamentary lobbying.
Globe also has prominent Conservative supporters.
The current Globe president is former Tory Cabinet Minister John Selwyn Gummer, now Lord Deben; while Mr Gardiner has been succeeded as board chairman by Tory MP Graham Stuart.
Globe receives money from the Foreign Office, the Department of Energy and the Department of International Development as well as wealthy backers and the EU.
Four years ago, Globe was dragged into the notorious row over the so-called ‘Climategate’ emails at the University of East Anglia which referred to a ‘trick’ to ‘hide the decline’ in global  temperatures.
An investigation by Globe director Lord Oxburgh cleared the scientists of malpractice. But critics claimed that it was a whitewash after it emerged Oxburgh did not declare his involvement with Globe in the House of Lords register of interests before his investigation.
Secretary general Mr Matthews denies Globe is a lobbying organisation. He says it is ‘an international group of legislators  set up to bring them together to discuss environmental issues’.
TWITTER SILENCE OF 'BELITTLED' MP FOR BRENT NORTH
Barry Gardiner may have preferred to keep his Cancun trip secret, but he was undone by Twitter, writes Glen Owen.
His presence at the event  was tweeted to the world on Tuesday soon after he and wife Caroline arrived at the resort.
James Waldron, a reporter for the Chemist and Druggist magazine posted: ‘Barry Gardener [sic] MP tells #SigmaCancun politicians won’t incentivise phs [public health service] unless they see evidence of how cost effective their services are.’
The same day, pharmacy law expert David Reissner also tweeted about Mr Gardiner. But the MP himself was silent on Twitter while in Cancun. 
Before he left the UK, he sent as many as ten tweets a day, detailing his every move, such as: ‘Arrived at Channel 4 News for interview on the flooding.’ 
His last tweet came on February 17, as the conference got under way. It stated righteously: ‘As always I will work to ensure that the best interests of my constituents in Brent North are protected.’ 
His Twitter account leapt back into life on Friday evening after The Mail on Sunday asked him about his freebies.
All of a sudden, the panicking politician tweeted: ‘£300m of pharmacy waste could buy 19,800 treatments for breast cancer or 11,775 more community nurses. Mail on Sunday belittle a serious issue.’
A serious issue Mr Gardiner had not previously seen fit  to tweet.
Document DAMONL0020140223ea2m001bh
