{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"3823"}
____
  
News
BRITAIN'S POLES SIGN UP TO UKIP
TAMMY HUGHES   
399 words
26 April 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; National
4
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
They join party branded 'racist and anti-Europe'
ANTI-EUROPE party Ukip has been recruiting new members - from Poland.
The "Friends of Poland in Ukip" group has attracted 120 members since it was set up in October.
The Ukip body was started by one of the party's London MEP candidates, Przemek Skwirczynski, who came to Britain to study in 1999 from Poland's third largest city, Lodz.
He said Poles were signing up to Ukip because: "A lot of Poles that come here are upwardly mobile and they don't like the tax system that penalises you for success."
Mr Skwirczynski, a banker, said Poles are drawn to the controversial party, branded "anti immigration and racist" by some outspoken critics.
He said: "For some reason everyone seems to bunch the Poles together.
Slurs
"But there are lots of us who come here for different reasons at different times and it's natural that we should want to vote for different people."
He added: "The Conservatives and Labour make anti-Polish comments but Ukip hasn't said anything anti-Polish per se."
Nigel Farage's UK Independence Party has come under fire this week after the star of their TV election film tweeted racist slurs.
Andre Lampitt was one of five supporters chosen to appear in the first Ukip broadcast for the Euro polls.
But he was suspended from the party on Thursday after tweeting that Islam was "evil".
There was further embarrassment for Mr Farage, 50, after another of his TV ad stars was embroiled in a sex scandal.
"Voter" Lizzy Vaid, 27, was reportedly photographed naked taking part in lewd sex acts when she was 20.
And the party was un-And the party was under fire again yesterday after they were accused of using an Irish actor for a campaign poster.
The ad features a builder in a hi-viz jacket and hard hat begging with the slogan "British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour".
Tory MP Bob Neill said: "I think it is pretty hypocritical of Ukip. They are using a trick most other parties stopped using long ago."
Ukip director of communications Patrick O'Flynn insisted that using actors was "standard practice".
He insisted: "The vast majority of people used in political poster campaigns are actors."
tammy.hughes@dailystar.co.uk
Document DAISTA0020140426ea4q0003n
