{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1187"}
____
TV&Showbiz
A bit of me time: Billie Piper goes make-up free to enjoy a hot drink and the view from Hampstead Heath
HANNA FLINT   
485 words
21 March 2014
12:44
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A successful actress of the small screen and the mother of two children, it’s fair to say Billie Piper has a busy life.
So it’s no wonder she enjoys a quiet moment to herself, and on Thursday she did just that, with a hot drink in her hand and a view of a Hampstead Heath.
Billie looked her normal self, without make-up and her hair unstyled, but as she was sat on a park bench enjoying the spring weather, she didn’t really need it.
Though the sun has been shining of late, it was still a little chilly so Piper wore a light grey coat over marl grey joggers, a striped top and black trainer boots.
Of course, for her latest role in the Showtime horror series Penny Dreadful, Billie’s attire was far different.
The actress plays Brona Croft, an Irish immigrant seeking to escape her dark past in Victorian London; as the origin stories of such classic literary characters as Victor Frankenstein, Frankenstein's monster; Dorian Gray and Count Dracula are regaled in the Showtime TV show.
The eight-part series was written and executive produced by Skyfall duo John Logan and Sam Mendes in their first collaboration for television, with the ensemble cast including Josh Hartnett, Eva Green, Timothy Dalton, Harry Treadaway and Rory Kinnear.
Showtime's President of Entertainment, David Nevins, had nothing but praise for Logan and Mendes.
‘John Logan and Sam Mendes are two of the great storytellers of our time,’ Nevins said.
‘The visual spectacle combined with the psychological insight in their reimagining of these iconic literary characters seems totally mesmerising to me. This promises to be a wholly original television show.’
Billie has also been lined up to star in a new Sky Arts project with another Skyfall alumnus, Ben Whishaw.
Foxtrot is the first TV drama by acclaimed playwright Polly Stenham, and will be part of a series of one-off comedies and dramas called Playhouse Presents.
Stenham’s show tells the story of an ill-fated heist by an all-girl gang and also stars Lindsay Duncan and Alice Sanders.
Before these shows come to air, Billie will find out if her critically-acclaimed turn in stage play The Effect has earned her a Lawrence Olivier award.
In Lucy Prebble’s follow to 2009’s Enron, Piper played one Connie, a psychology student who volunteers to take part in a drug test alongside drifter Tristan (Jonjo O'Neill).
As the doctors up the dosage, Connie and Tristan find themselves attracted to each other, however, they are unsure but whether their feelings are real or merely a side effect of the drug.
The Olivier Awards 2014 with MasterCard will take place on Sunday 13 April
Document DAMONL0020140321ea3l003mp
