{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1502"}
____
News
Romanian mother who smuggled migrants OUT of Britain... then back in is spared jail because of 'difficult pregnancy'
CHRIS GREENWOOD   
482 words
14 March 2014
21:53
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Marcella Nedea, 29, given suspended sentence at Canterbury Crown Court
* Judge spared her due to her difficult pregnancy and young daughter
* Helped smuggle hundreds of illegal immigrants through UK borders
A pregnant mother was spared jail yesterday despite her role in a human smuggling gang that sneaked hundreds of illegal immigrants through UK borders.
Romanian Marcella Nedea, 29, sobbed uncontrollably as a judge told her that her trafficking gang opened the doors of the country to terrorists.
But he gave her only a suspended sentence. A male accomplice was jailed for three years.
Nedea was described as the ‘acceptable face’ of the criminal network, which specialised in getting people out of the country.
Once on the European mainland they were put in touch with other traffickers who could supply them with EU citizen papers so they could return legitimately.
One member boasted he had organised up to 500 trips for those in the country illegally, who the gang charged up to £1,800 a time. They were packed into the backs of freight lorries and driven through Dover at night.
Judge Nigel Van Der Bijl said Nedea’s difficult pregnancy and the fact she had a ten-month old daughter meant he could show mercy.
Sentencing her to a suspended  18-month jail term, he added: ‘There really is no point in sending you immediately to prison.’
Police discovered £6,000 stuffed in a Tesco carrier bag when they raided her £350,000 semi-detached home in Harlow, Essex, and a further £3,000 lying around the house.
The businesswoman, who runs a cleaning company, owns a four-storey mansion and several apartments in Romania.
Canterbury Crown Court heard  she played a vital role in the smuggling operation, which was based in Walthamstow, East London.
Prosecutor Ian Foinette said the gang slipped illegal immigrants out of the country so they could get new paperwork and return.
A car park outside a primary school was used as a pick-up point. But in May 2012 one of their lorries carrying eight illegal immigrants was stopped by police at Dover after a tip-off.
Police discovered Nedea was at the heart of the operation run by an Asian mastermind who has not been caught.
She delivered illegal immigrants in her car for collection and was recorded saying there were no checks on people leaving the UK and that ‘no one has been caught’.
Her barrister Robin Sellors said she was a ‘pleasant young lady’ who took a foolish decision to get involved because of the easy money.
She is expecting her second child after a ‘problematic pregnancy’.
Accomplice Tallat Tarar, of North London, 28, was jailed for three years for acting as a  ‘fixer’. Both had admitted trafficking offences at an earlier hearing.
Document DAMONL0020140315ea3e000ju
