{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"616"}
____
News
'I would love to be Prime Minister,' Clegg tells the Lib Dems to LAUGHTER (...and snoring) from his own supporters as he snaps himself in a selfie
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
945 words
9 March 2014
00:49
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Clegg challenged about not campaigning for a majority in 2015
* He insisted best way of having Lib Dem policies in power was in coalition
* Supporters laughed at his chances of victory as others napped in audience
* Then snapped himself in a selfie with spring conference members
Nick Clegg declared he would 'love to be Prime Minister' - triggering laughter from his own party members while others appeared to fall asleep in the audience.
The Lib Dem leader was challenged at his spring conference in York about why he was not trying to cross the finish line first with an outright majority at the next election, instead of pitching for another coalition.
But he appeared for lost words and snorted at the very idea of voters handing him the keys to Number 10, before laughter broke out in the auditorium.
Clegg then took a moment to take a selfie with a group of Liberal Youth attendees.
Mr Clegg used a question and answer session with party members to defend hikes to tuition fees, attack the Tories over immigration and push for further income tax cuts for low paid workers.
But he appeared stumped when an activist asked him: 'Can we please campaign to form the next government alone. Under first-past-the-post nobody can vote for a coalition.'
Mr Clegg struggled for an answer, telling the conference hall at the York Barbican: 'I would love to be Prime Minister...'
But he was drowned out by applause and laughter from the party faithful.
He went on: 'I want us to campaign for Lib Dem policies, values and people in government. I don't go around campaigning for this coalition or that coalition.'
And in apparent admission that the Lib Dems' only hope of power is a power-sharing deal with Labour or the Tories, he added: 'I just so happen to think that most people realise that the way to get Lib Dem policies, values and people into government...
'...Right now is going to be done in power with another party.'
He repeatedly pushed his pro-EU message, which has dominated the conference ahead of Brussels elections in May.
But minutes earlier councillor Jill Hope told the Lib Dem leader that the party's conference: 'The theme for this conference is "in Europe in work", but no-one on the doorstep cares'.
Turning his fire on the Tories, Mr Clegg launched an outspoken attack on Immigration Minister James Brokenshire, who used a speech this week to accuse a 'wealthy metropolitan elite' of enjoying cheap tradesman and services.
The speech triggered a major coalition row, with Mr Clegg, David Cameron and Theresa May employ foreign nannies and cleaners.
Mr Clegg said: 'Over the last 24 to 48 hours we have seen in many respect some of the most ugly sides of the immigration debate.
'It is truly dispiriting to see the Conservative and Labour parties, the two largest parties in British politics, driven, as far as I can see, entirely by panic on this issues.
THE SELFIE CRAZE GETS POLITICAL
Clegg's selfie at the spring conference is the latest in a stream of the self portraits taken by political figures.
British Prime Minister David Cameron caused outrage when he, US president Barack Obama and Danish Prime Minister Helle Thorning-Schmidt posed for a selfie at Nelson Mandela's memorial service.
This week, Cameron caused a Twitter stir by posting a picture of himself on the telephone to US president Barack Obama.
Star Trek actor Patrick Stewart was one of the first to mock the rather embarrassing image - posting an image of himself with a packet of Wet Ones to his ear along with the caption - 'I'm now patched in as well - sorry for the delay.'
'You have got a Conservative Party which is no longer standing up for business - quite a big development, that. I think, personally they do so at their peril. The Institute of Directors absolutely slammed the irresponsible speech made by a Conservative minister this last week on immigration.
'And yet the Labour Party who won't stand up against xenophobia. Instead of trying to actually reduce the temperature of the debate they try and stoke it.'
Mr Clegg, whose hopes of remaining in power after 2015 depend on another coalition, attacked both Labour and the Tories over reports suggesting they could rule out any power-sharing deal in the event of a hung parliament.
Reports suggest that David Cameron is privately considering ruling out a coalition and promising to rule at the head of a minority administration if the Conservatives fail to secure an overall majority, and Unite general secretary Len McCluskey has also reportedly suggested that Labour should go it alone even if they fail to win the most seats.
Mr Clegg said there was an assumption within Labour that 'government will drop into their lap' and they did not need to work for it.
'I have found it very striking to see this McCluskeyite tendency in both the Labour and Conservative Party who are now going one step further and saying 'even if we don't have a majority, we will govern Britain', which overlooks the slightly old-fashioned democratic principle that you have to win a majority before you have a right to say you will govern Britain.
'All of this just reveals a really unpleasant mix of arrogance and cowardice on the part of the two main parties, the two larger parties in British politics.'
Document DAMONL0020140309ea39001rx
