{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"2477"}
____
Benefits Street's Dee raps about Government but says: 'I'm more chip shop than hip hop'
Andy Jones   
1,427 words
5 March 2014
00:00
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
BENEFITS Street celebrity White Dee has become Britain’s least-likely music star by launching a rap career. And the Daily Star had an exclusive invite into the recording studio to see the welfare mum – real name Deidre Kelly – in action. Here ANDY JONES spends the day with White Dee and discovers how she’s taking on David Cameron in her new rapper guise.
White Dee’s rider has arrived. A cup of tea – “one sugar, bag left in" – a box of fags and a Kit Kat. Four fingers, naturally. She needs to keep her strength up for a TV appearance later, after all. The least-likely pop star for a generation is good to go, just as soon as she has made everyone else in the band a brew.
An hour later, the undoubted star of Channel Four’s Benefits Street is growling into the mic, while laying into David Cameron, immigration and employers who pay the minimum wage.
She snarls: “I won’t lay my head low with embarrassment, It’s not my fault I’m living off the Government. I’m not resisting any work that comes my way, but can I really raise my family on the minimum wage?"
It’s part Missy Elliott, part political broadcast as the mum of two bounces around to a shamelessly catchy beat. Dee openly admits she looks more chip shop than hip hop, but her message is clear – she’s deadly serious about taking on a rap career.
At the Grosvenor Road Studios in Handsworth, Birmingham, where performers such as Sir Cliff Richard, The Move and Jasper Carrott have recorded, she’s backed by Brummie reggae outfit XOVA, who are providing the beats to her march to pop stardom.
From her modest house on James Turner Street, White Dee, 42, has become a global smash even before appearing on stage, attracting fans from afar afield as Africa.
She says: “The door knocks at least 50 times a day – people from Newcastle, Edinburgh and London. I invited the first few in to have a cup of tea but now it’s just too many.
“One woman had flown in from north Africa! She arrived in Edinburgh, then drove for seven hours to get here."
XOVA’s manager Steve Hughes
While she hadn’t expected a crack at the charts, Dee has long been priming her vocal flow on her kids at home with lines such as: “Gerrard needs to go to bed, before his momma bops his head!"
She’s also been building up her stage presence at the local karaoke bar with vicious renditions of Meatloaf’s Bat Out Of Hell.
“By the time I finish I need an oxygen tank!" she says.
Her debut track – co-written by XOVA singer Wayne Lawrence, 28 – is titled You To Blame and focuses on the realities of life growing up on the dole. Wayne says politicians don’t know how tough life is without work.
“We saw Dee on TV and thought she was speaking for a lot of people who are laughed at by society," he explains. “I’ve had friends murdered and I know what it is like not knowing where cash is coming from. We wanted her to come and spit some lines for us on a track."
A big fan of Tupac and Eminem, Dee insists she never asked to be a celebrity.
“I thought Benefits Street was a daft idea for a show," she says. “But if this is my chance to speak for the people who are in the same situation as me then I should take it. No-one ever gives a flying fish what Joe Bloggs thinks."
While her rap career is confined to the studio for now, Dee is nervously considering the possibility of a nationwide live tour.
She says: “I don’t think I’ll be twerking! But I certainly think I can dance after a few Jagerbombs!
“I’m hoping they will do what they did with Tupac and just hologram me on to the stage.
“I can’t sing harmonies – my singing is so bad I used to threaten my kids that I would appear on X Factor with a big sign around my neck if they didn’t behave!"
As with every big star, fame is sometimes proving difficult to manage for White Dee. She says: “I had a fake Twitter profile set up in my name and they invited people to my house, which is scary as everyone knows my address.
"Then again, having me on the door is almost like having a bouncer! But around town, most people are lovely to me. People want photos and don’t mention my benefits."
Dee isn’t afraid of a scrap and was recently debating the UK benefits system on Channel 5’s Big Benefits Row against professional bigmouth Katie Hopkins of The Apprentice fame.
Hopkins, 38, called her a “bloodsucking parasite" but Dee reveals that it was all an act for TV.
“She was nice as pie off camera and then when the filming started she flipped," says Dee. “Even then she saved her nastiest comments for a newspaper afterwards. What has she ever achieved anyway?
“I only know about her from The Apprentice and a newspaper story where she got caught humping someone in a field."
Many critics have questioned how Dee can pursue a pop career while suffering from depression but the Brummie says she hopes to show how debilitating the illness can be.
She explains: “People think you can just get on with your life and snap out of it. But depression is a medical condition – you feel absolutely horrific and worthless.
“Two years ago, my mum died – the most important person in my life. I would ring her 10 times a day and her dying destroyed me. I lost my whole life."
Dee also hopes to launch a career as an MP in Birmingham on a manifesto based around raising the minimum wage and free childcare for working mums.
She says: “People attack the benefits system, but they should aim their anger at employers. “The minimum wage is rubbish. It’s less than what you get on benefits. Now how is that right? Is the answer to lower benefits or raise wages? People are being robbed by employers not those on benefits."
XOVA’s manager Steve Hughes says that he is already impressed with Dee’s fighting spirit on-stage.
He says: “She’s a real urban wordsmith. She’s more like a beat poet than a rapper."
Dee's rap
YOU TO BLAME – XOVA featuring Dee from the Street
Laid my cards on the table for the critics to see
With no card unturned you can’t judge me
Everything that I’ve done, done to survive
Was done for my kids, give them better lives.
We used to be a nation proud to say
I come from England and be patriotic every day
Won’t lay my head low with embarrassment
It’s not my fault I’m living off the Government
I’m not resisting any work that comes my way.
But can I really raise my family on the minimum wage
Get my children educated with the will to learn
Never forgetting where they come from.
Dee on...Becoming an MP
“Why can’t I be an MP? Because I’m too common? I didn’t go to Eton, I went to Matthew Boulton College in Birmingham and proud of it. I’m serious about everything I set my mind to."
Benefits Street
“You only see half the story. When the guy attacks the cameraman with a hammer, what you don’t see is me and the other Dee bundling him to the floor and getting the weapon off him. We don’t tolerate violence on our street – we’re a family."
Crime
“It’s not the Government’s fault that some wally decides to steal five jackets from a shop, but they can make it more worthwhile to get a proper job. If wages are lower than benefits people have no incentive to work."
Related articles Benefits Street star is sent back to prison for nicking wine 1DEE on tour! Benefits Street star White Dee goes mobile to escape nutty fans LISTEN: Benefits Street star White Dee launches her rap career… on local radio Benefits Street's White Dee backs plan for claimers to work on farms
Document DAICO00020140305ea350013k
