{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"797"}
____
News
Security concerns raised as passengers on board London-JFK flight bypass immigration after plane arrives at the WRONG terminal
LUKE GARRATT   
317 words
25 February 2014
15:44
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Delta Air Lines flight from Heathrow took passengers to the wrong gate
* Passengers were taken to a baggage claim gate instead of immigration
* Those who congregated at the baggage claim had names taken down
* According to a passenger, those with carry-on bags could have walked out
International flight security concerns have been raised as passengers on board a flight from London to New York's JFK were left to bypass immigration when the plane arrived at the wrong terminal.
Passengers on the Delta Air Lines fight were let out into a section of the airport where they did not have to pass through immigration or customs, according to CBS News.
The passengers were only stopped when airport employees realised they were in the wrong part of the airport.
The passengers from the flight, Delta 3, which took off from Heathrow, found that instead of their expected customs and immigration check, they instead departed inside a domestic baggage claim.
The story was reported by CBS, as it turned out that a passenger aboard the flight, Andrew Rostron, is the husband of a CBS employee. 
According to Rostron, anyone who had a carry on bag could have just walked out the airport.
Meanwhile, the names of the passengers who had stuck around to collect their bags were taken down, and they were then sent through immigration and customs.
Delta Airlines told CBS News it is aware that 'a small number of customers off Delta flight 3 from London to New York's Kennedy International Airport were able to bypass customs screening.
'Delta is working with the Port Authority as well as Customs and Border Protection and is looking into the matter.
'Customer security is of vital importance and Delta makes every effort to follow appropriate procedures.'
Document DAMONL0020140225ea2p006f9
