{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3297"}
____
News
Adolf Hitler’s birthplace to be turned into integration centre for immigrants – as a beer shop opens at the bunker where he died
JULIAN ROBINSON   
865 words
14 May 2014
17:10
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Integration and language courses to be giving at dictator's birth place
* Future of Adolf Hitler's first home has been at centre of debate for years
* It comes as beer emporium is opened up at site of bunker where Hitler died
The birthplace of Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler is to be turned into an integration centre for immigrants as it was revealed the bunker where he met his end has become a booze shop.
Austrian officials keen to end a growing row over the future of the house where the infamous chancellor was born in the town of Braunau am Inn and are close to a deal with the owner to convert it for its proposed new use.
The move comes after it emerged that the air raid bunker where he ended his life and where the Third Reich came to an end has been turned into a beer emporium.
The City Service Berlin booze store is just yards from the bunker where on April 30, 1945, Hitler and his new bride Eva Braun ended their lives with gunshots and cyanide thirty feet underground.
Hitler spent the first three years of his life in what was then a local pub in Braunau am Inn during the 1890s.
His parents rented rooms so that his father could carry out his job as a customs official at the nearby Austrian German border.
The Hitlers left three years after Adolf's birth and in 1938 it was bought by the Fuhrer's private secretary Martin Bormann.
After World War II, the building was rented by the Austrian Republic in 1952 and until 1965 it was the home of the public library and later a bank.
The current row over the house started when the Mayor of Braunau Hannes Waidbacher from the conservative People's party (OeVP) said publicly that they didn't need another monument to the evils of war.
He had added that the Fuhrer had 'only lived there for three years anyway'.
The mayor added that there was already a memorial stone outside the building and said he felt that the local community had already done enough to remember the past, and there was therefore no need to feel pressurised to turn the property into something similar.
But after the international headlines that it generated the council partially backed down and said it had backed the idea of turning the house into a place where minorities would be helped to integrate which included language courses for children who were not native German speakers, and other community integration projects.
The council confirmed that the humanitarian aid organisation Volkshilfe had been asked to take over managing the integration and language courses that will be offered to immigrants.
After that a Russian MP said he was planning to put in a bid to buy the house so that 'every trace of fascism is wiped off the planet'.
MP Franz Klinzevitsch from the ruling United Russia party said he had even started collecting the £1.7 million that he estimates he needs and is being supported in the project by the Russian Communist Party.
But the house is not for sale, and the current owner who gets a monthly rental from the Interior Ministry had reportedly been difficult over exactly what use the property could be put to.
But there is now optimism that the latest proposals will be accepted ahead of a deadline on Friday.
Meanwhile, a beer emporium owner in Berlin says he intends to put up an informative plaque outside his store - next to the bunker site where Hitler and Eva Braun ended their lives.
Bernd Herbrich said: 'Although tourists find their way here, not everyone in the city knows that the bunker was here.
'I was born after World War II but I have heard the stories from my parents and grandparents.
'I imagine what happened 70 years ago, and there is much blame, but I cannot be responsible for those events.
'I'm a man of another generation, I see no problem to talk about the history, and cannot see why other Germans have.'
The bunker was the air raid shelter for Hitler's chancellery which he had to retreat to in early 1945 as the Soviet Red Army advanced on land towards the capital and the bombers of Britain and America pounded it into brickdust from the skies.
The bunker was overrun by Russians days after Hitler's suicide and the charred corpses of him and Eva were found in a shell hole in the garden outside. Stalin ordered that the corpses be secretly removed and buried in East Germany.
They had several secret burial places over the years before being dug up one final time in 1970, the bones burned and crushed, and the ashes dumped into a river.
The bunker was in the death strip of the Berlin Wall during the years of the Cold War and later a car park was built over it. It had been filled with concrete by the East Germans.
Document DAMONL0020140514ea5e006vd
