{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1465"}
____
Femail
35 and still living at home! Extra host Maria Menounos reveals her parents and long-term boyfriend all live under the same roof
SADIE WHITELOCKS   
522 words
13 March 2014
15:09
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Extra host Maria Menounos has revealed that she still lives with her parents at the age of 35, in keeping with traditions from her Greek heritage.
The television presenter also resides in her Los Angeles-based family home with her boyfriend of 15 years, Kevin Undergaro, and they currently don't have any plans on finding their own place, marrying or having children.
During an interview on Ellen yesterday Miss Menounos said that she constantly faces pressure from her family to 'take the next step' but for now she is focused on her career.
Scroll down for video
Indeed, on March 18 her new reality show Chasing Maria Menounos is set to air on the Oxygen channel.
The half-hour docu-sereis offers fans a glimpse inside the brunette's Hollywood lifestyle, including what she gets up to at home and in her free-time.
Her Greek immigrant parents, Costas and Litsa, also star along with her partner Mr Undergaro and a family friend named Jo.
Miss Menounos told Ellen DeGeneres her parents were 'definitely hesitant' about being on television but slowly came around to the idea.
When asked about how it is living in such a packed household, she didn't touch on any tension.
Instead Miss Menounos happily described her parents as 'so funny' and 'cute.'
'I just love the idea that I am able to take these two villagers from Greece who had no running water, they didn't have shoes to go to school with and now they're going to be famous on TV,' she continued.
However, in a preview clip for her new show it becomes clear that there are underlying strains.
Miss Menounos is seen on the verge of tears as she is talked into marriage - something she thinks she wants to do - and have a baby, which could prove difficult with Mr Undergaro's fertility problems.
'One thing for sure is the clock is ticking and I have got to figure things out' Miss Menounos exclaims.
Describing Miss Menounos' new show, an Oxygen spokesperson said: 'Chasing Maria Menounos is an emotional, comedic journey that will introduce viewers to a modern young woman who is at a crossroad in her life and trying to decide what’s next.
'Maria is ambitious, unconventional and incredibly funny, you just can't help but fall in love with her.'
In addition to her television duties, Miss Menounos is also an accomplished author.
Her new book called, The Everygirl's Guide To Diet And Fitness, is set to be published in April.
While you would never know it, the book chronicles Miss Menounos' personal struggles with her weight and how she finally managed to drop 40lbs over a decade ago.
'Being healthy isn't just for some girls, it's for every girl,' the slender brunette said.
The book is a follow-up to her 2011 bestseller The Everygirl's Guide To Life.
Chasing Maria Menounos premieres on Tuesday, March 18 at 10pm
Document DAMONL0020140313ea3d005vw
