{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3298"}
____
News
'Chillin' @ abc2 news': Mentally disturbed man who claimed he was God live tweeted his takeover of Baltimore TV station... as shocking footage emerges of him smashing stolen truck through the front doors
MICHAEL ZENNIE   
799 words
14 May 2014
16:48
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Vladimir Mehul Baptiste, 27, crashed through the front doors of WMAR-TV about 11.45am when a security guard refused to let him in
* He is charged with three counts of attempted murder
* Sent numerous tweets, most of them incoherent rantings, from the TV station after he barricaded himself inside
* Police initially thought he was heavily armed - though officers found him with only a golf club
* He was watching live coverage of his police standoff when he was arrested
The mentally disturbed man who smashed his way into a Baltimore TV station Tuesday live tweeted the his take-over as he watched the commotion he had caused on a TV inside the studio. 
Vladimir Mehul Baptiste, 27, demanded to be let into WMAR-TV and claimed he was God. When a security guard refused to open the door, he returned - this time with a dump truck he had stolen.
Security camera footage from the station shows him repeatedly ramming the front doors before finally plowing straight through into the lobby.
Baptiste was arrested after barricading himself inside the station for five hours. He faces numerous charges, including three counts of attempted murder. 
After breaking into the station, Baptiste locked himself in an editing room and began tweeting as he watched live TV news coverage of the commotion he had created outside.
'Chillin @ abc2 news waiting and yawning,' an hour and a half after the break-in.
The remainder of his tweets from inside the station appear to be meaningless babble about 'energy.'
'can you all see me the days of the negative energies hurting you are OVER!' he wrote. His final tweet was: 'ALL these millenniums of petyness and "just for Fun" Bulls***, you will not be forgiving by me! just wait.'
Scroll down for video
Authorities believe Baptiste was mentally disturbed. Baltimore County Police Chief Jim Johnson said was 'ranting and raving incoherently' as he was taken into custody.
A WMAR-TV employee recounted the scene as Baptiste tried to get into the TV station the first time. When a secretary refused to open the doors, he pounded on the front entrance and screamed 'let me in
'Let me in! Let me in! I'm God, I'm f***ing God!' the witness told WBAL-TV.
Baptiste is the son of Haitian immigrants. Merizia Saindor Baptiste broke down when she heard what her son was accused of doing.
Mrs Baptiste told WMAR-TV she and her husband moved their six children to the United States from Haiti in 1999 in an attempt to give them a better life.
Police say that after locking himself in a second-floor editing room in the building, he turned on a TV and watched the commotion he had just caused unfold live on local and national broadcasts. 
Just before 5pm, Baltimore County police officers sent a dog into the room where the man was holed up. The man was subdued so that officers could arrest him.
Police had initial reports that the man was heavily armed - possibly with several guns. Heavily-armed SWAT teams quickly swarmed the area and began clearing the building.
Terrified staffers fled the building through a back door. Everyone was believed to be safe and accounted for within an hour of the incident.
However, four hours after the attack, SWAT officers discovered one lone staffer who had taken cover and was cut off from the rest of the employees.
The TV station is on lockdown. The TV news channel, an ABC affiliate, has not been able to get on air, but that hasn't stopped the staff from tweeting about the incident.
Brian Keubler, a WMAR reporter, wrote that he watched at the man ran up to the front doors of the TV station and pounded on the doors. He screamed that he was God and yelled 'Let me in!'
Then, he got into a landscaping truck and rammed the doors at least three times before breaking through into the building.
So far, a head count in the TV station has revealed that none of the employees are missing or injured, Kuebler wrote.
Helicopter video from WJZ-TV shows a hole in the front of the building, large enough for a vehicle to enter. Drivers were still able to enter a neighboring shopping center, although a section of the road was blocked to traffic.
Two schools near the TV station are on lock-down as officers hunt for the suspect.
A stretch of busy York Road in Towson, Maryland, a Baltimore suburb, has been closed - disrupting traffic flow in the region.
Document DAMONL0020140514ea5e006n3
