{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1898"}
____
  
News
SOME UKIP MEMBERS ARE AKIN TO NAZIS SAYS TORY MP
BY JAMES CHAPMAN    
578 words
7 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
32
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
SOME members of the UK Independence Party are 'literally akin to the Nazis', according to a Tory MP.
In an incendiary attack ahead of the European elections, Robert Halfon said the anti-EU party had played a helpful role in 'cleansing' the Conservatives of people with extreme views.
Mr Halfon, an ally of Chancellor George Osborne and Tory chairman Grant Shapps, cited the example of UKIP immigration spokesman Gerard Batten, who believes that British Muslims should sign a special code of conduct rejecting violence.
Mr Halfon, who is Jewish, said: 'To me there are two kinds of UKIP - the [former defence spokesman] Godfrey Bloom guy who's like a cross between Sid James and Bernard Manning, and then there's a much more sinister element, like the MEP who said every Muslim has got to sign a declaration of non-violence, which to me is literally akin to the Nazis saying Jews should wear a yellow star.
'I genuinely find it abhorrent and frightening.'
The MP said such people were not welcome in the Conservative Party and insisted he was glad they had been driven out by UKIP.
'In many ways UKIP have done us an enormous favour because they're cleansing people from the Tory party that had these kinds of views, which is great because I don't want people who have those kinds of views in my party,' Mr Halfon told political magazine The House. His comments prompted an angry reaction from UKIP and will divide opinion on the Conservative benches.
UKIP leader Nigel Farage attacked Mr Halfon for directing 'hysterical slurs' at UKIP and its members and said he intended to step up campaigning in the MP's constituency of Harlow.
Last year in the county council elections, UKIP scored between 25 per cent and 30 per cent of the votes cast in the seat.
Mr Farage said: 'Mr Halfon's hysterical slurs are the result of a growing Tory terror of UKIP's rising popularity all over the country.
'Because I believe in taking politics and the big arguments directly to the people, UKIP will now be having a national action day in Harlow. Let the voters of Harlow hear what we have got to say. I know that many of them are already flocking to our side.
'As we approach the next general election, we will also consider whether to add Harlow to our target seat list given the positive response of people in the town to our message.'
UKIP euro election candidate Patrick O'Flynn said: 'Mr Halfon's idea that a party led by David Cameron and George Osborne will ever appeal to ordinary working families is deluded.
'But it is a shame to see him resort to gutter politics in a desperate bid to save his seat at next year's election.'
The Tory leadership has fought shy of making direct attacks on UKIP, with party strategists warning that such remarks risked playing into UKIP hands.
But some senior Tories now appear to have decided to confront the party, which says it is on course to top the polls in elections to the European Parliament on May 22.
Defence minister Anna Soubry launched a blistering attack on Mr Farage when the pair recently appeared on the BBC's Question Time, accusing him of putting 'fear in people's hearts' by scaremongering about immigration.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140306ea3700031
