{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"449"}
____
News
Mother forced to bring up daughter alone after her American husband was asked to leave Britain because he had cancer and is a '£98,000 burden on the taxpayer'
MARK DUELL   
1,512 words
11 March 2014
11:42
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Lorraine Marx, 56, nursed husband when he was diagnosed with leukaemia
* But he was escorted onto a plane and deported against medical advice
* Home Office ruled Ralph Marx, 56, had become burden on the taxpayer
* Couple - who have 10-year-old daughter Alexandra - married 13 years ago
A British mother has been left to bring up her daughter alone after her American husband was kicked out of the country - because he had cancer.
Lorraine Marx, 56, of Chidham, West Sussex, nursed her partner Ralph Marx, also 56, when he was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
But the former Royal Navy chief petty officer watched helplessly as he was escorted onto a plane, and deported against medical advice.
The Home Office ruled he had become a burden on the taxpayer and the NHS billed him £98,000 for the cancer treatment he had received.
The couple - who have 10-year-old daughter Alexandra - married in 2001 but Mr Marx had chosen not to apply for residency status.
It meant the chemical engineer was only allowed to stay in Britain for up to six months at a time before leaving and coming back.
His work - for an international company - meant he often travelled abroad on business and this was not an issue.
But his cancer diagnosis and resultant stay in hospital meant he was at risk of over-staying his visitor status.
Mr Marx surrendered his passport in 2012 and applied for Family Leave to Remain, at their home in Chidham. But the Home Office rejected his application and ordered he leave Britain immediately.
A later application from his new home in Tennessee was rejected when the Home Office ruled he was at risk of drawing on public funds.
A judge upheld the family’s appeal in January this year, and said: ‘On no occasion, save the time when he was gravely ill, did he fail to comply with the terms of his visa.’
He also acknowledged the family had private medical insurance and the invoice from the NHS came at the same time as the Home Office refused Mr Marx’s application.
WHAT ARE THE UK'S VISA RULES?
Partners of British citizens who wish to apply to remain in the country on the basis of their relationship must meet an array of criteria set out by the UK Border Agency.
They must prove that they and their other half are both over 18, that their relationship is 'genuine and subsisting', that any marriage or civil partnership is valid under UK law, and that they intend to live with their partner permanently in the UK.
UKBA also requires proof that would-be British citizens have met their partner in person, that the couple in question are not related in any way that would prevent them marrying under UK law, and that any previous relationship has permanently broken down.
Finally the applicant must show that they meet UKBA's list of 'suitability requirements', along with its English language requirement, and its financial requirement.
This states that any non-national hoping to remain in the country on the grounds that their partner is a British citizen must have an income of at least £18,600.
If the applicant has a child that is not a citizen or settled in the country that they wish to live with them in the country, the minimum income goes up to £22,400. Each additional child requires an additional income of £2,400.
The Home Office says the rules are intended to ensure people coming to Britain to join their spouse or partner do not become a burden on the taxpayer. In the case of Ralph Marx, his application was rejected after they ruled he would indeed be a burden.
This led him to believe ‘the impetus for the bill came from the Entry Clearance Officer’ rather than the hospital.
The NHS has since dropped its bill but the Home Office is appealing the appeal over residency and Mr Marx continues to live in America.
His case is to be heard tomorrow.
Schoolgirl Alexandra has only seen her father once in the past year, and has to speak to him via video chat service Skype.
He is currently in remission but has not had access to his medical team since he has been away.
Furthermore, he is unable to work because he does not have his passport.
Mrs Marx said her husband had private health cover but nurses told him his treatment would be the same on the NHS because his life was at risk.
She said: ‘I pointed out that Ralph wasn’t British but they were wonderful, telling me not to worry - as my husband, he was entitled to treatment.
‘I was stunned when the Home Office rejected Ralph’s application. We’d tried so hard to be positive, and after Ralph had been so sick, it was almost too much to bear.
‘To then receive the NHS bill made me feel like someone had thumped me in the stomach.’
She added: ‘I just don’t know where to go now or what more we can do. We’ve provided every document they’ve ever asked for and abided by all the rules.
‘With all the major issues the government has to tackle, I can’t believe they are working so hard to keep a decent, tax-paying, family apart. It can’t benefit anyone.
‘The only person I’ve managed to speak to at the Home Office asked "why we don’t just go and live in America?"
'This is our home. I’ve paid hundreds of thousands of pounds in taxes over the years and never received a penny in benefits.
'We will never get this time back. I can only pray that I will get to see my family soon. I miss them desperately and hate the pain this is causing my wife and little girl'
Ralph Marx
‘I understand that my husband is not entitled to any support - we’ve never asked for any. My daughter has had to live without her daddy for almost a year.
‘Will the Home Office come and explain to her if Ralph’s cancer comes back and she has missed the last couple of years of his life?’
Mr Marx said: ‘The Home Office is well aware that we are financially stable for the long term.
‘Additionally, I have now lost two, possibly three, jobs which would have resulted in significant revenues coming into the UK from overseas business.
FAMILIES SPLIT BY VISA RULES
Barman Justin Tutt, 29, told last year how he was facing having his two children taken into care 8,500 miles away after being told he was not earning enough to keep them in the UK.
Mr Tutt brought his son Seth, eight and five-year-old daughter Leigh to live in England with him following the sudden death of their mother in their native South Africa.
But despite Mr Tutt holding a British passport and having another son born in the UK, under new immigration rules, Seth and Leigh cannot stay here as they must be living in a family earning at least £22,500 a year. 
Ethan James Feltham, 23, of South Wales, served in the armed forces in Afghanistan - but he earns just short of the £18,600 he needs to earn for his Fijian wife to live in Britain.
This is despite him working 60 hours a week as a restaurant chef. UK officials do not believe his wife - whom he met through a military friend - will leave if she comes to stay.
‘The greatest tragedy though is in the pain and destruction of a British family at a critical time in their lives. We will never get this time back.
‘I can only pray that I will get to see my family soon. I miss them desperately and hate the pain this is causing my wife and little girl.
‘We are not scroungers, we can support ourselves and have done so all of our lives. But we are being treated as criminals - my daughter’s welfare is at stake and no one seems to care.’
The Marx family solicitor, Steven Grosvenor, said: ‘The Home Office relentlessly maintains that the family cannot support themselves in spite of their having savings more than six times the amount required by the rules.’
A spokesman for the Home Office said: ‘We are appealing the tribunal’s decision because we believe it did not apply the immigration rules correctly.
‘Mr Marx’s application for a spousal visa was rejected because he did not show that he met the financial requirements of the rules.
‘Our family rules have been designed to make sure that those coming to the UK to join their spouse or partner will not become a burden on the taxpayer and will be well enough supported to integrate effectively.’
Document DAMONL0020140311ea3b004st
