{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2642"}
____
  
News
HUGE CHILD PORN RING TRICKED UK YOUNGSTERS
BY JAMES SLACK    
526 words
20 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
24
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
BRITISH children using social networking websites have unwittingly been the victims of one of the world's worst child pornography rings, it emerged yesterday.
Police are now preparing to arrest a significant number of UK men suspected of paying to access the secret obscene image-sharing website.
US authorities - which smashed the international ring - called it 'one of the largest known online child exploitation operations in history'.
Many of the victims were contacted via social networking sites and 'enticed to produce sexually explicit material'.
Some of the men responsible tricked them by posing as females .
More than 27,000 subscribers to the vile secret network had access to 2,000 videos filmed on computer webcams.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement in the US said they had arrested 14 American men who operated the members-only site from the southern state of Louisiana.
Investigators have so far identified 251 child victims, of whom 243 were boys.
There were 228 Americans and a total of 23 from Britain, Canada, New Zealand, Australia and Belgium. The majority were aged 13 to 15, but 33 were aged under 12 and two were aged just three.
The UK's National Crime Agency has been handed detailed intelligence on British users of the site, who now face being arrested.
Daniel Ragsdale, of the US Department of Homeland Security, said: 'Never before in the history of this agency have we identified and located this many minor victims in the course of a single child exploitation investigation.'
He said the agency was fighting 'a growing trend where children are being enticed, tricked and coerced online by adults to produce sexually explicit material of themselves'.
Some of the 14 alleged operators assumed female identities to contact their targets on popular social networking sites.
They have been charged with running a child exploitation enterprise after allegedly distributing the material through the so-called 'dark web', which allows internet anonymity by hiding online traffic and a user's location.
The child porn network, which was operated for a year from mid-2012 to last June, was unmasked after an item was sent through the US Postal Service to a child.
An NCA spokesman said: 'We can confirm that information was sent to the CEOP command from our law enforcement colleagues in the United States.
'A number of disseminations have been made to UK police forces, but as investigations are ongoing, we cannot comment further at this time'.
Earlier this year, the Internet Watch Foundation warned of the dangers of UK teenagers sharing explicit images on social networking sites.
The IWF said children often used the likes of Facebook or the Snapchat mobile phone app to send explicit pictures or videos to a boyfriend or girlfriend because they did not believe the images would be widely circulated.
But analysts found nine out of ten images posted on the internet featuring young people later re-appeared on so-called 'parasite' websites after being stolen, hacked or copied.
Susie Hargreaves, the IWF chief executive, said young people must understand they were exposing themselves to 'ridiculous levels of risk'.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140319ea3k0005y
