{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1616"}
____
  
Features
SO WHO TOLD THE BIGGEST PORKIES?
BY DANIEL HANNAN    
541 words
28 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
8
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
LAWS
FARAGE CLAIMED: Seventy-five per cent of our laws come from the EU.
CLEGG CLAIMED: It's only seven per cent.
THE FACTS: Farage's figure is an estimate based on two others - a survey by Germany's Federal Justice Ministry which looked at every law passed in Germany and found 84 per cent emanated from Brussels, and the opinion of Luxembourg's European Commissioner Viviane Reding who said the figure was 70 per cent. Farage, in effect, split the difference.
Clegg said his 7 per cent figure was in a House of Commons Library briefing note. In fact, it mentioned the figure of 6.8 per cent only as a proportion of the UK's primary legislation directly made by the EU. It added that several other laws were generated by EU rules, concluding: 'All measurements have their problems and it is possible to justify any measure between 15 per cent and 50 per cent or thereabouts.'
VERDICT? Farage's figure was sloppy, but Clegg's was downright dishonest.
 
TRADE
CLEGG: Three million jobs are linked to our trade with the EU. If we were outside, those jobs would be at risk.
FARAGE: We buy much more from the EU than we sell - £150 billion a year compared to £100 billion - and it's inconceivable that the other EU states would jeopardise their exports to us simply because we withdrew from their political arrangements.
THE FACTS: Clegg's three million figure is a decade old and, in any case, the pro-European who came up with it has since disowned it. No one seriously claims that if Britain withdrew from the EU we would be excluded from the common market. Almost every other non-EU country - from Iceland and the Faroe Islands to Macedonia and Turkey - trades freely with the EU.
Farage was right to point to the balance of our trade with the EU, which has been negative in 39 of the 40 years of our membership (while we have run a cumulative surplus with the rest of the world).
VERDICT? Clear win for Farage.
IMMIGRATION
CLEGG: A Ukip leaflet had suggested that 29million Romanian and Bulgarian immigrants might settle in Britain whereas, in fact, the two countries' joint populations are not even 29 million.
FARAGE: The figure had changed because a couple of million had already emigrated to other EU states. In any case, every one of the EU's nearly 500million people has the right to settle in the UK.
THE FACTS: The combined population of Romania and Bulgaria is 27.5million. Provisionally, the Office for National Statistics puts the total number from the two countries living in the UK (including those who had arrived before restrictions were lifted in January), below 200,000.
Farage is right that the free movement of people is an inescapable requirement of EU membership - though this does not qualify them to free benefits. Ukip damaged its case by its hysterical predictions at the end of last year, and Clegg is right to point out that EU migrants to Britain have, so far, generated more in tax than they have claimed in welfare.
VERDICT? Win on points for Clegg.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140327ea3s0000i
