{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1551"}
____
Femail
From their children's school fees to new bathrooms and even horses, the couples living high on the hog to the bank of granny and grandad
HELEN CARROLL   
1,913 words
26 March 2014
22:43
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Catharine Higginson's parents have given her £60,000 of financial support
* They help out with credit card bills, furniture and even medical bills
* Catherine struggles financially after divorcing her husband
* 11 per cent of parents have gone into debt to support their children
Catharine Higginson’s parents probably thought that their daughter was set up for life when she won a place at Oxford University. Little did they imagine that two decades later they would still be supporting her financially.
At the last count, Catharine’s father Roger, a solicitor, and mother Ann, an art historian, have helped her out to the tune of nearly £60,000. This includes £15,000 to pay off credit card bills, £10,000 to renovate a home she bought with her first husband and £5,000 for a new bathroom in the house she shares with her second husband and three children.
Her parents have also paid £500 for a new cooker and £500 for bookshelves, and bought clothes, bedding and toiletries.
Last year they gave Catharine, a part-time copywriter and English tutor, their car, a Peugeot 406 worth £6,000, when hers was written off and she couldn’t afford to replace it. They have also agreed to pay £5,500 for orthodontic work for one of their granddaughters after NHS treatment went wrong.
While parents now routinely expect to help their offspring with the large deposits required to get a foot on the property ladder, an increasing number have, like Catharine’s parents, become a more — shall we say — regular source of funds.
Catharine and her husband James, a self-employed website developer, have combined earnings of a relatively meagre £30,000. She is divorced from the father of her children.
As 40-year-old Catharine, from Dorking, Surrey, says: ‘There are times when I think “It’s not fair. Why do I still have to depend on the bank of mum and dad?”
‘But many people who go through a divorce end up in my position. Although my ex is generous, when you’re running two homes there is never enough money.
‘I’ve got a very close relationship with my parents. Without their support we would have struggled to pay for some of the basics. Knowing I can always turn to them for help takes away a lot of stress.’
According to a recent study by Prudential, a quarter of parents expect to delay retirement until at least the age of 70 to help support their offspring. Meanwhile, a worrying 11 per cent have gone into debt to provide financial assistance for their adult children.
A survey by Abbey also found that parents have withdrawn, on average, a fifth of their savings to fund cash-strapped children through the recession.
But does the phenomenon go further than the economic downturn? Do the younger generation simply have material expectations beyond their means?
After all, Ann’s most recent donation was £500 so that Catharine could build a shelter for her horse Brownie, which she keeps in the 2.5 acres surrounding the four-bedroomed detached house that she and James, 42, live in with her children from her first marriage — Daisy, 18, Tilly, 16, and Max, 12.
Many would argue that if your household income is just £30,000 then you shouldn’t own a horse, but Catharine attempts to justify the expense by pointing out that she wears charity shop clothes.
But she does admit: ‘I know how lucky we are — in fact my dad wouldn’t want me to forget it! He’s a great one for writing letters reminding me how much money he has given me over the years, and it’s a lot, so I don’t blame him.’
With two brothers who haven’t had the same help, she accepts that these gifts may be deducted from any future inheritance.
Her mother Ann Sceat, 71, admits that the situation has caused a few tensions over the years.
‘Sometimes we feel exasperated — Roger more than I — because Cat just cannot seem to get on an even keel financially,’ she says.
‘I know when children are growing up it’s expensive. We managed without outside help, though. I think my generation is more frugal because we grew up when times were hard.
‘Just yesterday I bought myself a £3.50 top from a charity shop. I wouldn’t have dreamt of paying £50 for it at John Lewis.’
If Catharine and James have a lifestyle beyond their means, the same can certainly be said of Abi and Trevor Rooley-Towle.
While their combined income is less than £15,000, thanks to parental support they send their two sons to a private school where the fees per child are £6,000 a year.
Abi’s father, stepmum and mother also help with the £460-a-month rent on their cottage, cover the cost of fuel bills and buy clothes for the boys — Arran, 15, and Tam, 12. In fact, over the past 15 years the couple have received a staggering £80,000 in handouts.
‘We couldn’t possibly survive without their help,’ admits Abi, 43, a music tutor. ‘They could spend their money on fancy holidays but instead they choose to support us because they know how much we struggle.’
That might be true, though surely many would argue that putting your sons through private school is hardly a necessity.
‘Given that we can barely afford to feed and clothe ourselves, I realise people might think we’re mad sending our boys to a private school,’ she admits. ‘But we prioritise their happiness and education above everything.’
Abi’s hand-to-mouth existence is a far cry from her own privileged childhood. Her father is an international musician and she grew up with her younger sister Sophie in a sprawling house in the North Yorkshire countryside.
Educated at a private convent school, Abi went on to get a degree from the University of East Anglia. She met Trevor, 58, who has a degree from Durham University, in Darlington, County Durham, 20 years ago through friends. In 1997 they decided to marry and have children but found it hard to secure work that paid enough for them to support a family.
Four years ago they moved to Moray, near Inverness, hoping a new beginning might improve their prospects. But it has been tough. Trevor recently secured a job as a carer earning ‘just above the minimum wage’ of £6.31 an hour after spending years in casual jobs, including gardening and refuse collection.
Life became even more of a struggle when their sons failed to settle at school and the Rooley-Towles felt they had no option but to educate them privately.
Abi’s father picked up the tab for the first year’s school fees — £12,000 for both boys — and a substantial proportion of the three subsequent years’ fees have been paid by her stepmother.
‘We’re so desperate for the boys to stay at their school that we pretty much live off home-grown veg and split yellow peas to afford the couple of thousand pounds a year that my family doesn’t cover,’ says Abi. ‘The only clothes the boys get come from Grandma.’
Trevor says: ‘We have gone down the route of private education. We shouldn’t have, because without the help of Abi’s family we’re in no position to fund it. But it’s hard to take them out of the school now because they’re both very happy.’
Sam Smethers, of the charity Grandparents Plus, says the older generation feels increasing pressure to help offspring, both financially and with childcare
He admits it is also emasculating being reliant on his in-laws: ‘It can be difficult for the male ego when you can’t provide for your family and have to take handouts.’
But it’s not just families on low incomes who rely on financial injections from parents.
Puneet and Jas Bhandal have a combined income of around £80,000 but, thanks to an expanding family and taking out mortgages on two rental properties — one in Spain, the other in Cardiff — which have decreased in value, their outgoings are enormous. This has resulted in gifts of around £100,000 from parents on both sides.
‘We thought we were being financially astute but weren’t banking on the recession,’ says Puneet, 45, who works in publishing.
Their perilous financial situation is likely to continue as Jas, 43, an IT service manager, recently gave up a full-time role for better paid but less secure contract work.
Last year Jas’s mother paid £40,000 towards the cost of extending their four-bedroomed home in Hayes, Middlesex, because the couple felt they were running out of room.
They already have three children — Roma, nine, Arjun, seven, and Mili, two — and Puneet is expecting a fourth next month.
‘With three kids our house felt small, so we did a single-storey extension downstairs and had the loft converted into a bedroom at the same time,’ says Puneet.
Her retired parents — Puneet’s father worked for the Post Office and her mother for the immigration service — also gave her £15,000 to set up an online bridalwear business, selling her own East-meets-West designs, and also cleared £25,000 from the mortgage on the Cardiff flat, reducing the monthly repayments by £300.
But it’s not as if Jas and Puneet’s parents are wealthy. Jas’s late father was head of catering for British Airways and also ran a newsagent’s shop, which his wife worked in at the same time as holding down a factory job.
‘Our parents worked seven days a week and made sure they saved and had pension schemes, which I don’t have because we’re struggling to meet day-to-day costs,’ says Puneet.
Her father, Harchand Chahal, 79, says he and his wife offered the money without being asked. Puneet and Jas insist they intend to pay it back, though whether they will ever find themselves in a position to is less clear.
They hope they won’t have to borrow more from their families.
Sam Smethers, of the charity Grandparents Plus, says the older generation feels increasing pressure to help offspring, both financially and with childcare.
‘Grandparents get a lot of satisfaction from supporting their children and spending time with their grandchildren, but admit that isn’t what they expected to be doing at this stage in life,’ she says.
‘It’s vital that they don’t pass on too much and leave themselves high and dry.’
As for the other couples, Catharine’s parents still work but Abi and Trevor’s future financial support is much less secure.
Abi’s father is due to retire and has told her he can’t afford to be so generous in the future.
‘Dad pays a local delicatessen £40 a month by standing order so I can get nice olive oil, soap and shampoo, which is really sweet of him,’ says Abi. ‘But he has told me that will have to stop next year.’
As Abi is discovering, the bank of mum and dad can be generous, but it’s not an institution with unlimited financial reserves.
Document DAMONL0020140326ea3q006qj
