{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"2336"}
____
  
News
Unpatriotic to free Lockerbie bomber
667 words
20 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; Scotland
37
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
If Scotland's First Minister Salmond really does love his country and its people why did he let the lockerbie bomber out. Paddy O'Neil
Once again the politicians answer to all our problems is "build more houses". Once again they are ignoring the real problem, which is, too many people. Leave green and pleasant land alone! CHARLTON GARRY.
so mark carney warns "housing boom will break uk"........well mr carney its not houses the uk need its a smaller population actually! paul lancs
Boss says housing boom will plunge Britain back into economic crisis. Another load of b******s the only thing which is pushing Britain back into another Crisis, is all money going Abroad and all Sponging Parasites being allowed into country to get free houses and everything else they can get their sticky fi ngers on. Plus all MPs on the fi ddle. Colin
Here we go again labour NOW CLAIM TO BE WORRIED ABOUT THE CHEAP FOREGIN LABOUR BEING EMPLOYED BY BRITISH BOSSES .PITY THEY DIDNT CARE ABOUT IT BETWEEN 2004 & 2010. BUNCH OF HYPOCRITE. Dezza
Re sandy. The bankers and the rich are not to blame for amount of immigrants that came here under blairs open door policy on immigration u dork. decker
We cannot afford cancer drugs, but we can afford to pay for immigrants to be put up in 4*hotels. They won't have to rely on food banks. Bring on Ukip. diz
Schoolkids lives put at risk to save £3k, well its only to be expected with the s*** who are running this country. Everyones lives in Britain are in Danger because this Government are letting all terrorists and s*** from abroad enter country. cse
The leaders of the 3 main parties wonder why UKIP is so popular. it is because Nigel Farage speaks the truth and answers questions not treating public like idiots. Irate Pensioner
listen head in the sand clegg @ miliband farage is correct about romanians, just go 2 page hall in sheffi eld. b jay
Not surprised the US may hav shot down that missing plane. They're so frightened of world overpopulation & the problems that'll cause, they deliberately kill large groups of innocents to try to curb it. It's a secret agenda most Governments agreed to. David G
Sarah Jane, a lasting legacy for the young man, Mr Stephen Sutton would be for the government to OUTLAW operators of charities from taking 'wages', 'a cut of the donations' whatever you want to label the abuse, yes abuse! Money donated for the bene- fi t of people not in a position to live their lives as it should be lived MUST be used for THEM not to line the pockets of so called do gooders. Genuine charities GIVE not keep. Bigchef
So all other countrys fl ying to serbia to help with the fl oods. Dont remember that when we had fl oods in feb. CFC1
Stockton Bob, re Scotch broth: Make or get someone to make a big pot and freeze it. Its easy and much nicer than that tinned stuff AND you know whats in it. lou, yorks
re: paul, e likes wearin tights, well mate u want 2 try stockings n suspenders, much easier wen u go 4 a wee, and a lot sexier 2 wear. Royski
Seeing luisa zissman on the centre pages of the brilliant daily star i thought wow the austrian winner of the eurovision song contest has shaved her beard off ha ha. Tom dunne
Who kills Tina? Corrie. Tony. Jasons dad. U saw it here fi rst. Momma Towel
IF THE GINGER TOY SOLDIER DID BUY THAT PUB WOULD HE SERVE ROY ALE. POLISH PADDY BELFAST PS HELLO KIDS CHLOE BOBBY JAMES WIFE TERESA.
TEXT OF THE DAY
Just found outthat the Rubik's cubeis forty years old today.I have had one allthat time and I amstill no closer tosolving the bloodything.Stevo in Stirling.
Document DAISTA0020140520ea5k0005x
