{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1479"}
____
  
News
PM: I NEVER SAID I WAS THE HEIR TO BLAIR
BY JASON GROVES CHIEF    
492 words
14 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
4
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
JUDGING by the body language, it's more than just a table that separates David Cameron and Tony Blair these days.
The Prime Minister was once said to have called himself the 'heir to Blair' and they are reported to have met regularly for private talks.
But all that seemed well and truly behind the two men yesterday as they met in Jerusalem. Indeed, Mr Cameron insisted he was no friend of Mr Blair. Relations between the two are said to have cooled now that the former Labour leader is preparing to settle his differences with Ed Miliband and make a 'substantial' donation to the party.
Mr Cameron appeared touchy about their relationship when quizzed as he met Mr Blair, who is a Middle East peace envoy.
Asked if they had a friendly relationship, he replied: 'I wouldn't say it is about friendship. We were very vigorous opponents. I remember facing him across the despatch box every Wednesday at Prime Minister's Questions.' He pointed out that they came 'from different political parties, different political traditions' but both wanted a two-state solution to the Palestinian crisis.
When he was running for the Tory leadership, Mr Cameron raised eyebrows when it came to light in 2005 that he had described himself as the 'heir to Blair' in an interview with newspaper executives.
In 2010, he told the Mail: 'If I used that phrase, I regret it.'
Yesterday he distanced himself further from it, saying: 'That's not something I ever recall saying. I wanted to be the replacement to Tony Blair and I'm pleased to say, as Prime Minister, that's what I am.' After yesterday's meeting, Mr Blair encouraged Mr Cameron to step up his efforts in the region, where Britain was now 'trusted'.
Mr Cameron was hailed in Israel for his staunchly pro-Israel speech to the Knesset on Wednesday. The Jerusalem Post newspaper described his warm words as a pleasant surprise, saying he 'chose to address Israel and the Israelis, not The Guardian'.
? The Prime Minister yesterday defended his decision to hire a foreign nanny.
He came under fire over his employment of Gita Lima last week after Conservative minister James Brokenshire condemned the 'wealthy metropolitan elite' who fuel immigration by hiring domestic staff from abroad.
Miss Lima came to the UK as a Nepalese citizen but has gained British citizenship.
Asked about the nanny, Mr Cameron said: 'I have an excellent woman Gita Lima who looks after my children - who is a British citizen.
'She does a fantastic job. She certainly fits the description of someone who works hard and wants to get on.'
Mr Cameron denied helping Miss Lima secure British citizenship, but joked he may have briefed her on the role of the Cabinet to help her pass her citizenship test.
Distant: Blair and
Cameron
yesterday
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140313ea3e0001e
