{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1676"}
____
  
Features
WHO'S BEEN RIFLING THROUGH YOUR SUITCASE?
1,987 words
19 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
48
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
It's been revealed airport staff secretly open thousands of holidaymakers' bags. But that's just the start of it ...
BY TOM RAWSTORNE
Standing by the luggage carousel at Stansted Air-port, photography student Callum Sampson was about to experience every traveller's worst nightmare.
Not only was his bag the last to arrive on the conveyor belt, when he went to pick it up he quickly realised it was no longer zipped shut.
'I took it off, opened it up and could immediately see that a bag inside containing my camera kit had been gone through and that £5,000 worth of equipment had been taken,' said the 31-year-old from Newquay, Cornwall.
But that wasn't all. On closer inspection, he noticed that a birthday card his family had given him, which was in a sealed envelope, had been ripped open.
'Someone had obviously gone to the trouble of looking to see whether there was any money in it,' said Mr Sampson.
'In a strange way, despite all I had lost, that was probably the part that left me feeling most violated. I could understand them wanting camera equipment, but to go to the lengths of opening a card in someone's bag, that really stung me.'
The theft happened in July after Callum had checked his bags onto a Ryanair flight from Norway.
Despite reporting the loss to the police, the airline and to the company responsible for handling the luggage, to this day no one has accepted responsibility.
As a result, and because Callum did not have any travel insurance, he has been left out of pocket.
The million or so holidaymakers who are boarding planes at British airports this weekend to take advantage of the Easter break would do well to heed the harsh lesson this young man learned.
Why? Because last year a staggering 22 million items of luggage were 'mishandled' around the globe.
The term covers bags delayed, lost or stolen, as well as those damaged or that have contents taken from them.
The number of mishandled bags equates to roughly seven bags per 1,000. But European flyers are more likely to suffer than anywhere else — here, nine bags per 1,000 go walkabout or are damaged, compared with just three per 1,000 in America and less than two per 1,000 in Asia.
And it's not just thieves who could be rifling through your luggage after check-in. British border officials also secretly search through thousands of travellers' suitcases each year.
They say such searches are necessary in the war against drugs, crime and terrorism, but they are not obliged to tell passengers they have been rooting through their personal possessions.
It was recently revealed that even private correspondence and medical records are considered fair game by Border Force officials, some of whom have also been found to be ignoring set procedures when opening bags.
While many members of the public will agree that anything is acceptable when it comes to fighting crime or terrorism, the fact is that, despite acting on intelligence, only a third of these searches carried out between April and September last year found anything suspicious.
When they did, the majority simply involved cigarettes or alcohol.
It is hardly surprising, then, that there are those who believe the rules around these searches urgently need to be tightened up.
'Going on holiday shouldn't put your privacy at risk because of over-zealous luggage snoopers,' said Emma Carr, of civil liberties group Big Brother Watch, this week.
'It is not acceptable for luggage to be searched without a proper process followed and records kept — no bag should ever get opened unless it is necessary to do so.
'Ultimately, it is absolutely essential that people are able to seek redress.
'But how can you complain about a dodgy search if you don't even know your bags have been opened?'
Last year, 228 million passengers passed through British airports. While they will be familiar with the  tiresome checks and searches they and their hand luggage are subjected to, travellers are generally so relieved to get rid of their suitcases that they don't give another thought to what happens to them after they are checked in. But the reality is that this is just the start of a long, complicated and ultimately risky journey for the bag and its contents.
Once on its way, the luggage label that has been wrapped around the bag's handle is read by a barcode scanner, allowing it to be routed automatically through the network of conveyors and onto the plane.
Similarly, when luggage comes off a plane, the barcode is supposed to ensure it is routed to the correct carousel. This is no simple task.
At Heathrow there are 30 miles of conveyors with 2.8 miles of tunnels and 44 baggage reclaim belts. Around 53 million bags pass through every year. All luggage is passed through X-ray machines and CTX (computer tomography X-ray) scanners, which can check the bags automatically for explosives.
If the bag shows up a potential problem, an image of inside the case will be posted to screens constantly monitored by security officials. They will then decide if it needs manual examination.
This is a crucial step in ensuring explosive materials are not smuggled into the hold of a plane.
At the same time, anything else deemed suspicious will be noted and relayed to Customs and border officials at the flight's destination. 'If, for example, someone was flying in from Spain and their outward bag had been scanned by the Spanish and found to have 10,000 cigarettes stashed in it, a message might be sent ahead to the receiving airport,' says Chris Yates, an aviation security analyst.
'When it arrives here, it will be identified, opened and the contents verified. It will then be put back on the carousel, after which the people who collect it will find themselves being stopped as they go through Customs.'
While that sounds straightforward, concerns about how these searches are being conducted were raised in an official report earlier this month by John Vine, the Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration.
He studied hundreds of searches at our regional airports from April to September last year. (Though there is no national figure collated by the Home Office, experts say the number of bags searched across all British airports could run to five figures annually).
Mr Vine found a lack of consistent rules on how such searches should be conducted.
At Luton, staff were doing searches without seeking approval from managers, who are required by law to sign off on all searches.
Record-keeping was so sloppy at Edinburgh, Luton and Manchester that in half the notebooks Mr Vine examined there was no record of who authorised the search.
And staff were not recording why searches were needed. More worryingly, the report showed two thirds of searches turn up nothing and owners are never told.
The report said: 'Staff at Edinburgh told us they would be content to examine material they considered confidential during a baggage examination.
'Examples of confidential material discussed during staff focus groups included passengers' personal medical records and legally privileged correspondence.'
Home Office rules clearly state that any searches of confidential personal material need approval by a senior manager and the Surveillance Commissioner.
Mr Vine said it was a 'cause for concern' that there was no staff guidance on what to do when sensitive personal material was discovered. He called for urgent updated guidance on how the powers should be used.
A Border Force spokesman said: 'The searching of baggage, including when the owner is not present, is a legal and proportionate response to ensuring illegal goods are prevented from entering the UK and protecting revenue.'
And it is not just the British who check bags in this way.
Fly to the U.S. and the chance of your luggage being searched is far higher, something regular visitors will know. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) manually searches bags and it has developed locks that can be bought by travellers.
Rather than having to cut them off to open bags, officials hold master keys that can open them.
Unlike in Britain, the TSA puts a notice in any bag that's been searched, so a passenger knows if their bag has been opened.
'I think what is going on in the U.S. is excessive, without a shadow of a doubt,' says Mr Yates.
'They went overboard after 9/11 and are still going overboard in 2014, to the extent that virtually every passenger is treated as a criminal until proven innocent, not the other way round.
'Your bags may well be opened on the way in and the way out.'
On more than one occasion, Mr Yates says he has noticed items of his luggage missing after a TSA search.
'I don't think that it's necessarily theft,' he says. 'More like shoddy practice. They search through and drop something on the floor — say a tie or something — then don't bother to pick it up or put it back.
'It is one reason I never place anything of value in my luggage.'
While such losses may be accidental, thefts do take place, as the statistics attest.
Of those 22 million mishandled bags, delayed luggage accounts for 81 per cent of the total.
But 15.5 per cent are cases that have been damaged or pilfered from, with the remainder being bags that are lost or stolen.
In the Eighties, staff at Heathrow had such a reputation for rifling through passengers' luggage that the airport was nicknamed 'Thief-row'. Following an undercover police operation using hidden cameras, half of all British Airways' baggage handlers were arrested.
The problems with baggage handlers continue to this day.
Last month, a police operation at Los Angeles Airport busted what is thought to be one of the biggest property heists in airport history. Six baggage handlers were arrested, though more staff are believed to be involved.
The individuals targeted bags as they came off conveyor belts to be loaded on to individual flights.
'Basically everything of value — electronics, jewellery and other items — that could be stolen in seconds would be removed from bags,' said LA airport Police Chief Pat Gannon. 'They'd just open up the suitcases, rifle through them and pocket valuables.'
Police believe workers took the stolen items home and sold them, sometimes via the online marketplace Craigslist.
The airport is still trying to determine how long the ring operated and the exact value of all the stolen property, but they suspect thousands of items were taken.
But that is scant consolation for unlucky passengers such as Mr Sampson, who have had their bags opened and their possessions stolen. Especially as, in Mr Sampson's case, Ryanair will not accept responsibility for what happened to his luggage.
Instead, it has pointed him to the airline's terms and conditions, which state 'valuable items' should not be carried in checked-in luggage.
But Mr Sampson says he had to check it in because his hand luggage was already filled with other, equally expensive, camera equipment.
The baggage handing company at Stansted said it did not believe any theft could have taken place there due to the speed at which the luggage came off the plane and the fact the area was covered by CCTV, while the company in Norway, from where he had taken off, denied responsibility.
'I feel that if you check in baggage with an airline, until you take it off the carousel, it is their responsibility, not mine,' Mr Sampson says.
'You expect it to be looked after — not for it to be returned with everything missing, then to be told no one will do anything about it.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140418ea4j0000h
