{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"127"}
____
  
News
THE DEPUTY PM'S EYES WERE PINK - AND GOLLY, HE WAS NOISY
BY QUENTIN LETTS   
827 words
3 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
12
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
AS another Clegg-Farage pillow fight ended here ringside, BBC referee David Dimbleby (looking like Michael Douglas these days) spoke for the nation.
With just a hint of pop-eyed exhaustion, Dimbo turned to the camera and said: 'Well, I don't know if it made things any clearer or not.' As clear as a dish of tarka dal at your local Indian restaurant, maybe.
We possibly had fewer statistics than last week, thank goodness. Instead, in no particular order (as they say on X Factor), we had: Sitting Bull, Vladimir Putin, millions of Scots invading Orpington, Crazy Horse, dead Syrians, the price of chauffeurs, Elvis, Iceland (country, not frozen-food store), the Moon landings and, my favourite, W.G. Grace.
Welcome to the lunacies of the European debate.
The Gloucestershire and England cricketer (d 1915) came up because Mr Clegg claimed that Mr Farage wanted to 'turn the clock back' to the days when Grace was opening the batting for England. I had a sudden vision of Herman van Rumpy Pumpy and his cabinet watching this debate in Brussels, turning to one another and saying, 'who is zis Grace? Does she work for a think tank?' The debate's first half was a frenzied assault on Nigel Farage's admiration for the Kremlin. Nick Clegg shot out of his corner, saying that Mr Farage was 'so consumed with loathing' for Brussels that he was prepared to support a Russian leader who was allowing Syrians to be murdered in terrible numbers. Mr Farage turned a rather peculiar colour, almost his party's purple.
The Ukip man may have been taken by surprise by the ferocity of Mr Clegg's attack. There was something of the demon in the deputy PM. His eyes were pink and, golly, he was noisy. Kept interrupting, too. Dimbleby had to ask him to desist at one point, noting that he had been verbose.
The second 30 minutes went the other way. Game of two halves, Brian. This was when the talk turned to the democratic accountability (or lack of it, to be more precise) of the European Union. Now it was Mr Farage's turn to swing his gloves. He talked of 'the elite club of career politicians' and told Mr Clegg: 'The trouble is, Nick, nobody believes you.' Mr Farage's peroration was melodramatic to the point of gamey. 'Come and join the people's army,' he intoned. 'Let's topple the Establishment.' That would be the same Establishment that he uses to employ his wife.
As happened last week, both men had brought along one of the other side's leaflets. Mr Farage produced one in which Mr Clegg, notoriously, said that he supported a referendum on Europe.
Mr Clegg, meanwhile, had found an alleged Ukip leaflet which showed a big picture of a doleful Red Indian ('Native American' in Cleggspeak) which had the slogan 'he used to ignore immigration, now he lives on a reservation'. Mr Farage said that he did not recognise this masterpiece.
The Ukip leader depicted the European Union as a conspiracy between politicians and capitalists, creating pools of under-educated, cheap labour. He twice came out with the accusation that the EU created an economic climate which provided 'cheaper chauffeurs and cheaper gardeners for the rich'.
During the foreign affairs stuff, Mr Clegg said that while he represented 'the party of In', Mr Farage represented 'the party of Putin'. It perhaps works better if you say if out loud, emphasising the 'in'. Mr Farage gave a sickly grin.
Mr Farage called Cleggy 'the obstacle'. Mr Clegg responded with a crack that Mr Farage was 'Billy No Mates Britain, Billy No Jobs Britain'.
He accused Mr Farage of being the sort of person who thought Elvis was still alive, the Moon landings never happened and Barack Obama was not American. Mr Farage slapped his (own) face with weariness and kept saying 'oh dear, oh dear', despairing at Mr Clegg's dimness.
Perhaps the most shocking disclosure of the evening came when, in a passage about how you needed to be 57 to have had a vote in the last Europe referendum, Mr Farage told us that today will be his 50th birthday. He is only 50? Jeepers. He looks well north of that. Beer and fags not so great for the ageing process, perhaps.
He accused the deputy PM of 'twisting the facts' and said he was 'shocked' by Mr Clegg's arguments. Mr Clegg kept accusing his opponent of 'fantasy' politics, of wanting to return to a Britain of olden days, and said that predictions of a mass invasion of the UK by foreigners were as accurate as saying 'five million Scots will invade Orpington' if Edinburgh splits from the UK. And that concludes this two-set rubber. Next Wednesday evening we can have our country back.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140402ea430001e
