{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3354"}
____
  
News
FARAGE HAULED OFF AIR BY SPIN DOCTOR TO END CAR-CRASH INTERVIEW
BY GERRI PEEV    
557 words
17 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
2
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
NIGEL Farage was yesterday accused of being divisive and racist in a car-crash interview which was so bad that his most senior aide stepped in to try to stop it.
The Ukip leader suggested people would rather live next door to Germans than Romanians. When asked what the difference was, he replied: 'You know what the difference is.'
He also insisted that his German wife would not speak her native language on the train when challenged over his claim that he feels uncomfortable hearing foreign languages on public transport.
Mr Farage said: 'I got on a train and went for several stops and no one around me spoke English. I didn't object to it - I felt uncomfortable.'
He suggested it was acceptable for his wife to speak German at home, but added: 'I don't suppose she speaks it on the train, you know. That's the point I'm making.'
And he went on to say that he 'got the distinct feeling' that English was not the train passengers' language of choice.
Asked whether he felt uncomfortable when he hears his wife speaking German to his children, Mr Farage responded: 'No, because they can speak English.'
He was also interrogated over his claim that the majority of pupils in some East London schools did not speak English, when most are in fact bilingual like Mr Farage's own children.
The Ukip leader then asked why no one challenged the other parties over their controversial comments or candidates - to which LBC radio presenter James O'Brien replied that 'there is simply not the avalanche of bigotry emerging from the other parties'. He added that there were fears that Ukip 'represents deeply divisive and racist ideas'.
Rejecting the charge of racism, Mr Farage said his party was polling at 16 per cent among ethnic minority voters, adding: 'We're getting more BME [black and minority ethnic] voters than the Conservatives and Lib Dems added up together.'
The Ukip MEP's disastrous performance led Patrick O'Flynn, the party's director of communications, to take the extraordinary step of hauling him off the air.
Mr Farage appeared furious as his spin doctor attempted to bring the interview to an end. Mr O'Flynn later insisted the interview had overrun and said he stepped in because he needed to get the politician to another meeting. David Cameron, who has generally shied away from direct criticism of Mr Farage, last night criticised his remarks.
He accused the Ukip leader of saying some 'particularly unpleasant things' in the interview which sent a 'terrible message about Britain'.
In his strongest attack yet on Mr Farage, the Prime Minister said: 'I just hope that people look and recognise that we are an open, tolerant and compassionate country.
'Yes, we want to have a controlled immigration system but we must not demonise people.
'Yes we want to sort out our welfare system but we shouldn't put these labels on people like Ukip does.'
He added: 'I think people will say that this is not the sort of country we are and I am not voting for this sort of thing because it sends a terrible message about Britain.'
g.peev@dailymail.co.uk
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140516ea5h0000w
