{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"2262"}
____
  
Features
Gran's got some bottle to milk system again
703 words
21 May 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; Scotland
37
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
Deborah chniti & her tunisian husband want to come back to the uk to milk the system, I mean live here on benefits. Well mrs chniti you've made your bed, lie in it! ken, liverpool
Granny Deborah Chniti has got a hell of a cheek. she should of thought about these things before emigrating. serves her right. hope the courts fling her case out in the street and keep it there. she deserves all she gets. shaz, bridlington
So Deborah Chniti moans that noone speaks English where she lives. So do wot thousands of other expats do Debs: LEARN THEIR LANGUAGE! Chrissie B
expat cannot return 2 the UK as she wants 2 live on Benefits, but an immigrant can get all sorts of bene- fits. 1 rule 4 British 1 rule 4 the rest. geoff Cas
the spoilt westminster elite just dont get it. i aint against immigration. my son is married 2 a jamaican & daughters got an arab godfather. butthe schools. housing & NHS can only stand so much! JEZ
im all for immigration, becos roma girls are so fit. page hall in sheffield is full of them. paul lowe
to anyone who votes tory in the next election, say goodbye to nhs, your pensions and any security you have. sandy
So experts reckon we are gonna bake in a six week heatwave, must get my Mac and umbrella out. FLOYD
Seems the weather is going to be summary. Well that's what it said after the news at the top of my telly screen yesterday. Weather Summary! LEO, LEEDS
just back from a hot, long weekend on the coast and id like to thank all you cheeky guys for all the wolf whistles. TV LUCY
at last hookie has been found guilty and will die in prison. Good on the yanks. Bloody uk gov pussy footed around for far too long. stig2
this country disgusts me, May, this country Government tries to take credit for the conviction of Abu Hamza in the USA. The pathetic country that gave him his family palatial accommodation, benefits etc. This country is a laughing stock. R Hamilton
Useless Home Sec Teresa May says Govt worked tirelessly to deport Abu Hamza. What tosh. It took 10 years to Deport him. US done and dusted. Phil Denton
at least the yanks had the balls to deal wiv mad cleric abu hamza. let him rot. not like them pussies in cameron's rotten government. Get rid. robtin
Re Abu Hamza. Well done to the US for getting him bang to rights, unlike this Country who gave him Human Rights. How many more Hamza's are taking the pee out of us? LEO F
Utter disgrace that JustGiving have taken £200,000 out of courageous Stephen Sutton's charity. Bazboy
to David g: You don't sound much of a fruitcake if you believe that about the missing plane. MARSY
my friend BARRY knew a DENTIST and MANICURIST who were married and they often fought TOOTH and NAIL. MARY HOUGH
So an 18 year guy says he's a virgin. well at 25 i was a virgin then met the wife, 29 years married and i have never had nookie with another woman (or guy before you say anything) well thats me come out! anyone else...leo leeds? ALAN SMALL, EDINBURGH
Scotch broth? I've always known it as Scots broth, Scotch is a spirit. DAVE DOCK
just wanted 2 say how nice alex jones looked on the 1 show monday nite in a short pink flower print dress. keep up the good work ladies. andy
it really annoys me when people say 'free' instead of 'three' and 'haitch' instead of 'aitch'. I would never employ some1 who could not speak properly. I don't mean accent, I mean grammar. San Brum
i keep getting the urge to buy a large white bear from the arctic. my doctor thinks i might have buy polar disorder. spice of stockton
TEXT OF THE DAY
Paul gascoigne 2 have his own chain of bars. that will have as much success as white dee working 4 willy wonka! gretna grinch
Document DAISTA0020140521ea5l00060
