{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"575"}
____
  
News
SANGATTE MARK II
418 words
7 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
19
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Grim echo of 2002 as hundreds of migrants pack squalid Calais camp
BY JOHN STEVENS
HUDDLED amid makeshift tents, desperate migrants in a camp dubbed the new Sangatte await their to chance to sneak into Britain.
More than 600 are living in the squalid Calais site, which has poor sanitation and where men fight over food.
The settlement, just yards from the port, is a reminder of the Red Cross camp at Sangatte where up to 2,000 immigrants gathered before it was shut down in 2002 after triggering an immigration crisis.
After the closure, Britain accepted hundreds of migrants in a deal with France and the number living in Calais fell to just 100 by 2012. But in the last two years, it has increased six-fold - and French charities warn they are struggling to feed them all.
The main camp, on a disused railway line next to the main port where ferries go to Dover, has 135 tents. There are smaller camps nearby. Migrants, who take turns to try to jump on UK-bound lorries on the roads leading to the port, huddle around camp fires in the evening.
Rubbish litters the site and many tents are in poor condition. Hundreds of men have to share just three portable toilets. With no showers, they wash with bottles of water.
A barbed-wire fence separating the camp from the busy port is used as a washing line. Each evening, French charity workers come to serve pasta, rice and vegetables, which have been donated, but food is scarce.
Mahade Katab, 28, who lives at the camp, said: 'I have seen men fighting each other for food. Sometimes they just fight out of boredom.' Last week the Mail reported how four migrants trying to get to Britain from Calais died in one week last month. They included an Ethiopian in his 20s who died while hiding on a lorry transporting cars.
Migrants have boasted that the lack of police meant they were certain to get to England.
British lorry drivers said 'extremely light-touch' policing by the French had made them 'sitting ducks' for illegal immigrants.
Calais deputy mayor Philippe Mignonet said an average of 10 to 30 people make it across the border from the town each day. He wants the UK to contribute towards boosting the number of police in the area.
He told the Mail: 'We know why these people are in Calais. There needs to be better co-operation.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140406ea470001c
