{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1978"}
____
  
News
VOTERS ARE UNEASY ABOUT EXTREMISTS IN UKIP, SAYS IDS
417 words
30 April 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
8
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
IAIN Duncan Smith has claimed voters are increasingly 'uneasy' at 'extreme elements' of Ukip.
The Work and Pensions Secretary, the standard bearer of the Tory Right in the Cabinet, spoke out as a row raged about the wisdom of a new campaign attacking Ukip as racist.
He suggested a slew of stories about extreme views of Ukip members and candidates would undermine the party's credibility.
Addressing young Conservative activists, Mr Duncan Smith said there was a 'whiff of extremism coming through', adding: 'I know from polling that voters who have voted Conservative feel very uneasy with the association of Ukip close to what I call some quite extreme elements.
'This kind of stuff worries them but it takes some time to seep through. We know the last thing Conservatives want to be associated with is anything that touches on the BNP.'
Mr Duncan Smith's intervention came days after Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt also suggested Ukip has extremist elements.
Later this week the Migration Matters Trust, a cross-party campaign branding the party racist, will launch - despite warnings from some senior Labour MPs that it could prove counterproductive. Barbara Roche, Labour's former immigration minister, who is behind the campaign, said: 'Ukip's campaign needs to be exposed for what it is, a racist campaign.'
But Jacqui Smith, the Labour former home secretary, warned there were no votes to be won by suggesting Ukip voters are 'closet racists'.
Ukip leader Nigel Farage claimed there was an establishment plot by the main parties against Ukip and urged voters to 'give the creeps a lesson' at the ballot box.
Yesterday it emerged that a Ukip council candidate had questioned whether double Olympic gold medallist Mo Farah was qualified to race for Team GB when he was 'an African from Somalia who trains in America'.
David Wycherley, who is standing in Walsall, made the jibe on Facebook hours after the runner won the 10,000m gold medal at the 2012 Olympics. Farah grew up in London after fleeing his war-torn country.
It also emerged that William Henwood, a Ukip candidate in Enfield, North London, who suggested on Twitter that comedian Lenny Henry should emigrate to a 'black country', quit his party membership.
Ukip yesterday suspended two unnamed members after it found that one had been a BNP member until 2010 and another had given money to the English Defence League.
Comment and Stephen Glover - Page 14
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140429ea4u0001c
