{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1029"}
____
  
Features
CURING THE NHS OF SOCIALIST DOGMA
BY DAILY MAIL COMMENT   
556 words
19 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
14
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
 
WHEN Hinchingbrooke Hospital - £40m in the red, and providing woeful patient care - was handed over to the private sector to try to rescue in 2012, a posturing Labour Party warned of 'worrying implications for the future of our NHS'.
Andy Burnham, the shadow health secretary, accused the Tories of a 'huge gamble'. Only last week, Ed Miliband claimed the NHS was 'going backwards' because of private sector involvement.
The reality, as we reveal today, could not be more different.
Under healthcare provider Circle - which gives doctors and nurses a voice in how the hospital is run, and operates a John Lewis-style incentive scheme for staff - Hinchingbrooke should break even this year and run a small surplus next.
This has been achieved by slashing bureaucracy and middle managers and cutting money spent on locums.
Most crucially, the Cambridgeshire hospital has just won a major award for patient care, based on key categories such as readmission and mortality rates and treatment of those with cancer.
Under Labour, the innovation that has achieved these remarkable improvements would be blocked on ideological grounds, to the loud cheers of health unions who insist everything should be run by a monolithic, inefficient State machine.
And the patients? As ever, their needs would come second to political dogma.
Censoring the past
LAST week, in a savage blow to the public's right to know, an EU court ruled that convicts and conmen could order Google to remove links to stories about them that they do not like.
Now we learn our own ministers are considering separate plans that could make British newspapers erase from their online archives information that 'might reflect badly' on people facing trial.
The Attorney General's plan is well-intentioned: he wants to stop jurors from researching ongoing cases outside the court room.
But, as the Society of Editors warns, there is a grave danger of creating a 'black hole' in history by striking from the record previous criminal convictions and other important facts.
The Government's proposal to make it an offence for jurors to trawl the web is sensible. Simultaneously censoring newspaper archives, however, is unnecessary and yet another threat to freedom of expression.
Speaking sense
IN a welcome intervention, new Cabinet minister Sajid Javid says migrants should be expected to work, make a contribution and prove they can speak English.
The vast majority of voters will applaud his common sense approach.
The challenge for the Home Office - currently investigating the Mail's devastating revelations that foreigners who cannot speak English are being corruptly sold exam 'pass' certificates for £500 - is to ensure his fine words are not undermined by Britain's still hopelessly shambolic immigration system.
D-day for Dee?
WHITE Dee, the 'star' of Channel 4's Benefits Street, has become a poster girl for people brazenly taking advantage of the welfare state.
Her notoriety has allowed her to enjoy alcohol-soaked holidays and rake in cash from promotional work - while claiming thousands in State handouts because she is too 'depressed' to get a job.
Shamelessly, Deirdre Kelly says that if people have a problem with her earning and claiming benefits they should 'talk to David Cameron'.
Well, Prime Minister - isn't it time to stop this mocking of the taxpayer?
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140518ea5j00007
