{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3342"}
____
  
Features
HOW THE NHS PUSH FOR HOME BIRTHS WILL SPARK WAR BETWEEN MOTHERS
BY BARBARA DAVIES   
1,570 words
14 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
22
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
WOMEN accused of taking 'the easy option' if they have emergency Caesareans. Mothers criticised for not giving birth 'properly' because they asked for an epidural. And others told they would never bond with their children because they hadn't achieved a 'natural' birth.
These are just some of the stories women were sharing in online forums yesterday, following the announcement that the NHS is to encourage hundreds of thousands more women to give birth at home, without a doctor present.
First-time mothers are to be told they are just as safe having their baby in a small midwife-led unit as on a labour ward. Most of those having their second child will be told under draft new NHS guidelines that giving birth at home is as safe as hospital.
The encouragement for home births marks a major change in NHS guidance, which previously warned mothers to be cautious about having a baby at home.
In the fiercely competitive world of childbirth, the news proved to be a spark in what was an already highly combustible arena.
Women's choices when giving birth have never been so judged, so politically loaded as they are today. And the overwhelming message from the NHS, the National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and parenting groups is that a natural birth with minimal medical intervention is best for mother and baby.
As TV presenter Kirstie Allsopp tweeted yesterday: 'What I hate about Birth politics is the smug, self-satisfied "I tried harder than you" brigade. Please consider others before you tweet.'
No wonder, then, that this febrile climate is encouraging some middle-class women — the kind who read every baby manual and religiously attend National Childbirth Trust antenatal classes — to become increasingly judgmental about the choices their fellow mothers make when giving birth.
This kind of bitchy commentary is making many mothers feel they have no choice but to go natural when having a child — anything but face the opprobrium of those women who achieve the holy grail of the 'perfect' birth, eschewing all pain relief and medical intervention.
Take Libby Townshend, 30 — when she wrote her birth plan before her son's arrival, one thing was top of her list: 'home birth'.
Beneath it, she jotted down the things she hoped would herald her baby's entrance into the world — classical music, scented candles and a roaring log fire at her Cornwall home, with just her partner and a midwife there to support her.
But when her baby finally arrived 12 weeks ago, Libby was in hospital in Treliske after being rushed there by ambulance when her son's heart rate plummeted during labour.
During the drama that ensued, her birth plan was thrown aside as her son, Dacey, was delivered with forceps by a team including an obstetrician and a senior midwife.
Today, Libby confesses to feeling disappointed she couldn't manage a home birth, 'especially when other new mums talk about giving birth naturally in five hours flat with no pain relief. I feel I missed out'.
Under the new guidelines, only women at high risk of complications will be told to give birth in hospital. As well as being criticised for putting mothers and babies at risk, the proposals have met a wave of protest from health experts and mothers, who've dismissed them as a cynical cost-cutting measure based on flawed and out-dated research.
The figures speak for themselves: a birth at home costs the NHS around £1,066 per baby, compared with £1,631 for a non-Caesarean hospital birth. And the implication, say some critics, is clear: the NHS, with maternity wards experiencing the highest birth rate in years thanks, in part, to immigration, is exploiting the concerns of paranoid middle-class mothers to save cash.
And that paranoia is only deepening. 'Birth is competitive enough, even without this new announcement,' says Pauline King, a 39-year-old mother from Chesterfield, Derbyshire, who runs Baby Sensory infant development classes.
Pauline began her labour in a birthing pool at home and ended up in hospital to give birth to her son, Harris. 'There is so much pressure on women to have what is considered the "perfect" birth without the health authorities pushing them into it,' she says.
'I meet a lot of new mothers who can be quite upset by the reaction they get if they admit they had a Caesarean section, whether it was by choice or not.
'I know one lady who had a C-section six years ago and she refuses even to speak about it because she feels so judged — not just by other mothers but by health professionals, too.'
Like so many of her contemporaries, Pauline got swept along by the idea of the 'perfect' natural birth.
'I wanted a water birth at home with just gas and air for pain relief,' she recalls. But 17 hours later, the two midwives attending her summoned an ambulance.
'I was at the hospital in about ten minutes,' says Pauline, whose 46-year-old husband, Andy, is an IT worker. 'They hooked me up to a monitor and saw that the baby was in distress.'
Harris was born minutes later by Caesarean section, and while Pauline insists that, above all, she is grateful he was born healthy, she admits: 'I'll always be a little disappointed that I didn't give birth "properly" as some women say.'
More worryingly, campaign groups are warning that the new proposals are based on studies which wrongly conclude that women and babies are as safe in midwife-led units as they are in hospital with doctors present.
According to Maureen Treadwell, chair of the Birth Trauma Association: 'First-time mothers giving birth at home have a significantly higher death rate.
'The Department of Health has an agenda to centralise maternity care into these giant super-units and close local maternity units, and the only way it can do that is to promote midwifery-led care out of hospital as equally safe.
'Some women are going to make choices that are going to result in them losing their babies.'
The most recent major UK birth research, conducted by Oxford University in 2011 and called The Birthplace Study, suggested that babies of first-time mothers were four times more likely to have a problem if they were born at home compared with in hospital, and were more than twice as likely to face problems in a free-standing midwife-led unit.
Controversially, the chairman of NICE's guideline development group, obstetrician Dr Susan Bewley, is a well-known 'natural birth' advocate who has given birth at home herself.
Mother-of-two Sarah Gooding passionately wanted a home birth and even installed a birthing pool in her South London home.
But after two days in labour, she ended up in hospital suffering from seizures while her unborn daughter's heart rate soared.
Her daughter, Scarlett, now three, was delivered by emergency Caesarean section.
Sarah, 37, who also has a 21-month-old son, Orlando, says: 'I went into it saying, "I don't want any drugs at all", and I ended up having absolutely everything.
'My husband later told me that, at one point, knowing how much I'd wanted a natural birth, he'd said to the obstetrician: "What will happen if we leave her to progress on her own?" and the doctor replied: "Your wife will die and so will your child."
'My mum is a midwife, and she was very anxious about me having a home birth. I lived five minutes from a hospital — I think you if you lived further away, it would be very different.'
Currently, the NHS advises that women should have a choice of where to give birth — either at home, in a midwife-led unit or in hospital.
The fear is that with NHS trusts struggling to save money, encouraging women to stay at home will become influenced by financial decision-making.
'Choosing a home birth for a second baby is often a good choice,' says Ms Treadwell. 'But what if you want an epidural? What about those women? What about the first-time mother who just feels safer in a hospital with doctors? What this is going to lead to is a restriction of choice.'
She points out, too, that there is new evidence that conflicts with what NICE is proposing. 'The Netherlands are going in the opposite direction,' she says.
'They found that low-risk women in midwifery care had the same peri-natal mortality rate as high-risk women in obstetrics units. That's a staggering finding.'
Daily Mail columnist and GP Dr Martin Scurr, who has delivered dozens of babies at home, admits he is worried about the proposals.
'Where are all the midwives going to come from? And now that there is no longer any out-of-hours GP care, what sort of back-up will they have?' he asks.
As Sarah Gooding puts it: 'The idea of blindly encouraging women to have their children at home is just madness.
'The whole point of women beginning to go into hospital to have their babies from the Fifties onwards was because so many births aren't straightforward.
'You never know what will go wrong until it goes wrong.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140513ea5e0000k
