{"newspaper":"dailystar.co.uk","id:"2503"}
____
Peace at last! Katie Hopkins signs her own gagging order
Jaymi McCann   
361 words
5 March 2014
12:28
dailystar.co.uk
DAICO
English
Copyright 2014   
IT IS no secret that many would like rent-a-gob Katie Hopkins to shut up.
But it seems that even Katie has admitted her 15 minutes of fame might be over, after she signed her own gagging order.
The former Apprentice star was given a piece of paper after attending a public debate and she autographed it without looking.
The 38-year-old looked shocked when she realised the person was not an ordinary fan.
Voters on website Crowdwish.com chose: “I wish Katie Hopkins was the subject of a gagging order banning her from any form of public speaking" as their number one wish of the day.
And always happy to oblige, the site did their best to make it happen.
Katie signed an order stating, among other things, that she would: "Accept that my 15 minutes of fame are over. I will stop making ‘controversial’ and asinine comments about those I wrongly consider my social inferiors.
"In fact, I’m sorry and embarrassed for pretty much everything I’ve ever done. I’ll go now."
It also made her apologise to Lily Allen and Kelly Osborne for remarks she has made in the past.
Katie commented on both stars' appearance, calling Lily "Overweight" and Kelly a "Purple haired dwarf".
Related articles Katie Hopkins blasts Olympian Rebecca Adlington for getting nose job The Big British Immigration Row Live: Katie Hopkins and Luisa Zissman face off
A spokeswoman for the site said: “As it was the top wish, Crowdwish made a bee-line to where Katie Hopkins was taking part in a public debate and succeeded in getting her to sign the attached statement.
“Admittedly Katie didn’t actually realise what she was signing at the time, but given her propensity to open her mouth without thinking we thought she might not mind signing her own gagging order without prior consent."
Crowdwish asks users to wish for something creative and imaginative every day.
Then, after 24 hours of voting, they try and to make the wish become a reality.
Katie's representatives have been contacted for a comment.
Document DAICO00020140305ea35002mj
