{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"3353"}
____
  
News
A GUARANTEED PASS ... AND YOU DON'T EVEN NEED TO TURN UP
BY INDERDEEP BAINS   
584 words
17 May 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
6
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
IT took less than four minutes for Usmaan Attan to reveal he could arrange bogus English language qualifications for immigrants looking to get a British passport.
In his tidy office in Upton Park, East London, Mr Attan said he could get around the compulsory test - even if the candidate spoke no English.
The Learn Pass Succeed office is in the predominantly Pakistani area of Plashet Road, set among ethnic shops, and easily spotted thanks to shiny, bright purple signs. Its large waiting area is plastered with motivational posters encouraging students to 'invest in yourself' and a certificate announcing the company's accreditation with the Home Office-approved exam board EMD is proudly fixed to the wall.
Mr Attan works from a small laptop, sometimes consulting candidate files kept in a drawer. As a female applicant practised for a test just inches away, the 30-year-old manager of LPS offered to provide a 'guaranteed pass' for £500 - three times the proper cost of the exam.
'We can do a guaranteed pass as well, where he doesn't turn up, nothing, and will just receive a certificate' he said. The increased fee was because 'there is a lot of risk involved and we have to get someone else to do the exam for him', he explained.
At first Mr Attan suggested the candidate take the exam himself, even if he hardly spoke English, explaining the firm could make it almost impossible to fail.
The staff could fill in the written parts of the exam and then give the candidate a script for the spoken element, he said.
'What we would do is write up a script for him?...?We will say, OK what would you like to say? And?...?we would just make it into a proper sentence for him - and then he can practise that,' he added.
When asked if he would give our candidate the questions that are on the test, he replied: 'Yeah. Then we just get him to practise it throughout the week. We just go over it again, again, again.'
Asked whether or not the candidate could get in trouble, Mr Attan, wearing jeans and a body warmer, laughed and boasted: 'Don't worry, we've done it plenty of times before.'
When our undercover reporter decided her imaginary cousin's English was too poor even for this, Mr Attan assured her he could get the certificate anyway, saying: 'We have to get someone else to do the exam for him so it does cost a lot more.'
But when our reporter said she was happy to pay £500, he said the process would be straightforward, adding: 'All we need is proof [of] address, proof [of] ID and a passport-size photo and then he'll receive the certificate in a few weeks.'
The Mail's fake candidate was enrolled on to the course on our reporter's second visit to the centre and Mr Attan was handed £500 in cash. A few weeks later the certificate was ready for collection at the LPS head office in a community centre in Leyton, East London. The certificate, stamped with an Ofqual logo, claimed our candidate had 'successfully achieved EMD Entry Level Certificate in ESOL International (Entry 3)'.
An letter from LPS confirmed he was 'initially assessed by a qualified ESOL tutor', despite staff never meeting him, and said he had attended a course.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140516ea5h0001b
