{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"698"}
____
  
News
FOREIGNERS IN UK MORE LIKELY TO HAVE A DEGREE
295 words
11 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
10
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
IMMIGRANTS often have better educational qualifications than people born in Britain, a study has claimed.
The survey revealed that more than a third of people who were born abroad have degree-level qualifications - but just over a quarter of people who were born in Britain managed to reach the same academic standard.
Researchers at the University of Manchester used information gathered by the national census between 1991 and 2011 to check the educational levels of people born in different countries - and found that pupils born in Britain were also more likely to have left school without any qualifications.
The report found a wide educational gap between people born in Britain and those living in Britain who were born abroad. It said that young people showed the most marked educational differences.
And it claimed that people from Chinese, Indian and African backgrounds are now ahead of white British people in academic achievement, and that Bangladeshis and Pakistanis are quickly catching up.
The only foreign-born ethnic group that lagged behind people born in Britain was the collection of people who identified themselves in the census as Irish travellers, with six out of ten having no qualifications and fewer than one in ten attaining a degree or an equivalent.
The study said: 'Across all ages, over a third of people born outside the UK had degree-level qualifications compared with a quarter of people born in Britain. Similarly, the foreign-born population were less likely to be without any qualifications than the UK-born population.'
And lead researcher Kitty Lymperopoulou said: 'Over the last 20 years, educational attainment has been increasing among ethnic groups as a result of an improvement in access to education overseas.'
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140310ea3b0002g
