{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2978"}
____
Science
Stonehenge was the 'LONDON of the Mesolithic': River Avon acted like an 'A-Road' for ancient log boats, expert claims
SARAH GRIFFITHS   
853 words
9 May 2014
13:25
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Ancient Britons travelled from far and wide to see pink flint, have feasts and tours of the area surrounding Stonehenge, one archaeologist claims
* Experts at the University of Buckingham carbon dated bones to prove that indigenous  people lived around the monument before they built it
* Amesbury is the oldest settlement in Britain and has been continually occupied since 8,820BC
* Over 31,000 flint tools were discovered at Vespsian’s Camp, Blick Mead - around one mile from Stonehenge - which proves it was a 'visitor's centre'
Stonehenge attracts around one million visitors each year and now archaeologists have revealed that it was ‘the London of the Mesolithic’ – and even had an ancient ‘visitor’s centre’.
Ancient Britons from far and wide were drawn to Stonehenge to see the area’s pink flint and the River Avon acted as an ‘A-Road’ carrying people to a nearby settlement at Blick Mead where feasts and tour guides were available even before the monument was built, one archaeologist has claimed.
It is now thought that there was an established community in the area before the monument was built and that people travelled to the settlement in log boats.
AMESBURY:BRITAIN'S OLDEST SETTLEMENT
It had long been thought Thatcham in Buckinghamshire was the oldest continuous settlement in the UK, but researchers have now bestowed the title on Amesbury in Wiltshire.
The location is home to Stonehenge and now holds the claim of being the birthplace of history in Britain - an honour confirmed by the Guinness Book of Records.
It is thought the settlement dates back more than 10 millennia to 8,820BC.
David Jacques of the University of Buckingham said:'The area was clearly a hub point for people to come to from many miles away, and in many ways was a forerunner for what later went on at Stonehenge itself. The first monuments at Stonehenge were built by these people'
Carbon dating of bones from giant bulls and boars discarded at Vespsian’s Camp, Blick Mead - a settlement around a mile from the monument - prove that Amesbury is the oldest settlement in Britain and has been continually occupied since 8,820BC.
Archaeologists think that the communities that built the monument lived and worked in the area for around 3,000 years and that Stonehenge was built as part of an established settlement, rather than a monument in an empty landscape.
They have also ruled out the possibility of the monument being built by European immigrants and think the giant stones were placed by indigenous hunters and homemakers.
The team found that Mesolithic cultures cleared land around Blick Mead between 7,500 and 4,600BC, which they had thought was an activity previously thought to be a part of the ‘farming package’ brought in by Neolithic immigrants from the continent in the 5th millennium BC.
The persistent use of the site for nearly 3,000 years and the fact that many of the tools found were for domestic purposes rather than hunting ones also points to the fact that people were settling there.Previously it was thought that there weren’t any settlers until Neolithic times.
David Jacques, research fellow in archaeology at the University of Buckingham, who led the dig, said that the site ‘provides evidence for people staying put, clearing land, building, and presumably worshipping, monuments.
‘The area was clearly a hub point for people to come to from many miles away, and in many ways was a forerunner for what later went on at Stonehenge itself. The first monuments at Stonehenge were built by these people.
‘In effect, Blick Mead was the very first Stonehenge Visitor Centre, up and running in the 8th millennium BC. The River Avon would have been the A-Road – people would have come down on their log boats.
‘They would have had the equivalent of tour guides and there would have been feasting.’
The team of archaeologists found remains of big game animals and a large amount of burnt flint from their feasting fires as well as tools that suggest people travelled to the site from the east and west.
‘Another possible reason why people were attracted to the area was the striking bright pink colouring of the flint, which isn’t that colour anywhere else in the country,’ he said.
The pink colour of the flint was caused by Hildenbrandia rivularis algae and is due to a combination of dappled light and the unusually warm spring water in the area.
Dr Jacques said: ‘It’s unique to have people of that time come from so many different faraway places. The site and the Stonehenge areas were very well known places to visit for a very long time – the London of the Mesolithic.’
Archaeologists also recovered the largest haul of Mesolithic worked flints across the Mesolithic period ever found. 
A total of 31,000 were discovered in an area measuring  52ft (16 square metres) 2,000 of which were concentrated in just a metre squared.
Document DAMONL0020140509ea59004k3
