{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1598"}
____
News
'I don't support Putin... but if you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond': Farage hits back in Ukraine row with Clegg
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
3,070 words
27 March 2014
17:21
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage take part in televised debate on Europe
* Snap poll shows 57% think Farage won, but 36% said Clegg
* Questioner asked why Ukraine wants to join EU as UK looks to leave
* Clegg said Europe had promoted peace, democracy and rule of law
* But Farage accused Brussels o f ‘imperialist, expansionist’ agenda
Nigel Farage today insisted he did not back Vladamir Putin's incursion into Crimea, but warned 'if you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond'.
The Ukip leader was branded ‘extreme’ by Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg for claiming in a live TV debate that the European Union has ‘blood on its hands’ over the crisis in Ukraine.
But tonight he was defiant, repeating the claims about Brussels and suggesting the same applied to conflicts in Syria and Libya where 'vanity' had taken the place of reason in foreign policy.
Mr Clegg and Mr Farage went head-to-head on Britain’s membership of the European Union on LBC radio and Sky News last night.
But the most controversial point came when Mr Farage said the British Government had encouraged the EU to pursue an ‘imperialist, expansionist’ agenda.
But in the closing minutes the two men were challenged about why countries like Ukraine are so keen to develop closer ties with the EU while in the UK there is a debate about doing the opposite.
Mr Farage claimed the UK had to ‘hang its head in shame’ after the uprising in Ukraine, because the EU's 'imperialist, expansionist' attitude had given people in Kiev false hope.
Today Mr Clegg said the comments showed 'quite how extreme people can be' when their loathing of the European Union becomes so all-consuming that they even end up siding with Vladimir Putin in order to make their point'.
As the row escalated, Mr Farage hit back in a defiant statement attacking the 'naive' approach taken to foreign uprisings by Prime Minister David Cameron and others.
'I do not support what Putin has done, of course I don't,' he said. 'But the approach of David Cameron, William Hague, Nick Clegg and other EU leaders has been disastrous.
'If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond. And if you have neither the means nor the political will to face him down that is very obviously not a good idea.'
He went on: 'We are seeing vanity take the place of reason in foreign policy and the result is to destabilise a whole series of countries to no positive effect that I can discern. It is not just the Ukraine.
'The civil war in Syria was made worse by EU leaders stoking the expectation of western forces helping to topple the Assad dictatorship despite the increasing dominance of militant Islamists in the rebellion.'
Protesters took to the streets of Kiev after president Viktor Yanukovych's rejected an association deal with the EU, preferring closer ties with Russia, with dozens killed in the violence.
Following his loss of power, the Russian-leaning Crimean peninsula has been effectively annexed by Moscow and there are fears that President Vladimir Putin could make a move on the country's eastern regions.
'The European Union frankly does have blood on its hands in the Ukraine'
Ukip Leader Nigel Farage
Mr Farage said during last night's debate: ‘We should hang our heads in shame.
'The British government has actually geed up the European Union to pursue effectively an imperialist, expansionist and even the Commission President once himself said that we are building an empire.
‘We have given a false series of hopes to a group of people in the western Ukraine, so geed up were they that they actually toppled their own elected leader.
‘That provoked Mr Putin, and I think the European Union frankly does have blood on its hands in the Ukraine and I don't want a European army, Navy, Air Force or European foreign policy. It has not been a thing for good in the Ukraine.’
But the remarks provoked a furious response from Mr Clegg this morning, who said it was proof of Mr Farage’s ‘extreme’ views being clouded by his hatred of the EU.
Speekly on his weekly radio phone-in, Mr Clegg told LBC: ‘It shows quite how extreme people can be like Nigel Farage when their loathing of the European Union becomes so all-consuming that they even end up siding with Vladimir Putin in order to make their point.
‘To suggest that somehow it is the European Union's fault that the Ukrainian people rose up, as many did on the streets of Kiev, against their government - seeking to claim greater democracy, greater freedom - it is such a perverse way of looking at things.
‘What Vladimir Putin has done and what the Russians have done, in effect annexing a part of another country in the heart of Europe, is simply unacceptable in this day and age.
‘The only reason we are able to seek to exert any influence - and it is difficult enough as it is - on Vladimir Putin is because we can act with the clout of being part of the economic superpower that is the European Union, upon which Russia depends a lot.’
He went on: ‘It is really insulting to those people who, in Kiev, were simply standing up for values which we should share and support, of democracy, autonomy, of them being able to determine their own fate.
‘For Nigel Farage to side with Vladimir Putin, he will have to explain why he did so. I was astounded.
‘It was in many ways the most striking, if not shocking, new revelation that came to light.’
FARAGE CLAIMS EUROPEAN CARS ARE BETTER THAN BRITISH ONES
Mr Farage was accused of being unpatriotic after he told the debate European cars were 'much higher quality' than British ones.
'We sell a million cars a year to the European Union,' he said. 'It's an important marketplace for us, declining of course because they're in real economic trouble.
'But they sell us 1.8million cars a year, and cars of much higher quality and price.
'The point about trade is the German car industry needs the British market far more than British-manufactured cars need the European market and that's called the world of business. That is how it works.'
Mr Farage could not continue with his point because the debate was moved on by host Nick Ferrari.
But his comments were seized upon by politicians and commentators.
Chief treasury secretary Danny Alexander tweeted: 'Farage says cars from rest of EU are better quality than those made in UK - he's wrong, we are the best place in Europe for that industry'.
The debate between Mr Clegg and Mr Farage was dominated by arguments over immigration, trade and the impact of leaving the EU on British jobs.
A snap poll last night suggested Mr Farage won the debate after the two party leaders clash angrily over jobs and immigration.
A YouGov survey of 1,003 viewers found that 57 per cent thought the Ukip leader had performed better, with 36 per cent backing the Deputy Prime Minister.
According to a tracker analysis of viewers’ and listeners’ responses by Blurrt the hour-long debate was a close-fought thing.
Mr Clegg was viewed positively by 24 per  cent and negatively by 32 per cent, Mr Farage positively by 25 per cent and negatively by  32 per cent. The pair will face each other in a second televised debate next Wednesday.
The Ukip leader’s most effective attacks during the LBC debate hosted by radio presenter Nick Ferrari centred on immigration, in which he warned that EU rules meant Britain’s borders were open to 485 million people from across the Continent.
They had a ‘total, unconditional right to come to this country’ which could be amended only if Britain left the EU, which he branded a ‘failed project’.
Mr Clegg hit back by insisting he wanted to live ‘in Great Britain, not Little England’.
He brandished a Ukip election leaflet suggesting 29 million Bulgarians and Romanians would come to Britain once the countries joined the EU and immigration controls were lifted at the beginning of this year.
‘There aren’t even 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians living in Romania and Bulgaria. It’s simply not true,’ he said.
‘Let’s not scare people by claiming things that are not true which would have the consequence of making us poorer and putting more people out work.’
Mr Farage said two million people had already left the two countries to work elsewhere, but conceded most had ‘gone to Italy and Spain’.
Mr Clegg said the Government had ‘significantly tightened up the rules’ and that of the jobs created under the Coalition in recent years, nine out of ten had gone to Britons.
He said 1.5 million Britons had taken advantage of EU freedom of movement rules and were working in other EU countries, and might be ejected if the UK left the EU.
The Lib Dem leader said three million jobs in Britain depended on the EU, arguing that multi-national companies would pull investment out of the UK if it left the EU.
JUST HOW MANY OF BRITAIN'S LAWS COME FROM EUROPE: 7% OR 75%?
Much of the debate was focused on how many of Britain's laws come from Brussels.
Ukip's Nigel Farage claimed 75 per cent of all legislation is generated by the European Parliament.
But when pressed on where the figures come from, he admitted that it was his own estimate.
Nick Clegg hit back, insisting the independence House of Commons library has put the figure at just 7 per cent.
The analysis states that ‘6.8 per cent of primary legislation (Statutes) and 14.1 per cent of secondary legislation’ implements EU regulation'.
‘That would be devastating for the UK economy,’ said Mr Clegg.
‘Why would we pull ourselves out of the world’s largest economy when 50 per cent of our exports go to Europe?’
But Mr Farage dismissed Mr Clegg’s comments as scaremongering.
‘I remember, Nick, you and all your gang – all the big corporates – all telling us 12 years ago that if we didn’t join the euro, all inward investment would cease, the City of London would disappear,’ he said.
‘All I can say is thank God we didn’t listen to you, otherwise we would have been in one hell of a mess.
‘This debate is between a tired status quo defending a crumbling EU that frankly isn’t working any more, and a fresh approach that says, let’s be friendly with Europe, let’s trade with Europe, but let’s not be governed by their institutions.’
The Ukip leader, who broke out in a sweat as the debate went on, struggled when challenged over why he uses taxpayers’ money to pay his wife, having previously pledged not to do so.
He said his German spouse, Kirsten, had worked for years for him for no salary and he had decided to put her on the payroll because he worked long hours and needed help.
WHY DO YOU EMPLOY YOUR WIFE?
Nigel Farage was put on the spot about why he employs his wife on public money as an aide in Brussels.
During questions on trust. the Ukip leader was challenged about his commitment to transparency.
But he defended paying his wife using taxpayers money, claiming he is the busiest politician in Britain.
He said: 'I do actually lead a group in the European Parliament. I very much doubt that anybody else in British politics has worked the hours and had so little fun as me over the last few years.'
He said he often got home at midnight and it was nice to have his wife there to say she had done some work for him.
Mr Clegg’s worst moment came when he was challenged over the Lib Dems’ previous support for a referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU, when Labour was about to sign up to the Lisbon Treaty.
A squirming Mr Clegg said voters should have looked at the ‘small print’ of the party’s pledge.
A Ukip spokesman said: ‘What we achieved was for Ukip to take the leadership of the great Eurosceptic majority.
'The big loser was (David) Cameron, who didn’t have the guts to turn up.’
A Lib Dem spokesman said it was clear Mr Clegg had been ‘more in control of himself’.
Former Tory deputy chairman Lord Ashcroft, now a leading pollster, said: ‘One reason Nigel Farage was a winner tonight, irrespective of how the two performed, was simply his exposure to a wide audience.’
Both Mr Cameron, who has pledged to hold an in/out referendum on the EU if he wins next year’s General Election, and Labour leader Ed Miliband were invited to take part in the debate, but declined.
The Prime Minister affected nonchalance about last night’s clash. Aides said he would not be tuning in and had more important things to do, including a meeting with the Queen.
QUENTIN LETTS: Who'd choose one of these jabbering maniacs to rule us?
Two rather insistent blokes kept shouting at us. For an hour. Sometimes a third man, moderator Nick Ferrari, joined in – three voices, all striving for supremacy, three mad supermarket shoppers doing aisle rage with their trolleys.
That was how the great Clegg-Farage debate felt to me. The moment the programme stopped at 8pm, a blissful hush fell over the ‘spin room’ at the debate venue, a central London ballroom lit orange and blue. Peace. Silence. We drank it in like the survivors in ‘Ice Cold In Alex’.
Who won? Neither, so far as I could make out. Or maybe they both won. They both got themselves on the airwaves. Is that all it takes to go up in the opinion polls?
But who, in reality, would choose one of these maniacs to represent them? They were both so weirdly vehement, jabbering, gobby.
Sprints can not last an hour. We could have done with some variety of tone and pace.
They stood at little lecterns which advertised LBC Radio. Mr Clegg was the taller, fitter, Mr Farage the more formal and pursed around the chops. The upper lip bulged.
Cleggy was soon standing back a little from the oche, thrusting his groin forward, sticking a paw in his pocket. Mr Farage churched his hands on the lectern and in  his opening shot he looked a bit Thunderbirds puppetish.
'This debate is about YOU,' said Mr Clegg, and he looked into the camera the way they do in washing powder adverts
He referred to an early questioner as ‘the lady’. Nick called her Deborah. I bet he does that with all the girls. Mr Farage, meanwhile, started to develop a minor perspiration crisis. Sweating like an onion on low gas, he was. By the end he was positively pinko. Now there’s a first.
‘This debate is about YOU,’ said Mr Clegg, and he looked into the camera the way they do in washing powder adverts. Mr Farage went off at 100 miles an hour, faster than racing commentator Cornelius Lysaght doing the home straight of the Derby.
An early prang for Cleggy: when asked about a past election promise to give us a Europe-related referendum, he said ‘read the small print’. Aiee. Not a good moment. You’re a politician, not an insurance assessor, chum.
For the so-called outsider Farage, meanwhile, there were sticky moments when he was asked about his longish career as a Brussels-crat and the way he has employed his wife on the EU payroll.
‘I don’t know anyone who works the hours I do and has so little fun,’ he wailed. ‘When you get home at night,’ he continued (should that ‘when’ have been an ‘if’?) ‘you need someone to hand you the documents.’ Did he mean ‘divorce papers’?
The most common phrase from Mr Farage was ‘tired status quo’. Mr Clegg’s was ‘let’s stick to the facts’.
Suddenly coming over all reasonable, Mr Farage accepted that Europe had improved British food. About halfway through the hour, he tried to inject some humour to his replies but it did not erase a rather over-emphatic, ranty delivery. I’m not sure it’s great for the Eurosceptic cause that he has become its champion.
Mr Clegg was smooth. That is not altogether a quality to be desired.
Mr Ferrari kept things rattling along. He could make a half-decent cattle auctioneer. Occasionally he dipped into his goodie bag and brought out some horror of a claim that the two men had made in the past.
One statistic from Mr Clegg had Mr Farage going ‘oh dear, oh dear’ in a sort of voice the younger Steptoe used to use when his dad had disgraced himself. A dicey Farage statistic, meanwhile, was questioned by Mr Ferrari who asked: ‘Where did you get that from?’ Farage: ‘That’s the estimate we made.’ Ribald laughter from the audience and an expression of farce from Cleggy.
Gay marriage came up, though it was not clear what that had to do with Europe. Mr Farage did not look his most comfortable putting the anti case. I suspect he thinks his party’s gay-sceptic stance is wrong.
Not everyone in the hall – did those blue lights not lend it the faint air of a public convenience? – was entirely gripped. The Sky TV cameras alighted on an elderly woman who was rubbing her jaw in a ‘must stay awake’ manoeuvre. Later, a younger woman was rather evidently slipping off into the land of zeds.
However, let us not quibble. This was an interesting duel. And as can happen in duels, neither combatant sustained anything more than a glancing flesh wound. Both live to delight us another day.
After you with the cyanide.
* Last night's debate was hosted by LBC radio. A second debate, hosted by the BBC, will be held next Wednesday from 7pm on BBC2 and Sky News.
Document DAMONL0020140327ea3r0048w
