{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"169"}
____
News
'I know it’s easy to take benefits in England’: Gipsies who move to Britain reveal how they claim thousands of pounds every month as part of their bundle of benefits even though they do not work
JILL REILLY   
618 words
3 April 2014
16:14
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Documentary features a mother of 11 who receives almost £2,000 in benefits
* Also follows immigrant who wants to earn £40,000 in benefits in two years
Gipsies have revealed how they are claiming thousands of pounds every month in benefits after moving to Britain and milking the generous state benefit system. 
The admissions were made in a damning new Channel 5 documentary which follows the lives of Roma gypsies in Britain.
One of the gipsies featured in Gypsies On Benefits And Proud is Katarina Cisarova, 43,who brought her eleven children and eleven grand-children with her to an estate in Rotherham.
The Slovakian Roma receives almost £2,000 in benefits programmes and boasts: 'We have a good life here. We have everything that we want here. It is very nice.'
In the seven years she has been in Britain, Katarina has worked a handful of days.
She lives with her husband Peter and their four youngest children – all teenagers.
Peter, who has not had a job for two years says: 'My country, I no had a job, no food, nothing. No going back, never. Thank you so much England.'
Most of their grown up children also rely on the welfare state.
The documentary which will air April 11, also features Ion Lazar, 36, who came to the Britain with five other immigrants when the work restrictions on Romanians were lifted in January.
He admits he is just planning to stash his benefits to take home to his family in Romania.
'I need maybe forty thousand from benefits.... four zero thousand pounds for my family and I think this money I can make in one years maybe two,' he said.
He says on the show: 'I know it’s very, very easy to take benefits in England… She’s give me home free, she’s give me money free, she’s give me everything.'
Another subject in the documentary is Viorel Dinu, 25, who lost both of his legs in Romania when he was seven-years-old.
He says that at home he used to have to beg for money in the street using a skateboard to move, but now he receives £750 a month in handouts.
He revealed: 'I come to the UK cos I don’t have a nice life there. In Romania it’s very hard with the money and everything.
'The money that I have is not exactly what I need, but what can I do, I must say thank you for this one.
'In England is more better life because here they don’t look on you if you black or not, they don’t think if your gipsy or not. Every door is open here, this is the most easy'.
Two years ago Dinu made headlines after being handed an ASBO following his arrest after police officers were alerted to a 'high pitched screeching' sound coming from outside John Lewis in Oxford Street, central London.
He has previous convictions for begging outside Selfridges and Gap, also on Oxford Street.
Executive Producer Jacqui Wilson says: 'This programme reinforces the determination of the And Proud series to bring ground-breaking content, unearthing controversial characters and challenging stories that viewers have never have seen before.
'People should watch this programme before jumping to conclusions. Some of its revelations will make people think twice about Gypsies in the UK.'
Gypsies On Benefits And Proud will air on Friday April 11 on Channel 5 at 9pm.
Document DAMONL0020140403ea43005ej
