{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"2037"}
____
News
Labour is too middle class: Ed Miliband's policy guru says party's working class support has DIED in boost to Ukip
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
776 words
28 April 2014
10:39
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* Lord Glasman warns Ukip is now eating into Labour's heartlands
* Working class support has been in free fall since 2001, he says
* Poll puts Ukip in the lead ahead of European Parliament elections
* Rows over fakery and racism have done nothing to dent Ukip support
Labour risks losing support to Ukip because it has become too ‘middle class’, Ed Miliband’s policy guru has warned.
Lord Glasman, a policy adviser ennobled by the Labour leader, warned the support of the working classes had ‘died’ in 2010 and the rise of Nigel Farage's party was eating into his party’s ‘heartlands’.
The blunt message to Mr Miliband came as a poll showed Ukip is on course to win the European elections on May 22, which Mr Farage has claimed will trigger a ‘political earthquake’ in Britain.
For several years the rise of Ukip was thought to have come at the expense of the Tories, with Eurosceptic traditionalists wooed by Mr Farage’s blunt-speaking.
But in recent months attempts to eat into the Conservative vote has stalled, with the biggest gains made in Labour;s working class heartlands in the north of England.
Recent studies show Ukip supporters earn the least of all the major parties, and are more likely to be working class.
Lord Glasman said voters' concerns about immigration and welfare needed to be addressed to stop them abandoning Labour permanently.
‘That is the dilemma at the heart of the party's strategy - is it possible to address these economic, political and cultural concerns when the party is becoming in many ways very middle class?’ he told The Times.
‘What I mean by that is liberal and progressive in its sensibility. Ed (Miliband) is trying to address it.
'This is a long-term trend since 2001, in terms of the working class vote just declining quite dramatically.
‘The Labour middle class vote held up (in 2010). It was the working class vote that died. These are often people who are earning, who have jobs, but they don't see Labour as representing their interests.’
The comments emerged after a YouGov poll for the Sunday Times gave Ukip an outright advantage in the European election contest for the first time, with 31 per cent support compared with 28 per cent for Labour, and the Tories languishing in third on 19 per cent.
The backing for Ukip comes despite another dire week of publicity, with its £1.5million campaign derailed by rows over fakery and racism.
A voter from Devon in the party’s manifesto was revealed to be Lizzy Vaid, a Ukip official based at its London HQ.
Zimbabwean decorator Andre Lampitt appeared in a party political broadcast was suspended over tweets that Islam is ‘evil’ and branding the Prophet Mohammed a paedophile and later a builder in an anti-immigration poster was revealed to an actor from Ireland.
Would-be councillor William Henwood also suggested comedian Lenny Henry should emigrate to a ‘black country’.
Ukip’s deputy chairman, former Tory MP Neil Hamilton, said Mr Henwood’s  comments were being investigated by  the party.
He claimed that ‘every party’ had ‘unknown’ activists who ‘may have said something unpleasant on social media’.
Mr Hamilton told the BBC that the party was attracting ‘decent’ former supporters of the BNP who feel ‘swamped’ by immigrants.
According to pollsters Populus, Ukip supporters are more working class and on lower incomes than any other party.
Ukip voters are more likely to be older, white, male, married, retired and living on an average income of £25,410.
Labour supporters are younger, unmarried, earn £26,460 and are more likely to work in the private sector than other parties’ supporters.
Laurence Stellings, associate director of Populus, said: ‘If you look beyond the headlines you can quickly dispel the casual stereotypes about UKIP supporters.
‘They are not just grumpy shire Tories as some suggest. In fact, your typical UKIP supporter is a working class male from the Midlands.
‘Perhaps the most striking feature of UKIP’s support is just how male it is. Nearly two out of three UKIP voters are men, and three quarters of UKIP voters did not continue their education beyond secondary school.’
Some 55 per cent of Ukip backers are from C2DE social class groups, compared to 45 per cent ABC1s, dominated by the upper and middle classes.
Only 47 per cent of Labour supporters are from C2DE, falling to just 37 per cent of Tories and Lib Dems.
Document DAMONL0020140428ea4s003bk
