{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"75"}
____
  
Features
BARBARIC BUT I HAVE NEVER SEEN IT HAPPEN HERE
BY DR KATRINA ERSKINE    
1,124 words
26 March 2014
Daily Mail
DAIM
8
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
DR Katrina Erskine is an eminent gynaecologist working in an area of East London with a large migrant population. Here she tackles a difficult subject with honesty and candour. Some readers may recoil, but it's an issue that must be aired.
As a consultant gynaecologist working at an inner-city hospital in London's East End, I'm all too used to seeing women who have been subjected to female genital mutilation (FGM).
Hackney has substantial immigrant populations from Somalia and Eritrea - two of the many countries in Africa and the Middle East where FGM is still widely practised - and as a result many of the women who arrive at Homerton Hosptial, where I work, show the unmistakable signs of this barbaric practice.
We see around 50 cases a year of the worst kind, so-called Type III FGM, where the clitoris and inner lips (labia minora) of the vagina have been sliced off and the outer lips (labia majora) sewn together to leave only a small opening.
All the women that I personally have seen were born abroad, and had the FGM abroad, prior to their arrival in this country.
The challenge for their doctors and midwives is to ensure that these women are safely delivered of their babies, despite the physical obstacles presented by FGM, and that's a challenge that has just become a lot more difficult following the Director of Public Prosecutions' decision to prosecute a British hospital doctor for carrying out FGM.
The case in question is now sub-judice so I can't comment on any clinical specifics, but what has seriously alarmed those of us working in the field is that the patient who was being treated by Dr Dhanuson Dharmasena at a North London hospital had already been subjected to FGM.
If, as a result of the DPP's intervention, any post-delivery stitching or repair to a woman with FGM is, itself, going to be potentially considered as mutilation then doctors and midwives will understandably hesitate, at the very least, before intervening. In certain situations, that potentially could cost a new mother her life.
Where pregnant women arrive in British hospitals having already had FGM, surely it's obvious that the only person guilty of that quite properly criminal act is whoever carried out the original mutilation. It's certainly not the doctor or midwife, who is simply trying to stop any bleeding and mend any tears after the trauma of childbirth.
Whether Alison Saunders, the DPP, felt under some pressure to bring a prosecution - any prosecution - given that she was about to appear before the Commons home affairs select committee, I can't really comment, although I can see Mrs Saunders might have felt the need to have something to tell MPs.
Others, however, have already pointed out how surprising it is that despite FGM being made a criminal act almost 30 years ago - either for carrying it out or aiding and abetting it - there has not yet been a single prosecution in Britain. Or not until last week.
Perhaps this is because, in the 21 years I've worked as a gynaecologist at Homerton Hospital, I have never seen a British-born woman who has been subjected to FGM. Nor have I seen a woman of any nationality on whom FGM has been performed in Britain.
Indeed, the only reason I know it happens in Britain at all is because respected colleagues tell me it does and because friends in the teaching profession, all too used to some of their female pupils mysteriously disappearing for a couple of weeks, back them up.
Nevertheless, FGM in British-born women is rare so I'm not surprised the DPP has found it so difficult to prosecute. But she needs to concentrate her department's efforts on the back-street butchers who are said to carry this atrocity out in this country, and on the parents who take their daughters abroad for the procedure, not on hospital doctors and midwives who are simply doing what they've been trained to do.
Most pregnant women with Type III FGM who are seen at hospitals like mine are offered a procedure called 'a defibulation' in advance of their due date, during which the often tiny opening left by FGM is widened to accommodate the safe delivery of a baby. It's a procedure that needs to be performed only once, before the delivery of the woman's first baby, because after the baby has been born the vaginal opening will now be of normal dimensions.
But some pregnant women with Type III FGM choose not to have a defibulation in advance, either through fear, embarrassment or simply because they prefer to have all the medical intervention required for the birth carried out at once. In these cases, doctors and midwives can only start to intervene when the woman arrives at the hospital having gone into labour.
Any birth can be traumatic but one that starts in these complex, challenging circumstances, particularly so. A defibulation has to be carried out on a woman who is already in labour and, as a result, once the baby has been delivered, the area around the vagina - newly operated upon, of course - will be raw, sore and bleeding. The new mother urgently needs stitches or, in some cases, there is a real risk she could bleed to death.
My concern is that following the DPP's decision to prosecute a British hospital doctor, doctors and midwives will think twice about doing what they know to be medically right. Stitching up a woman who has had FGM after she has given birth is not the same as carrying out the mutilation itself, and it's outrageous that the two things could possibly be confused.
Now it may be that there are facts in the DPP's prosecution that have not yet emerged: as I've already said, I cannot comment on a particular case. But the DPP and the Department of Health need to move quickly to end the confusion and make the general principle clear. Stitching up a bleeding woman who has previously been subjected to FGM is not the same as committing FGM itself.
These poor women who come into our hospitals have already suffered enough - they've been mutilated, and then go through the trauma of childbirth. They need to be looked after by doctors and midwives who can confidently get on with what they've been trained to do, rather than looking nervously over their shoulders to see if a policeman has just walked into the delivery suite clutching a pair of handcuffs.
© Daily Mail
Document DAIM000020140326ea3q0000i
