{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"1118"}
____
News
Nosy neighbours told to look to the skies to spot guns, drugs and illegal immigrants being flown in via small airfields
MATT CHORLEY, MAILONLINE POLITICAL EDITOR   
436 words
6 May 2014
11:58
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
* National Crime Agency asks for public to join fight against terrorism
* People living near airfields urged to look out for criminals
* UK has 3,000 aerodromes, small airfields and farmers’ field strips
Guns, drugs and illegal immigrants are being smuggled into Britain by plans landing at small airfields and in farmers’ fields.
The National Crime Agency – Britain’s answer to the FBI – has urged people who live near landing sites to join the ‘fight against organised terrorism’.
Officers want nosy neighbours to look out for unusual activity in remote areas and report suspected criminals.
As part of Operation Pegasus people living near small airports are being asked to keep an eye out for potential threats to national security.
In particular, there are suspicions that light aircraft, microlights, helicopters and private jets are being used to bring illegal goods and people into the country.
It includes illegal immigration, importing hard drugs such as cocaine and amphetamines, and trafficking firearms.
The NCA claims locals are ‘perfectly placed to spot out of place behaviour that could be an indicator of criminal activity’.
The UK has more than 3,000 aerodromes, small airfields, farmers’ field strips, and helipads which could be used to land an aircraft.
There are around 47,000 pilots licensed with the Civil Aviation Authority and around 20,000 light aircraft.
At least 90,000 general aviation flights come into the UK every year.
But the request for the public to help to police who is entering the country through small airfields will raise questions about the NCA’s ability to police Britain’s borders.
David Armond, Director of the NCA’s Border Policing Command, said: ‘This is an area where we are convinced the public can really help law enforcement disrupt criminal activity.
‘You might have seen unfamiliar people in sensitive areas of the airport, or unusual patterns of activity such as night-time airdrops. That information could be key to an investigation into an organised criminal network or terrorist group.
‘Information about unusual use of aircraft or activity in and around the airfield should be reported no matter how trivial it may seem.’
If someone spots suspicious activity, they are asked to record ‘what happened, when and why was it unusual’.
They are asked to note details of the aircraft, any markings or modifications and who owns it, and flight details, such as type of flight, flight plans and timings and any information about the pilot or crew.
Document DAMONL0020140506ea56003sc
