{"newspaper":"Daily Star","id:"3084"}
____
  
Features
'Bieber's lucky dad goes Mileys too far'
703 words
25 April 2014
Daily Star
DAISTA
1; Scotland
47
English
(c) copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
So justin Bieber's 38 year old dad has been cavorting with miley cyrus. All i can say is what a fi lthy, lecherous rotten lucky b******. Honeymonster
Another benefi t cheat Louise Coulter with an interest free loan AND to be paid back out of benefi ts, so, it's us mugs (the taxpayers) who'll be paying it, not her! lou, yorks
why is england raising money for cancer charity when the medication is not available for the patients as it is too expensive? where is the money going then? mark
Brits suffering breast cancer denied treatment through cost. Why allow immigrants riddled with TB, Hiv, Aids etc 2 come here 4 free treatment? Den
Sad excuse for a human/waste of skin Josie Cunningham is an enigma. All that money on plastic surgery on the NHS & thats the best that happens? Great advert for going private! I'd rather the money go to filling potholes! Captain
ref Denise Van Outen not being chatted up. What the hell is up with blokes these days? She is a proper normal non-plastic beautiful lady, of which I have always adored. Fancy a date with a forklift driver, baby? Eastieboy
Why the hell would anyone want to go out with Debbie Dingle in Emm erdale? She is such a miserable cow! Rosko. Leeds
good point bigchef: ever thought about becomin a lawyer. This time next yr you could be a millionaire. MZ Emblem
Jurgen klopp the Dortmund manager has turned down the Man-U job but said his brother Clipperty may be interested. DD
Want to stop the break-up of the UK? Move the UK parliament to Edinburgh for the next 300 years and let us elect 4x as many MPs as anyone else. Never gonna happen. Vote YES. Craig
re annoyed ds thur: who told u "u have 2 refer" urself british. i'm scottish british and proud of both it's scottish, british and proud of both. it's a free country call urself what u want, i "refer" 2 ur txt as "pish". glesga maizy
Hope Abi Clarke doesn't wear that striped dress on the telly. Will be thinking its on the blink. Alan Bolton
mr smith steroid man you dont care about side effects now. in ten years if you live that long you will. hard pumping will get you there it just takes diciplin and longer. hunty
i wish all mps would stop the talking and do something positive to help the poor and the sick. sandy
no mention of st georges day on the one show again, yet alex jones goin on bout wales yet again! anti-english? methinks so. burnsy
here in the sth west a major church shown on tv fl ying union fl ag instead of st georges. their excuse the bad weather over the winter left old one in tatters. surely one of the biggest landowners in england could supply new fl ag to a flagship church. where has the national pride gone? robtin
FIGURES show more self employed since new benefit clampdown. Yes more going out thieving, robbing, smuggling and drug dealing. colin If wots appnin in Donetsk with the Jews is true thr is a genuine cause for alarm. Persecuted for 1,000s of yrs. Lets discuss a solution please. its 2014. KK
With a cheeky grin on my face and my arms held out wide i said 2 my girlfriend name sumthin thats both smokin hot and extremely cool at the same time, she said ya brother! Tasty Tone
Blair should shut his warmongering, interfering mouth. Enough good people have died as a result of his cowardice and lies. Mandamn
jesus threw money lenders out the temple, cameron welcomes them with open arms. sandy aberdeen
Has any snooker referee EVER managed to blow the impacted chalk off the cueball when asked to clean it? Trevull
was that a meerkat playing the part of the uncle in jamaica inn. stewpot
TEXT OF THE DAY
How come everytime I get on a busthe driver always seemsto get the best seat.No wonder everybodylikes to talk behind his back. GRANT HATELY
Document DAISTA0020140425ea4p0005k
