{"newspaper":"Daily-Mail","id:"751"}
____
TV&Showbiz
'She does everything for her kids': Marion Cotillard reveals how being a mom inspired her to play one in new film Blood Ties
JENNIFER PEARSON   
506 words
24 February 2014
20:20
Mail Online
DAMONL
English
© 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Marion Cotillard plays a woman who will do anything for her children in the new movie Blood Ties.
The 38-year-old French beauty drew from her own experience as a mother to flesh out the role, as she described in the March issue of Interview Magazine.
Marion also had the benefit of working with her real-life partner, Guillaume Canet, who directed and co-wrote the crime-drama about two brothers (Clive Owen, Billy Crudup) on opposite sides of the law who combat each other in 1970s Brooklyn, New York.
Describing her character Monica, an addict who turns tricks for a living, Marion said: 'It was actually one of my favorite characters. She really touched me.'
Like Monica, Marion is also a mother to her two-year-old son named Marcel with Canet.
'She does everything for her kids, even if she struggles with drugs,' the actress said. 'But this fight for her kids really moved me. And, of course, it's because I became a mom myself.' 
Marion wouldn't mind if Marcel follows her footsteps into acting either.
'Ah, it's an amazing job, but my parents never told me anything about how hard the job would be,' Marion shared.
'My parents were actors too. I don't even know if when I wanted to be an actress, they went, "Oh, s**t." [laughs] I must ask them. 
'I mean, an actor has a huge failure in him... So it's kind of a struggle. I mean, if my son wants to be an actor, it's fine.'
Marion relished the opportunity of collaborating with her boyfriend on the project.
'I loved working with him,' Marion told the magazine of her on-set relationship with Canet on the film, which comes out in US theatres on March 21.
Marion will also play a prostitute in the forthcoming The Immigrant, in which she plays a Polish woman who arrives in Manhattan and falls prey to a charming yet wicked man (Joaquin Phoenix).
'He is a special actor and a very special human being,' Marion described her co-star Phoenix. 'His instinct is like the instinct of an animal. 
'There's a pureness about him. We lost this animal instinct that we used to have... Yeah, he's an animal. 
'That's how I describe him. To be in the same area with him, I took it as a privilege.'
In regards to playing a prostitute in two films this year, and in the music video for David Bowie's The Next Day, Marion laughed and said: 'Yeah, that's a question that I didn't really ask myself.
'I don't know why this year was all about that. Three prostitute roles in my life this year and last. I don't know why. Not that I don't want to do it, because why not?'
Document DAMONL0020140225ea2o000eb
