{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3558"}
____
Labour is running scared from the EU referendum
By Macer Hall   
1,492 words
22 February 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
NEXT weekend Ed Miliband will get together with union bosses for a Labour Party conference that is shaping up to be a rather a docile gathering.
Expectations of a historic confrontation over the party’s future fizzled out when Len McCluskey of the powerful Unite public sector union and the rest of the brothers accepted the Labour leader’s proposed changes to the party’s rulebook with little more than a bit of griping. 
Once again Mr Miliband has opted for a fudge rather than the fight that could have been a defining moment for his leadership. 
Yet while civil war with his union paymasters has been avoided I understand that he is facing a revolt within his Shadow Cabinet that is threatening to be far more damaging. 
Labour sources say a majority of the Labour leader’s team are now convinced he is making a monumental blunder by refusing to match Prime Minister David Cameron’s pledge of an in-out referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union. 
And many in Labour despair that Miliband and Shadow Foreign Secretary Douglas Alexander do not appear to want to even address the issue of our relationship with Brussels that is increasingly dominating the political agenda. Miliband recently gave the Parliamentary Labour Party a pep talk about strategy for the year ahead but failed to make any mention of the referendum debate. “The word Europe did not cross his lips once during the entire presentation," one Labour MP told me. 
The Labour leader is instinctively deeply uncomfortable with the idea of referendums and fears that giving in to demands for one about Europe could come back to haunt him. 
Despite Labour’s relatively slender opinion poll lead he dreams that the electoral arithmetic can put him into 10 Downing Street at the next election and genuinely fears he could end up being prime minister of a country that votes to quit the EU. 
“Miliband’s nightmare is a waferthin Labour majority, a resurgent Tory Party led by a new Euro-sceptic leader – Boris Johnson for example – and a referendum within 18 months," one source close to a leading Labour donor told me. 
The conclusion the Labour leader’s inner circle drew from Labour’s thumping margin of victory in last week’s Wythenshawe and Sale East by-election is that Nigel Farage’s UK Independence Party is stealing plenty of Tory votes but is not a threat to Labour. 
“The Tory-Ukip share of the vote was the same in the by-election as at the general election. There is no sign of Ukip taking Labour voters," said a senior Labour source. 
Many party insiders believe that smacks of dangerous complacency given that the poll was held in Labour’s heartlands and followed the death of local MP Paul Goggins who was hugely popular in the constituency. 
Ukip have made no secret of their desire to attract blue-collar voters who traditionally backed Labour but feel betrayed by the last government on immigration and welfare. Some shadow ministers privately admit that the anti-Brussels party is gaining ground in Labour territory. 
Miliband is set to make a final decision about how to respond to Cameron’s referendum pledge after votes are counted in May’s elections for the European Parliament. But with the polls suggesting Labour could turn in a creditable performance that result could well simply reinforce his conviction that a referendum on EU membership is best avoided. 
However it is unlikely to allay the concerns within the Shadow Cabinet. Some frontbenchers are worried that Labour is going into the euro election campaign without a clear position on the referendum question and are mystified about what the party’s manifesto for the Euro elections will say on the crucial issue. 
Even more importantly they are desperately worried about the signal that Miliband’s refusal to back an EU referendum sends to the electorate. His opposition to giving voters a say about the country’s future could well be taken as a sign of contempt.
........................................................................
All is quiet on the Westminster front as MPs sit idle
WESTMINSTER has been through a quiet week with MPs away on yet another mini-break and ministers off sploshing around in flooded areas. 
Yet Parliament has felt only slightly less busy in recess than on sitting days over recent months given the severe shortage of legislation passing through the Commons and the Lords. 
“There really is very little for us to do here at the moment," one MP told me before heading off. “It feels as if we are just marking time until the general election." 
Tory and Lib Dem ministers are so focused on highlighting their differences in the run-up to next year’s general election that they are struggling to agree any new coalition measures. And I gather that the problem has been compounded by an embarrassing mix-up in the Government whips offices over the date of the state opening of Parliament. 
“Somebody managed to put the wrong date in the diary for the European elections. It looks like we can’t hold the Queen’s Speech until June," said the MP. Because Government departments are banned from making policy announcements during the “purdah" period in the run-up to elections the monarch’s ceremonial visit to Parliament has had to be delayed by weeks. 
And the result is MPs will have even more time than they expected to fritter away before the Government’s programme for the final year of this Parliament is announced. 
The lack of legislation has become so acute that a Commons business paper for the week ahead put aside one day for the presentation of a Bill without giving any indication as to what the Bill was going to be about. Ministers suspect that the light workload is giving backbenchers plenty of time for plotting and mischief making. 
The MP added: “Part of the reason why there have been so many revolts is that we just haven’t got enough work to do." 
Perhaps voters should be grateful for a period of calm from our law makers. At least it means a bit less meddling in our lives and fewer half-baked laws designed for no other purpose than to “send a message" that the Government is doing something.  
........................................................................
TORY MPs are tipping  rising star Work and  Pensions Minister  Esther McVey to be the next Conservative Party  chairman but she was wary  about the idea this week. “If I was offered it now  I would have to say no. I do not  know anywhere near enough.  What do they say? Fools rush in where angels fear to tread,"  she said.  It hardly sounded like a vote of confidence in Grant  Shapps, the present holder of  the post.  
........................................................................
NICK CLEGG and Nigel Farage are to go head to head in a live broadcast  debate on Britain’s membership of the European  Union. I understand the Deputy Prime Minister and the Ukip  leader have already squared up  over the issue. The clash happened over a decade ago when they were MEPs. They debated whether Britain should stay in the EU over a couple of pints in a Brussels pub, says one Ukip source. 
........................................................................
JACQUI SMITH, the former Labour home  secretary humiliated in the Commons expenses scandal, reflected wistfully on the experience of losing her seat at the last general election this week. “Being on the BBC website with the headline Biggest Loser above a picture of you is not easy to take. My children thought it was hilarious," she told Total Politics magazine.
........................................................................
MICHAEL FALLON, an earlier favourite for the Conservative Party chairman’s job, is now  said to be out of the running. The  Energy Minister was recently given duties as the minister for  Portsmouth to help the city  recover from the loss of  shipbuilding.  One Tory MP said: “That’s a  big clue that Michael is not going  to Tory HQ. He’s become the minister for clearing up other people’s mess." 
........................................................................
ED MILIBAND’S  political hero is  Theodore Roosevelt,  US president in the  first decade of the last century.  The Labour leader recently  handed copies of a biography  of the American statesman to  his chief aides. One of  Roosevelt’s favourite sayings  was: “The first requisite of a  good citizen is that he shall be  able and willing to pull his  weight." Perhaps that’s a  slogan Labour should adopt if  Miliband really wants to shake  off the “welfare party" tag. 
........................................................................
ACCORDING to ancient  parliamentary procedure  proposals for new laws  have to be read to MPs  three times. Some officials are  now wondering if this can be  dispensed with. Third readings  have become just an opportunity  for MPs to talk about the  unpleasant habits of the  colleagues with whom they have  been cooped up over the last few  weeks, was the verdict of one.  
Document EXCO000020140222ea2m001f4
