{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2748"}
____
A Manilow for all seasons: Barry sets the record straight
By Simon Edge   
1,182 words
27 February 2014
00:53
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A COUPLE of years ago Barry Manilow explained to a journalist why his face looks so weird these days.
He suffers from chronic hip problems which leave him in constant pain and he sometimes has steroid injections to help him cope. These tend to make him swell up especially around the face, giving everyone completely the wrong impression.
"So when I see those pictures with my face blown up they attribute that to me and bad plastic surgery," he went on. "And I've asked my publicist, 'Can't I just say something about this?' Because this had nothing to do with plastic surgery. Because I'm not interested in it. But I see these pictures and it does look strange."
He tends to have the injections when he goes on television because he doesn't want to be seen hobbling on camera, which explains the latest pictures of the 70-yearold singer on a US TV show this week. With cheeks puffed out like cushions around the nose that helped make him famous, he could be a distant relative of the so-called Bride of Wildenstein, the New York socialite who had her face surgically altered to look like an exotic cat.
But that's steroids for you. And if Barry seems to have a problem moving his facial muscles during those TV interviews so he can hardly open his mouth let alone show any emotion that must be the steroids too.
However odd he looks and for whatever reason you don't have to be a hardcore "Fanilow" to feel some love for a man who was once a byword for spangly cheesiness but has garnered respect across the music industry as a performer and a composer.
I saw him play in Hyde Park a few years ago when he was the headline performer at the open-air Proms In The Park. At the end of a long evening during which one lesser artiste greeted the crowd with self-aggrandising cries of "Hello London!" Manilow was utterly captivating: a tiny, distant figure who was modesty itself but exuded enough charisma to make you feel you were watching him in the intimacy of a small room.
It's a skill he has learned over years of playing live at Las Vegas, a famously lucrative gig guaranteeing stars a steady income when they're at the top of their game. But on tour you're playing to fans and are pretty much guaranteed a rapturous reception whereas in Vegas you play to whoever happens to be in the hotel. Manilow himself has described performing for drunken male delegates at cementmixer conventions. They're hardly his natural fan-base, which is overwhelmingly female, but he tends to win them over by the end. "I'm all right with them," he says with typical understatement.
He was born Barry Alan Pincus in a Brooklyn tenement. His father, who drove trucks for a brewery, left home when the boy was two and he was brought up by his mother Edna, a Russian Jewish immigrant, and stepfather Willie Murphy. He took his mother's maiden name at the time of his bar mitzvah.
He studied orchestration at the New York College of Music and went on to play the piano for an off-Broadway show before composing jingles for Kentucky Fried Chicken and Vicks and then teaming up with Bette Midler as her producer and pianist.
Barry hasn't changed all that much since 1978 [REX]
The man described by Rolling Stone magazine as "the showman of a generation" never had any aspiration to sing. Set on composing he found that no one wanted to record his songs and it was only in desperation that he sang and recorded them himself to send out a demo tape. He was surprised when a record label came back and wanted to release the songs as an album - but not as surprised as Midler was. "When I told Bette I got a record deal she said, 'Doing what?'" he says.
That first album in 1973 included Could It Be Magic, which was later a cover-version hit for both Donna Summer and Take That. He had his first number one with Mandy, written by Scott English and written by Scott English and Richard Kerr in 1974 and his own celebrated composition Copa" cabana, telling the story of showgirl Lola and her lost love Tony, was released in 1978. Lauded by Frank Sinatra and Bob Dylan he had 25 consecutive top 40 singles over the next decade and has sold more than 80 million records worldwide.
Money and fame went to his head "for a while in a period he now describes as his "a***hole years". "He surrounded himself with cooks, servants and chauffeurs and basked in his own importance. "They keep yessing you to death and you believe you're the centre of the world," he says. "But when I looked up there were no friends around me."
He says he doesn't behave like that any more but he fiercely defends his privacy at the 64-acre estate in Palm Springs where his idea of a good time is to sit in front of the fireplace, play classical music and do the crossword.
"You can only come into my world if I invite you in," he says. "From the very beginning that was the rule. I learnt how to deal with the publicity and press thing. You just say, 'I'm not interested in "Talking about that.' Even the names of my dogs! They are my kids, my friends are my friends and my family, they are mine. That's the only way I can survive. I have to keep that to me. I don't want strangers knowing everything. If that happened that would drive me crazy."
It's hardly surprising that a man who keeps his dogs' names a secret - whenever he gets a new puppy he stops everything to train it for eight or nine weeks - won't say if he has a significant other or what gender they would be if he did.
In his early 20s he was briefly married to high-school girlfriend Susan Deixler and he is said to have had a long-term relationship with a woman called Linda Allen which ended in the 1980s. His best friend Lorna Luft, Judy Garland's daughter, also claimed in her memoirs that she and Barry had been lovers later volunteering that in his case it was all true about a large nose corresponding to a hefty endowment.
That doesn't stop speculation that he is gay and Barry isn't saying one way or the other.
But on the plastic surgery front he has always been adamant. He had a couple of cysts removed from his face in the late 1990s and he did Botox a few times but didn't like it. Otherwise the complexion and hairline are natural.
It would be churlish not to believe him.
Document EXCO000020140227ea2r00105
