{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3408"}
____
EXCLUSIVE: The staggering £500,000 haul of Britain's worst benefit cheats
By Giles Sheldrick   
643 words
16 May 2014
09:53
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THESE shameless mothers are today exposed as Britain’s worst benefits cheats – between them swindling half a million pounds from taxpayers.
Webber right and Olayeni have been exposed as the UK's worst benefits cheats[PA]
The biggest sponger is mother-of-eight Amanda Webber, 43, who pocketed £363,250 after claiming five of her children had disabilities – though they were auditioning before Simon Cowell on Britain’s Got Talent.
Also named and shamed by the Department for Work and Pensions is illegal immigrant Bola Taiwo Olayeni, 49, who stole a UK citizen’s identity to pocket £119,000.
The fraudsters were exposed yesterday as the man in charge of recouping the £3.3billion lost in the last year to benefit fraud and error urged the public to report cheats.
Webber, 43, was jailed for fiddling the system with bogus benefit and tax credit claims in a 12-year scam starting in 1998.
She lied that some of her children had problems with their speech and language and battled learning disabilities and behavioural issues.
However, their schools had no record of such disabilities.
Investigators later found they were auditioning for stardom and appearing in West End shows like Les Miserables, The Wizard of Oz and Billy Elliot.
At the height of Webber’s deception her family lived on an income of more than £10,000 a month – the equivalent of £120,000 a year.
Her deceit paid for her children’s private education and a dance studio at her seven-bedroom home.
Webber, of Haywards Heath, West Sussex, was told her huge income was something the “vast majority of hard-working, honest fellow citizens can only dream of”.
Jailing her for four years in May last year, Judge Anthony Niblett said: “You have chosen to have eight children and to live your life as you have but you are not entitled to do so.”
Olayeni, 49, from London, was jailed for four years in January after pleading guilty to fraudulently claiming income support, housing and council tax.
Despite repeated efforts to mend a broken system, official data exposes the continuing shambolic condition of the welfare state.
Figures released last night show £1.5billion was lost in overpayments due to claimant error in 2013/14.
During the same period benefit cheats conned £1.1billion out of hard-working families while overpayments due to official error totalled £700million.
Only £940million was recovered, meaning £2.4billion has been written off – almost the amount needed to pay for the 14 F-35 fighter jets the UK ordered earlier this year.
TaxPayers’ Alliance spokesman Andy Silvester said: “The amount of detected fraud and error in the system is falling and the Department for Work and Pensions is to be congratulated, but the figure is still far too high.
“The benefits system is supposed to support those who need it most, but abuse of the system damages taxpayers’ trust that it is working properly.
“Government needs to do more to reduce fraud in the system, but also to get people back on to the job ladder and off benefits entirely.”
New powers have seen fixed-penalty fines for welfare fraud increased from £2,000 to £5,000, and permitted the use of bailiffs to confiscate high-value possessions from convicted fraudsters.
Lord Freud, the Minister for Welfare Reform, called for the public to help catch cheats. He said: “Benefit fraud is completely unacceptable but we know there is more to do and that is why we are toughening the rules to crack down on fraudsters.
“We are striving to return fairness to the system and make sure money goes to those who need it – and the public can help us do this by informing the authorities of anyone they suspect of defrauding the system.”
Document EXCO000020140516ea5g00009
