{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1861"}
____
‘Come clean!’ MP demands Cameron’s cabinet disclose how many foreign workers they employ
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
737 words
6 March 2014
16:21
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
CABINET ministers were today urged to come clean over the use of migrant workers as domestic helpers, after a minister attacked the "metropolitan elite" for benefitting from cheap foreign labour.
Both David Cameron and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg employ foreign staff in their private domestic arrangements, it emerged today.
The disclosure prompted Labour MP John Mann to demand the whole Cabinet reveal their use of foreign workers, and how much they were paying them.
The row came after a speech by Tory immigration minister James Brokenshire who said the wealthy had been the main winners from Britain's openness to labour from abroad because they had to pay less for tradesmen and services.
The losers had been ordinary workers whose wages had stagnated, he added.
His comments came as a long-awaited Government report on immigration claimed British workers lost out on jobs to immigrants during the recent recession.
In a speech to the Demos think-tank, Mr Brokenshire said: "The immigration system we inherited was not designed to benefit this country or the people who live here.
"For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services, but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country.
"Those who tend to lose out most when there is uncontrolled immigration are manual and low skilled workers who have to compete with an influx of people from poorer countries who are willing to work for less."
The Prime Minister's official spokesman stonewalled questions on whether it was appropriate for Mr Cameron to use foreign nannies. He has employed women from Nepal and Australia since entering Downing Street, with the former recruited from Kalayaan, a charity that helps immigrants to escape abusive bosses.
"I will talk about the Government's policies," the spokesman said.
The Liberal Democrat leader was also pressed on his domestic arrangements. "I have a lady who has a Belgian passport who helps us," he said during his regular LBC radio phone-in.
Mr Clegg insisted he would not "get into" details of his home life.
But Labour MP John Mann demanded that the whole Cabinet come clean on their use of foreign workers.
"We need every Cabinet minister to declare what staff they have employed from abroad," he said.
"They should be seeking out British staff."
He added: "It is total hypocrisy. they need to make up their minds on this. That is why we should have everything out in the open."
Mr Brokenshire's predecessor as immigration minister, Mark Harper, quit last month after it emerged he had unknowingly employed an illegal immigrant as a cleaner.
Labour MP John Mann has demanded the Cabinet reveals if they employ foreign staff [PA]
The Government report, which was compiled by officials from the Home Office and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, said: "Overall, our assessment is that there is relatively little evidence that migration has caused statistically significant displacement of UK natives from the labour market in periods when the economy has been strong.
"However, in line with some recent studies, there is evidence for some labour market displacement in recent years when the economy was in recession."
It added that "where displacement effects are observed, these tend to be concentrated on low-skilled natives".
The evidence suggests that the labour market can adjust to increased net migration when the economy is strong, but during a recession and when net migration remains high as in recent years, there is a slower adjustment and "some short-term impacts are observed".
The analysis added: "To date there has been little evidence in the literature of a statistically significant impact from EU migration on native employment outcomes, although significant EU migration is still a relatively recent phenomenon and this does not imply that impacts do not occur in some circumstances.
"The evidence also suggests that where there has been a displacement effect from a particular cohort of migrants, this dissipates over time - that is any displacement impacts from one set of new arrivals gradually decline as the labour market adjusts."
Lib Dem Business Secretary Vince Cable is expected to use a speech tonight to hail free movement in the EU and attack immigration "scare stories".
Document EXCO000020140306ea360048x
