{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2185"}
____
MPs are preparing for another coalition
By Macer Hall   
769 words
8 March 2014
01:38
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
WESTMINSTER appears to have decided that hung parliaments and coalition governments are here to stay.
This week Labour frontbencher Chuka Umunna hinted that his party is preparing for a deal with the Lib Dems after the next election. A few days later Nick Clegg went further and unveiled the negotiating team – to be led by his chief sidekick Danny Alexander – already lined up to thrash out a second coalition agreement with either of the main parties after the votes are counted. And in private many Tory MPs are resigned to the prospect of not winning an overall majority in next year’s poll.
“The Ukip vote could cost us up to 70 seats. We’re not going to make it," one Tory gloom-monger told me.
Thirteen months away from the scheduled date for the next election, the political elite is already consumed with wrangling over how to share out the spoils. Clegg’s audacious move, particularly given the Lib Dems’ miserable opinion poll ratings, provoked surprise and irritation among senior Tories.
“The Lib Dems are utterly shameless. They seem to think they’re already entitled to be part of another coalition. They are taking the voters for granted," one source said.
Among pundits the popular theory is that the declining popularity of the traditional Westminster parties means the days of landslide victories for a single party are gone. In 1951 Labour and the Tories shared 96 per cent of the votes cast between them. At the last election in 2010 that figure had slumped to 65 per cent. And the astonishing rise of the UK Independence Party threatens to eat away further at the fast-declining core votes of old mainstream parties.
Senior Tories suspect that while the popularity of the Lib Dems plunges, Mr Clegg is dreaming of keeping a top job in government in perpetuity. They point to the career of Hans-Dietrich Genscher, a German politician who managed to remain his country’s foreign secretary from 1969 to 1992 simply because his tiny, centrist Free Democrat Party held the balance of power in a series of elections and could always cut a deal with one of the larger parties.
For many voters the thought of Mr Clegg remaining Deputy Prime Minister for more than two decades is beyond a nightmare. But perhaps it does not need to be like that – received wisdom among the Westminster elite about what is inevitable for the country can be confounded once the voters are given a say.
While the coalition government is Britain’s first since the Second World War the electoral system has thrown up hung parliaments and minority administrations. The result was that voters were sickened by the wrangling and squabbling and were soon yearning for the smack of firm government. Economic crisis in the 1970s brought a series of inconclusive election results, minority rule and at one stage an ill-fated Lib-Lab pact.
Voters turned to Margaret Thatcher partly out of disgust with the feeble politics of compromise that had gone before, as well as out of frustration with economic failure. In the early 1990s John Major was forced into seeking a deal with the Ulster Unionists when his narrow Tory majority dribbled away. The chaos and backroom deals of that period contributed to the disillusionment with the Conservatives that brought landslide victories for Tony Blair.
Opinion polls suggest that voters today, having accepted that coalition did bring some political stability after the financial crash, are losing patience with the paralysis and petty squabbling into which the current two-party administration has fallen. This week’s public spat over immigration policy was typical of the posturing that frustrates voters. Lib Dem business secretary Vince Cable goaded the Tories by talking up the benefit of mass migration and railing against “scare stories".
Tory Immigration Minister James Brokenshire hit back by denouncing his analysis as “incorrect" and blaming a “wealthy metropolitan elite" for driving the influx of migrants. Outside Westminster what the voters see is net immigration figures soaring while coalition ministers bicker.
At the next election they will deliver their verdict on coalition and as in the past appear to be itching for strong, one-party government once again. David Cameron has just over a year to convince the electorate that the Tories can provide that sort of leadership.
“We need to lose the pessimism and toughen up," one senior Tory source said.
The pressure is on the Prime Minister and his team to confound the Westminster village pundits and save Britain from another Rose Garden deal.
Document EXCO000020140308ea38001b9
