{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1430"}
____
Royal tour is Diana's vital legacy
By Vanessa Feltz   
1,334 words
4 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
AT THE tender age of eight months, Prince George will join his mummy and daddy on an official three week tour Down Under.
The heir to the heir to the heir to the throne will graciously hobnob with other babies at a parents and toddlers group in Wellington and the entire trip has been planned on a “hub and spoke" basis so William and Kate can travel to public engagements by day and back to spend time with their adored son in the evening.
The whole things sounds like an awfully big adventure on which the trio will win the hearts of even the most obdurately anti-royalist Antipodeans.
In the ensuing excitement and the furore over Catherine’s outfits and George’s favourite toy marsupial, let’s not forget the person who made the entire expedition possible. She is, of course, the late Princess Diana, George’s paternal grandma, whose presence and influence still shine brightly over the next generation of her family.
It would be all too easy to forget that, prior to Diana, royal babies were never brought on international tours. The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh departed on one expedition which took them away from a toddling Prince Charles for the best part of six months, a period of time so long he clasped his nanny in fear of two adults he didn’t recognise when his parents finally returned.
It took the maternal instinct and quiet courage of Princess Diana to fly in the face of royal convention and the diktats of the establishment and insist that she would not dream of leaving the country without her baby son. Thirty-one years after she led the way, taking a nine-month-old Prince William on tour to Australia, Diana’s son, daughter-in-law and baby grandson are benefiting from the trail that she blazed.
It is all too easy to remember Diana as a neurotic, needy, demanding manipulator of the press. To do so is to do her legacy a grave injustice. She was the first member of the Royal Family to dare to put her baby before protocol. Her love for her son gave her the guts to take a stand. Mothers all over the world should continue to celebrate her devotion.
........................................................................
Forget the Strictly curse
As a Strictly veteran I can state loudly and clearly that there’s no such thing as the “curse of Strictly".
Any relationship worth its salt should be able to withstand four months in which one partner is utterly absorbed in a project that – for once in a lifetime only – consumes them body and soul. Strictly is all encompassing.
It does involve getting seriously up close and personal with a ridiculously attractive, lithe and limber individual of the opposite sex for every waking hour, six days a week. Yet, in the scheme of things, it’s little more than a blip. Contestants do – albeit dripping with sweat and dropping with exhaustion – go home every night.
Normal life is temporarily in abeyance, but real love is surely not so easily dissolved. If marriages can withstand war, lengthy hospital stays, months of service on an oil rig or submarine, even a sojourn at Her Majesty’s pleasure, they jolly well ought to be able to survive a few months rehearsing for a Saturday night television programme.
My fellow terpsichorean Rachel Riley’s marriage hit the rocks and now ex BBC Breakfast’s Susanna Reid’s 16-year union – she’s now signed with ITV – appears to have imploded.
By all means send waves of sympathy to all parties concerned. Certainly wonder if the pressure and pleasure of Strictly helped to bring friction and problems to a head. By no means, however, blame a frothy sequinned TV confection with a core of true grit which brings joy to 12 million people every week.
PS: BBC One Controller Charlotte Moore is said to be “in talks" with Sir Brucie about his role in the next series. Let’s hope her team of advisors have made it abundantly clear that Brucie should call the shots. As long as he wants the gig it should be his. Anything else would be downright churlish.
........................................................................
Irrepressible Nancy's just a fabulous phenomenon
UNDERESTIMATE Nancy Dell’Olio – currently said to be walking out with the Duchess of Cornwall’s brother and therefore hovering on the perimeters of the Royal Family – at your peril. I’ve had many encounters with the femme fatale over the years and like many who came to scoff but stayed to admire, I’ve been forced to gawp in awe.
Nancy may not have managed to hang on to Sven. She may be billed as a lawyer but only practised briefly. She may mangle the English language so violently it’s impossible even to have a stab at what she thinks she’s attempting to say.
Her sartorial philosophy may be “more is more" – the most suitable outfit for every occasion involves a swathe of fur, killer stilettoes, tarantula false eyelashes and an entire bottle of musky perfume – but Nancy is irrepressible.
Encountering her on Channel 5’s The Big Immigration Row, I was floored by her panache, self-deprecating sense of humour and irrepressible glamour. She’s a phenomenon. She’s never leaving and it’s Italy’s loss.
........................................................................
Lorraine isn't the only one who wings it
SURELY no one could be more confident of her talent and competence than Lorraine Kelly? She has presided over early morning TV with unflappable professionalism for the past 20 years. She practically gave birth to “wee Rosie" live on air and she deals with politicians, A-list stars and recalcitrant children with equal aplomb.
It’s refreshing to hear, however, that even our Lorraine suffers from Impostor Syndrome: the fear that, at any time, she could be rumbled, tapped on the shoulder and told she’s fooling none of the people none of the time and she had better take a hike. We may resemble adults on the outside but most of us are convinced we’re “winging it".
I’ve felt equally fraudulent interviewing the Prime Minister, at my child’s parents’ evening and in sole charge of a Talbot Alpine. How long, I wondered, can it be before some grown-up sees through me, realises I have no idea what I’m doing, sweeps in and takes away the job, the child and the car? It’s somehow supremely comforting to know lovely Lorraine is going through identical internal angst.
........................................................................
It looks like time to let go of the reigns
CLICHÉS such as “back in the saddle" are all very well until you are literally back in the saddle. I’m still not sure what inspired me to take my sister, the niece and the nephew on a horse ride through leafy Ascot. Nor am I certain why, when the instructor said: “Are you ready to canter?" I answered “Yes!" with such alacrity.
We may have grown up scrambling on and off ponies in the Black Mountains and picking up bits of dressage in the more formal stables of North London but we hardly make a habit of it these days.
Gracious goodness! Oscar the horse took off with gusto, leaving me bobbing about and wondering if at 52 it’s time to turn in my jodhpurs. Perhaps riding a horse is a tad different from riding a bike. At least Raleigh Choppers don’t lurch to a halt to have a nibble of juicy foliage allowing you ample chance to slide heavily to the ground over the handlebars.
........................................................................
Posh pubs do not cut the mustard
Pub lunches are swankier and costlier than ever before. Landlords are pushing up margins by serving posh fodder and we’re paying just shy of a tenner for the sustenance. Whatever happened to good old boil in a bag cod in parsley sauce and toothsome chicken in a basket?
Document EXCO000020140304ea34000pu
