{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"437"}
____
BBC was not sceptical enough over immigration, admits Today presenter John Humphrys
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
312 words
11 March 2014
14:12
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE BBC was not sceptical enough about immigration and the 'European ideal', according to one of its most senior journalists - John Humphrys.
The Today programme co-host admitted the corporation had been far too ready to accept pro-European arguments, although he argued it had now changed.
Mr Humphrys also conceded that people who work for the organisation tend to come from backgrounds which promote "broadly liberal views".
Tory MPs have previously accused BBC presenters of having left-wing political views.
The Mastermind host said: "We weren't sufficiently sceptical - that's the most accurate phrase - of the pro-European case. We bought into the European ideal," he said.
"We weren't sufficiently sceptical about the pro-immigration argument. We didn't look at the potential negatives with sufficient rigour.
"I think we're out of that now. I think we have changed."
BBC political editor Nick Robinson [GETTY]
Mr Humphrys said that he had voted for "most political parties," but admitted to Radio Times magazine: "The BBC has tended over the years to be broadly liberal as opposed to broadly conservative for all sorts of perfectly understandable reasons.
"The sort of people we've recruited - the best and the brightest - tended to come from universities and backgrounds where they're more likely to hold broadly liberal views than conservative."
His comments about immigration echo those made by the BBC's political editor Nick Robinson in January, in which he criticised the corporation for making a "terrible mistake" over its handling of the issue.
He said: "They feared having a conversation about immigration, they feared the consequence."
Last July a report commissioned by the BBC Trust found the corporation had been "slow" to catch up with public opinion on immigration and leaving the European Union.
Document EXCO000020140311ea3b003ph
