{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"249"}
____
David Cameron rules out EU migrant cap despite fears over Bulgarian and Romanian influx
By Macer Hall   
368 words
12 May 2014
11:38
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
CAPPING migration from EU countries was ruled out by David Cameron yesterday despite concerns that thousands of Bulgarians and Romanians are coming to Britain every month.
Official figures to be released later this week are expected to show that at least 30,000 from the two eastern European nations have arrived since work permit restrictions were removed on January 1.
The surge will take the total living in the UK from both countries to around 200,000, once non-working family members are taken into account. But the PM said the Government will concentrate on curbing migrants’ access to benefits rather than seeking to curb the freedom of EU citizens to come to Britain.
He told the BBC One Andrew Marr Show: “I think free movement within the European Union is important but it needs to be returned to the original concept, which was the freedom to be able to go and work in another country.
“Many British citizens go and work in other European countries. Other European citizens come to work here. Freedom to apply for a job to go and work in another country, that is one thing but I think what we’ve seen recently is something else.”
Mr Cameron called for immigration controls to be maintained when other countries with much lower income levels join the EU in the future.
He said: “You could have transitional controls that say, for instance, you don’t have the freedom to move and get a job in another country until, say, your level of income per capita is at a certain level. Now that would be a way of avoiding some of the difficulties we’ve had in the past.”
He also promised a future Conservative government would seek to increase the time migrants must spend working in Britain before they are eligible for benefits.
But Mr Cameron’s remarks are unlikely to satisfy Tory MPs calling for more action to curb immigration. Tory MP Nigel Evans said: “We have got to learn the lessons of the past. As an island nation, we cannot have an open-door immigration policy.”
Document EXCO000020140512ea5c001ry
