{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1121"}
____
Desperate Afghan migrant caught trying to cross English channel in home-made raft
By Peter Allen   
608 words
6 May 2014
18:37
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THIS is the moment a desperate would-be migrant was caught trying to cross the English Channel in a raft made of a table leg, wooden planks and a sheet.
The 23-year-old Afghan was soaked in sea water and suffering from hypothermia when he was picked up by French coastguards on Monday.
He told them that his "dream" was to "travel to England to start a new life" and would stop at nothing to get there.
It comes as many of the hundreds massing in Calais to get to Britain increasingly put their lives in danger by plunging into the sea.
Bernard Barron, head of the local coastal rescue operation, said the young man was "drifting towards Cap Blanc Nez, off Sangatte" when he was spotted at 2pm.
This suggested that high winds were blowing him along the French coast, rather than towards the UK.
Mr Barron said the man had built his raft using wooden planks, a float wrapped in tarpaulin, and a table leg supporting a makeshift mast and white sheet. 
"He was upset at being caught to begin with, but was then very happy to be safe," said Mr Barron.
"Because of the very strong winds and currents, it would have been impossible for him to get to Britain, even in a rowing boat.
"If the wind had risen, or the raft had collided with a ferry, then the raft would have capsized and the man would have died."
The man, who did not have any documents on him and cannot be identified, was dressed in a blue tracksuit and woolly hat, and carried all his possessions in a small rucksack on his back.
A refugee camp in Sangatte was closed in 2002 [AP]
Mr Barron said the solo effort was undoubtedly nothing to do with the gangs of people smugglers currently operating in Calais.
He said: "They do not encourage migrants to travel alone, and certainly not in the sea." 
He added that the man was "handed over to the border police" after medical treatment.
Last month four would-be immigrants to Britain were taken to hospital suffering from severe hypothermia after being caught in the sea off Calais.
In a further sign of the desperate methods being used by those hoping to enter the UK, all were trying to get aboard England-bound ferries moored in the harbour.
It follows four other would-be migrants dying in a single week in Calais as they risked life and limb for the chance to claim residency in the UK.
Clutching waterproof bundles full of food and other essentials, the men swam out from Fort Risban, part of the city's ancient fortifications.
"The idea was to swim out to the ferries so as to avoid customs and other checks," said a local police spokesman.
"Fisherman spotted them, and alerted the authorities. Port patrol cars were on the quay alongside them within a few minutes."
Three of the men were plucked out of the water relatively easily, but one went missing and got into difficulty into deep water.
The body of an Eritrean who also tried to swim across the harbour drowned in exactly the same spot last October.
Hundreds of migrants from outside the EU are living in a camp yards from the perimeter fence of Calais port.
Charities say there are more than 650 in the town, the greatest number since the closure of the Red Cross camp at Sangatte in 2002 - and they are taking advantage of gaps in security and a minimal police presence.
Document EXCO000020140506ea56003bh
