{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3055"}
____
Ukip spark new row over Irish actor used in a billboard advert
By Macer Hall   
325 words
26 April 2014
01:38
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE UK Independence Party last night dismissed criticism of a billboard campaign featuring an Irish actor posing as a British worker left jobless by mass immigration.
The poster carries a photograph of a builder wearing a hard hat and begging on a street alongside the caption: “EU policy at work. British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour.”
This sparked an attack from the Tories after it was revealed that the man is Dave O’Rourke, an actor from Dublin.
Tory MP Bob Neill said: “I think it is pretty hypocritical of Ukip.
"They always like to say ‘we are not part of the political establishment’, they like to claim they are the party of ordinary people.
“They are using a trick most other parties stopped using long ago, because they get found out doing it.
“As far as I am aware, we always use genuine people in our adverts.”
But Ukip director of communications Patrick O’Flynn insisted the use of actors was “totally standard practice”.
He said: “The vast majority of people used in political poster campaigns are actors.
“It is nonsense for the Conservative Party to try to depict this as anything out of the ordinary.
“For example, the people depicted in the Tory ‘You paid the taxes...’ campaign under William Hague were actors.
“So Bob Neill needs to go and berate the Foreign Secretary if he really thinks there is anything wrong with this.”
The row is the latest controversy to hit Ukip’s campaign for the May 22 European elections.
Party member Andre Lampitt, who featured in an election broadcast, was found to have posted offensive messages about foreigners on the internet.
He was suspended from the party and his views described as “repellent” by leader Nigel Farage.
Another Ukip member, David Challice, came under fire yesterday for past remarks about Muslims and women.
Document EXCO000020140426ea4q0002z
