{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2318"}
____
Extreme parties will dominate 'joke' European elections across the continent, warns expert
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
1,600 words
20 May 2014
15:23
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
MAVERICK and extreme parties are set to win one in three of all European Parliament seats on Thursday, leading one expert to brand the election a "joke".
Extreme and right-wing parties are set to do well across Europe[Corbis/FameFlynet/EPA/WENN]
Nigel Farage's Ukip party are likely to be at the forefront of a wave of eurosceptic parties gaining seats in Brussels, with anti-European parties in France, Greece, Hungary, Denmark and the Netherlands also predicted to make gains.
European elections analyst Professor Sara Hobolt believes such parties could grow from having less than 20 per cent of European Parliament seats to at least 30 per cent.
A report published today on the rise of 'outsider' parties reveals that of the 25 'outsider' parties making gains across Europe, 16 are eurosceptic, 11 are anti-immigration and nine have been involved in Neo-Nazi controversies.
Professor Kevin Featherstone, an expert in European Politics at the London School of Economics, said the rise of these parties provided a "skewed" vision of politics across Europe.
He said: "These elections may prove to be a joke across Europe.
"The people most likely to vote will be those who feel very passionately about Europe or about migrants, etc.
"Overall, such people are a minority. 
"So, we could have very skewed results that exaggerate the support for the maverick, extreme or protest parties.
"I can’t see how the results can be accepted as a reliable guide to national opinion as a whole in any the 28 countries.
"They’ve become more like the Eurovision song contest than a platform for a serious debate about the EU."
Ukip leader Nigel Farage is hoping to cause an 'earthquake' in British politics [PA]
The largest party in the European Parliament is Germany's Christian Democratic Union, which has 34 MEPs and sits in the ruling European People's Party group in Brussels.
Euroscepticism in the parliament is led by the Europe of Freedom and Democracy - chaired by Ukip leader Mr Farage - and to a lesser extent the European Conservatives and Reformists, which includes the UK's Conservative MEPs.
The rise of anti-European parties across the continent has been fuelled by both an increase of migration across the EU and the eurozone financial crisis.
Austerity measures imposed by the troika of the European Union, International Monetary Fund and European Central Bank has seen a rise in both the far-left and far-right in Greece.
Both parties are benefitting from Greek frustration over the strict austerity measures which were conditions of a bailout of the Greece economy in 2010.
Anti-immigration parties are thriving in more affluent central and western European countries, such as the UK, France and the Netherlands.
Douglas Murray, associate director of the Henry Jackson Society which today published a report on the rise of outsider parties across Europe, said: "This week we will witness an unparalleled surge of parties representing what were, until recently, the fringes of European politics.
"These parties are anti-establishment, anti-EU, anti-austerity and in some cases associated with the most extreme forms of politics.
"Whatever else happens, this week’s elections look set to alter the balance of power in Europe”
But Professor Hobolt, from the European Institute at the London School of Economics, believes votes for extreme parties - on both the right and left - are as much a reaction to individual national governments as a verdict on the EU itself.
She said: "Some of it is euroscepticism, that's clear, and people also have concerns over the immigration issue.
 
"But also it's people being fed up with the established parties.
"Britain is clearly the most eurosceptic country.
"Ireland and Spain don't have the kinds of parties like Ukip in the same way."
Turnout in European elections are typically low, with just 34.7 per cent of the UK electorate voting in the last European elections in 2009.
Across the EU, turnout has fallen from 61.99 per cent in 1979 to 43 per cent five years ago.
Professor Hobolt said: "People don't really care. It doesn't look like turnout will go up dramatically.
"If it hadn't been for Ukip in this country the elections would not have been getting as much coverage.
"The mainstream parties have hardly been doing any sort of campaigning."
She added: "Eurosceptics have around 20 per cent in the European parliament at the moment, and that is due to go up to 30 per cent.
"They wouldn't have a majority but 30 per cent is still a significant share."
Marine Le Pen, leader of the National Front in France [FLYNET]
EUROSCEPTICISM ACROSS THE EU
FRANCE
If Nigel Farage is the face of the anti-European right in the UK, Marine Le Pen is the poster girl for the cause in France.
The 45-year-old daughter of the founder of National Front party, Ms Le Pen became its leader in 2011.
The FN is the third largest political party in France, and like Ukip, wants to see immigration reduced and withdrawal from the European Union.
FN's economic policy differs greatly from Ukip, as it opposed to free trade and favours protectionism.
The FN is slightly ahead of the party founded by Jacques Chirac - The Union for a Popular Movement - in the polls for Thursday's election.
An alliance of the left-wing Socialist and Radical parties are predicted to come third.
GERMANY
The largest economy in the eurozone, Germany has been at the forefront of bailing out the single currency and enforcing unpopular austerity measures on Southern European countries.
The alliance between the Christian Democratic Union of Germany and the Christian Social Union of Bavaria - led by Angela Merkel - is set to top the European vote this week.
The left leaning Social Democratic Party is set to come second, with smaller Green and let parties also expected to win seats. However, even in this most-pro of EU countries, there is a backlash beginning to form.
The Alternative for Germany party could win up to seven sears in the European Parliament. One of its main policies is to allow countries to abandon the euro.
Nikolaos Michaloliakos was arrested in 2013 [GETTY]
GREECE
When you think of the collapse of the eurozone, you think of the impact on the Greece economy.
Unemployment is still growing in the country four years after the first EU and IMF bailout loans and austerity packages were agreed.
However, the anti-EU sentiment in Greece is represented not by the extreme right, but the extreme left, in the form of the umbrella group called Syriza.
The coalition, which is made up of 13 groups and individuals, is the main opposition party in the Greek parliament and recent polls shows it is on course to either win the European elections or come a close second to the ruling New Democracy party.
Syrizia is opposed to the austerity policies imposed by the troika - the EU, the IMF and the European Central Bank - but does not want the Greece to leave the organisation.
The party which does want Greece out of the EU and the euro is the Golden Dawn party.
It is on course to gain between eight and ten per cent of the vote in Thursday's election.
The party is dogged by controversy, and its leader Nikolaos Michaloliakos along with 17 of its MPs, are being charged with leading and operating a criminal organisation.
Six are imprisoned and awaiting trials for their alleged roles in murder, extortion, and arson.
ITALY
Italian politics is notoriously hard to predict, and in a seemingly constant state of flux.
The ruling Democratic Party is now led by 39-year-old Matteo Renzi, who became Italy's prime minister in February this year after the ousting of Enrico Letta
The centre-left party is set to win the European elections, ahead of the Five Star movement led by comedian Beppe Grillo.
The eurosceptic party wants a referendum on Italy's membership of the euro, and it is expected to get about 25 per cent of the vote.
Silvio Berlusconi's eurosceptic Forza Italia party is set to come third in the election.
Hungarian far-right politician Gabor Vona, leader of the Jobbik party [GETTY]
HUNGARY
Hungary is home to proportionally the largest far-right party in Europe, Jobbik.
Led by 35-year-old Gabor Vona, it came third in Hungary's general election in April with 20.5 per cent of the vote, an increase by almost four per cent from 2010.
Jobbik is set to come second in Thursday's election, ahead of the Socialists but behind the ruling Fidesz party.
The anti-European party has been accused of anti-Semitism and anti-Roma gypsy rhetoric, and even France's Marine Le Pen has refused to join a union with Jobbik in the European Parliament.
Jobbik does have the support of British National Party leader Nick Griffin, who sits alongside its MEPs as part of the Alliance of European National Movements.
THE NETHERLANDS
The eurosceptic Freedom Party, led by Geert Wilders, is the favourite to win the European elections in the Netherlands this week.
The party wants to see the Dutch leave both the euro and the EU, and is closely aligned to France's National Front.
The Centre-right People's Party for Freedom and Democracy is due to come second, just ahead of the Democrats 66 - a socially liberal party which favours European federalism.
Document EXCO000020140520ea5k001ry
