{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"853"}
____
EXCLUSIVE: Thousands of foreign RAPISTS dodging deportation to roam British streets
By Anil Dawar   
572 words
6 May 2014
02:41
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THOUSANDS of foreign criminals, including rapists, killers and paedophiles, are roaming Britain after dodging deportation, official figures have revealed.
Almost 4,000 convicted migrants who should have been put on a plane home are still walking the streets.
Most were able to stop their removal by claiming a “right to a family life” under the Human Rights Act.
Their numbers soared by a fifth in the past year, despite promises by ministers.
Tory Philip Davies said: “These figures are shocking. They highlight what a fiasco human rights laws are.
“It seems they protect the rights of rapists and murderers, rather than hard-working British people.”
Fellow Tory backbencher Jacob Rees-Mogg added: “Foreign criminals who commit major crimes should be deported unless there are exceptional circumstances.”
British law says foreigners jailed for 12 months or more can be deported when their sentences are up.
But many launch human rights challenges.
Home Office figures obtained under the Freedom of Information Act show that 3,937 foreign criminals are at large in Britain after successfully appealing against deportation. Most committed relatively minor crimes.But a handful are terror suspects or gangsters.
And 98 have convictions for crimes such as child sex abuse, murder and rape.Among these, eight are murderers and 48 are rapists, including eight who raped children.
Ten committed other paedophile crimes.
Among them is Jamaican Jason Francis, 26, jailed for more than four years over the gang-rape of a 14-year-old girl in a playground.
He beat deportation by hiding behind a clause in the European Convention on Human Rights, which protects his right to a family life because he has fathered children in the UK.
Alphonse Semo, 54, was jailed for eight years for a horrific rape and should have been returned to the Congo after completing his sentence in 2011.
But he was granted permission to marry his German girlfriend and stay.
Sani Adil Ali, 28, was convicted of raping a 12-year-old months after being given refugee status in Middlesbrough.
He was allowed to stay in the UK because his tribe is threatened in Sudan.
One of the most outrageous cases involves Congolese asylum seeker William Danga, 41. He avoided deportation after jail for raping a 16-year-old because he had fathered children here. But he abused two girls under the age of seven while on bail.
He was finally jailed in 2011, for 15 years.
The figures also include 13 foreigners convicted of manslaughter, 11 of causing death by dangerous driving and 19 of indecent assault.
Separate Home Office statistics show more than 30 foreign convicts walk out of jail and into the community every week.
Some 1,328 have been fighting deportation for at least six years.
From July to September 2013, 395 foreign ex-prisoners were set free.
Home Secretary Theresa May told courts two years ago that overseas convicts should be deported regardless of family circumstances.
But defiant immigration judges say her guideline does not carry the same weight as the Human Rights Act.
She is now changing the law so that the right to a family life no longer ­bars deportation.
A Home Office spokesmansaid: “We ensure foreign nationals who commit serious crimes are deported at the earliest opportunity.
Since 2006, the Home Office has removed or deported more than 32,000 foreign national offenders.”
Document EXCO000020140506ea56000e0
