{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3234"}
____
Government reveals new crackdown on migrant child benefits
By Alison Little   
482 words
9 April 2014
10:38
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
IMMIGRANTS must live in the UK for at least three months to get child ­benefit and child tax credit from July, the ­Government announced last night.
Sources said it was the “next logical step” after changing the rules in ­ January to impose a three-month residence test for people to receive Jobseeker’s ­Allowance .
In a further crackdown, taking effect from today, translation services will no longer be routinely available for new JSA claimants and they could lose benefits if they fail to co-operate with programmes to improve their English.
Both measures aim to answer fears that Britain’s generous welfare system acts as a magnet for poor EU migrants.
Ministers say they would like to go further but that some tougher measures will need Europe-wide reform as they would not be legal under EU membership rules.
The European Commission is already intent on taking the UK to court over the residence test for foreign benefit claimants which Brussels says is discriminatory and illegal.
Earlier this week, Conservative Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith argued that Britain should be able to defy the EU. He would like to ban some migrants from claiming ­benefits for as long as six months or even more than a year.
But official legal advice is that three months is the EU maximum.
Treasury Minister Nicky Morgan said that the reforms send a 'strong message' [PA]
Unveiling the latest curbs, Treasury Minister Nicky Morgan said: “The ­Government is building a system that is fair and consistent, one that supports those who want to work hard.
“These changes send a strong ­message that our welfare system is not open to abuse and will deter those who think that they can move to the UK primarily to claim benefits. Making work pay is part of our long-term plan to ensure that Britain’s growing economy and dynamic jobs market deliver for those who work hard and play by the rules.”
The new child benefit and child tax credit rule applies to all immigrants but is aimed primarily at Europeans since others will be covered by visas which may already impose claim limits.
The measure will still not satisfy many British ­parents who have lost some or all their child benefit because one partner earns more than £50,000 a year.
The Government admits it would need EU-wide agreement to stop migrants claiming child benefit for families left behind in their home countries.
On translation, in a move signalled last year, new JSA claimants from today no longer have routine access to ­interpretation services for more than 140 languages that cost taxpayers some £3million a year.
From later this month new ­claimants in England will also have their spoken English tested.
Benefit fraud inquiries and interviews under caution will still use interpreters and translation.
Document EXCO000020140409ea49000xe
