{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1691"}
____
'We'll tackle scandalous zero hour contracts', says Farage in pitch for working class vote
By Nigel Farage MEP   
857 words
18 April 2014
12:00
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
I HAVE spoken a lot recently about the cabal of big business and big politics that has become too dominant in the way our country is run.
You will find no keener champion of free enterprise and competition than me. But where a few big players dominate things, competition can fail and people can end up getting exploited.
So today I want to blow the whistle on an issue that concerns multinational companies exploiting employees. I am talking about the recent trend towards zero-hours contracts for working class jobs.
With so much cheap labour flooding in from abroad, giant corporations are in an increasingly powerful position to dictate terms and conditions for workers.
Now zero hours contracts – where no fixed hours are stipulated in advance but employers and employees come to agreement about hours of work available each week or day as they go along – suit some people.
Students looking to work a couple of evenings a week, for example. Or parents who are mainly at home but have the odd morning available. It can suit such people to be on call and to be asked the night before whether they can make the next day or the day after that.
But while having a zero hours contract as an option is one thing, having it as the only available form of work is quite another.
And keeping people on zero hours contracts for year after year when they aspire to stable employment so that they can provide for their families is something else again.
I do not believe in banning zero hours contracts. But I do believe there is a very strong case for expecting large employers to sign up to a tough code of conduct as to how they are applied.
For instance, if an employee proves reliable enough to be working for a big company for a year or more then there should be an expectation that the company will offer him or her a permanent position.
At its worst this rapidly proliferating practice reminds me of the way dockers used to have to gather at the dock gates in the 1920s and a foreman would come out and point to those he could use and tell the rest to go home with no money in their pockets. To expect people to pay their bills and raise a family under employment conditions like this is just not on.
For small companies I can understand why flexibility can sometimes be the difference between life and death.
I am quite unusual for a politician in that I have actual run a business and employed people. But the truth is that most small companies rise or fall on their team-spirit and so the idea of keeping people dangling on zero hours for years at a time is not one that would appeal to many.
Nigel Farage believes David Cameron has forgotten about zero hour contracts [PA]
So we are left with the big battalions. Multinationals that are often foreign-owned and very careful not to pay any more tax than they are legally obliged to. I do not blame them for that – it is the responsibility of the authorities to set the tax regime after all.
But I do say that they should show more responsibility towards those on the shop floor. Often those kept on zero-hours contracts are women with major family responsibilities.
Official ONS figures show rocketing numbers of people employed under zero hours contracts. In 2012 it was estimated that they covered 250,000 workers but last year that estimate more than doubled to 582,000.
I have even heard of cases where household name international companies have resorted to expecting workers on zero hours contracts to turn up in the morning and then go home without pay if they are deemed surplus to requirements.
That offends my British sense of fair play.
The biggest and most profitable companies can and should do better than that.
It surprises me that none of the other political parties appears to want to talk about these excesses.
Perhaps it is because these multinationals are the ones willing to back their aim of keeping us in the EU by spouting alarmist drivel about what would happen if we left.
I have no truck with militant trade unionism – never have and never will.
Where over-mighty unions provoke frequent strikes and disrupt production then everyone loses. We must never go back to the bad old days of the 1970s.
But equally where over-mighty corporations refuse to accept any social obligation towards loyal employees I am moved to cry foul as well.
Unlimited immigration from Eastern Europe and elsewhere has left many British working people pretty much defenceless against constant downgrades in their pay and employment conditions.
My message to them is that while the other parties may have forgotten about you, Ukip is aware of your plight and will speak up for you – however unpopular it makes us with the political class and its corporate allies.
Document EXCO000020140418ea4i001md
