{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2789"}
____
Boost for Cameron's EU renegotiations as Angela Merkel says reforms are 'doable'
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
630 words
27 February 2014
17:24
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
GERMAN Chancellor Angela Merkel gave hopes of renegotiating freedom of movement laws in the EU a boost today, saying "where there's a will there's a way" after meeting with Prime Minister David Cameron.
Speaking during a press conference in Downing Street, the German leader spoke of her own frustrations at 'benefit tourism' in the EU, echoing the concerns of the British Prime Minister.
Just hours before, Mrs Merkel told members of the Commons and Lords that workers rights to freedom of movement across the EU must be upheld, as "all member states, all citizens benefit from this".
But this afternoon, Mrs Merkel said: "If we were to see freedom of movement has as a consequence that each and every one who is seeking a job in Europe has the possibility to come to Germany and will receive an equal amount of benefit as someone who for a long time has been employed in Germany... then that would not be the interpretation of freedom of movement that I would have.
"Is immigration into social security possible? No country in Europe will be able to withstand such an onslaught, because we have very different social security systems.
"We can only have the same level of social security if we try to generate growth and jobs, but not by having immigration into social systems.
"That is just as much of a headache for us in Germany as it is for the British people. We have to look at it. Can we change our German laws or do we need more of a specification as to what we mean by freedom of movement?
"If we say we want freedom of movement for jobs but no immigration into social security systems in Europe, then I think we need to come to a definition."
Mrs Merkel said the European Council had previously shown itself able to overcome apparently "insurmountable" differences to achieve reform.
"I firmly believe that what we are discussing here is feasible, is doable," she said. "I think it's most important first to define political goals."
Angela Merkel met with the Queen this afternoon [PA]
After addressing members of Parliament, Mrs Merkel headed to Downing Street for talks with Mr Cameron, and this afternoon will have tea with the Queen in Buckingham Palace.
High on the agenda today has been reform of the EU, which Mr Cameron is hoping to achieve prior to an in/out referendum on the UK's membership in 2017.
Mr Cameron said he and Mrs Merkel had discussed "ideas like how to cut the excessive interference and meddling by European institutions in our national life" and "how to guarantee the interests of those who are in the single market but not the euro".
Mr Cameron said: "We both agree that Europe faces an existential economic challenge and it needs to change if it is to succeed in the modern world.
"The overriding task of the European Union today is to help secure the prosperity and the well-being of its citizens. That requires a more open outward-looking, flexible and competitive European Union. We want to work together with our fellow leaders to deliver that change."
And he added: "There are further changes needed for the eurozone - those are changes Britain supports. And there are changes that we need for Britain, to protect our interests in the single market and to secure the support of the British people for our continued membership."
Mrs Merkel said: "There is a lot of common ground here. You may imagine that we did not get into technicalities here. We talked about overriding goals of growth - we need growth, we need more jobs."
Document EXCO000020140227ea2r003xr
