{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"722"}
____
Police arrest Romanian gypsies at Marble Arch
830 words
4 April 2014
18:07
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A GANG of Romanians who have been terrorising residents, tourists and shopkeepers near Marble Arch were arrested this morning in 2am swoop by police.
The group of over 20 rough sleepers have been congregating outside a plush Park Lane apartment block, leaving some residents complaining that they are too scared to use their own front door.
Locals claim many in the gang are armed with walking sticks or crutches with knives on the bottom to slash open rubbish bags to check for anything of value, before leaving the contents strewn all over the floor for the council to clean up.
In the early hours of this morning, police, council officials and Home Office immigration staff raided the area, resulting in 14 of the gang agreeing to return home.
A further nine people spoken to during the raid will be issued with immigration papers demanding they leave within a month.
Chauffeur Patrick O'Toole, 54, said he has seen police move on the group about 12 times within the last two years.
He said: "We have to phone the council all the time about them. 
"As soon as people put their rubbish bags out they are tearing all the bags open, chucking rubbish everywhere.
"In the evening residents are too frightened to use the front door if they see them outside." 
He says that men in the group have repeatedly tried the gold ring scam on him, in which you are approached by someone saying that you have dropped a gold ring on the floor.
They then produce a cheap brass ring with hallmarks on and say as they have helped you, you should give them money.
"It's just gone berserk over the last two years."
Mr O'Toole added: "It's happened to me four times in one week. It just really annoys me. 
The area is popular with Eastern European migrants, pictured in 2013 [Romanian]
"I see them doing it to American tourists and I get out the car to warn them then they turn round looking like they are going to stab me. It's just not on." 
Police say they are working to build a case against some members of the gang so they can be issued with ASBOs.
Businesses in Park Lane, one of the richest areas of Mayfair, and Marble Arch have complained that groups of rough sleepers constantly harass customers and staff and cause sanitation problems.
Makeshift camps have been set up next to Marble Arch itself and the area is used as an outside toilet.
A Met Police spokesperson said: "Neighbourhood policing teams in Westminster, in partnership with Westminster City Council and other agencies, have this morning broken up encampments of eastern European rough sleepers in Park Lane.
"This is an ongoing issue. Whilst some very good progress is being made, this issue persists and all agencies are committed to dealing with this matter in a robust and proportionate fashion." 
Since January, any illegal European immigrant removed or who voluntarily leaves the UK having been found to be staying illegally will be unable to re-enter the UK for 12 months if there is a chance of "abuse" of the system.
Arif Islam, 30, who has been working in the newsagent's near where the gang sleep, says the problem is made worse by Arab tourists who give them large amounts of money.
He said: "The Arab people help them a lot. Only yesterday one of them bought drinks and food for all of them. They give the whole group £5 or £10 each. These people know what they are doing.
"They pretend to have a problem with their leg but you see them later walking completely normally.
"One of my neighbours told them to move and they urinated all over his shop. I'm too frightened to tell them anything." 
The gang have been sleeping outside the newsagents for about two years and arrive every night at 9pm before leaving at about 6am.
One street cleaner for Westminster Council, who did not want to be named, said his job had become almost impossible over the past two years since the group arrived.
"They've made my job so much harder. I get complaints all the time that I haven't done my job but as soon as I clean it, they're back," he said.
He added:  "I just can't keep up with them. They have walking sticks and crutches with knives on the end of them to cut open the bags and they just turn the stuff out onto the floor.
"They are looking for things they can get money for, clothes and stuff. When I come round in the morning all the bags are open in the roads around here, everywhere you go there are open bags."
Shopkeepers in the area have previously complained of losing up to 20 per cent of their custom since the group moved into the area.
Document EXCO000020140404ea44003s6
