{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2593"}
____
Migrant child rapist sues UK for breach of his 'human rights'
By David Pilditch   
401 words
18 March 2014
00:35
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A SUDANESE rapist who preyed on girls as young as 13 is suing Justice Secretary Chris Grayling over “frus­tration and anxiety" caused by a delay to his parole hearing.
Adil Aboulkadir, 38, was jailed for a minimum of four years for his part in the abuse of three vulnerable girls.
He was said to have led a gang of five Darfur refugees who groomed victims aged 14 and 13 in Dartford, Kent.
Aboulkadir had already launched a series of taxpayer-funded ­legal actions which could cost Britain more than £250,000 and block moves to deport him for years.
Now he wants damages, saying his human rights were violated because he had to wait seven months for a court date to argue for his freedom.
Taxpayers paid £125,000 for a legally-aided lawyer and ­interpreter during the gang’s trial at Maidstone Crown Court in 2008. Aboulkadir was convicted of rape and sexual ­activity with a child. But he convinced the High Court that his rights were “arguably" violated by a failure to consider release immediately his minimum jail term ended.
He was freed 16 months ­after the four-year tariff expired. Since 2013 he has been in an immigration centre, fighting a bid to deport him.
He has been granted a judicial review hearing over the delay and the case could end up in the European Court of Human Rights.
Former minister and Daily Express columnist Ann Widdecombe said: “What about the frustration and anxiety of his victims?" Ukip Euro MP Gerard Batten said: “End his frustration – put him on the plane to Sudan.
“He’s laughing in our faces. We must free ourselves from the idiocy of the Convention on Human Rights. "
Jonathan Isaby, of the TaxPayers’ Alliance, said: “It’s an insult that taxpayers foot the bill for this vile individual."
Julian Blake, for Mr Grayling, said Aboulkadir’s challenge was “academic" as he was cleared for release last September.
A date will be set for a full High Court hearing.
Aboulkadir is also seeking to challenge his convictions.
Another of the gang, Jumaa Kater Saleh, 25, has won compensation for being held too long during a bid to deport him. He spent two years at an immigration centre after two in jail. He will not be deported – on human rights grounds.
Document EXCO000020140318ea3i000p1
