{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2983"}
____
FARAGE: In Cameron Land the term 'BS' stands for Big Society – I can think of another term
By Nigel Farage MEP   
851 words
9 May 2014
17:53
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THERE was a very good TV quiz show called 15 to 1. Last night on the BBC’s Question Time it sometimes felt as though I was a contestant on a minor variant. Let’s call it 4 against 1.
Labour’s Chuka Umunna, Grant Shapps for the Conservatives, Caroline Lucas for the Greens and Shirley Williams for the Lib Dems formed tag teams against me as we debated the European Union and open-door immigration.
And the most hilarious thing was despite them all fundamentally agreeing with each other and backing the policy of this government and the last one to hold the door wide open to southern and eastern Europe, they claimed that it was I who represented the Establishment!
I must say I really rather enjoyed it as I exposed them one by one for their inability to offer the British people any meaningful form of immigration control when it comes to more than two dozen European nation states.
Umunna even said in his waffle-ridden answer to the question from the audience that the British people wanted proper border controls. 
He must know that freedom of movement between member states is one of the key founding principles of the EU!
Shirley Williams seemed to base her response on having had a friend who got good medical treatment in Italy. 
Nigel Farage said the old parties tried to gang up on him on BBC Question Time last night [BBC]
I’m delighted to hear it, but it is hardly a sound basis for proceeding towards full political union under the authority of Brussels.
Caroline Lucas had put together a long and mostly indecipherable list of alleged benefits from EU membership. I must say that to her credit she has always argued that the British people should get to decide on this via an In/Out referendum.
That is more than can be said for Shapps. 
To listen to him last night anyone would think that he was a profoundly principled democrat, determined to uphold the right to decide of the British people. 
Yet he was one of a great majority of Tory MPs who tamely obeyed a three line whip put down by David Cameron in October 2011 ordering Conservative ministers and backbenchers to vote against a referendum.
Back then, Dave used to stare directly into TV cameras and say that a referendum would be profoundly against the national interest. Ukip’s runaway success forced him to change his mind. But now he has the nerve to accuse Miliband and Clegg of being anti-democratic because they oppose a referendum. 
In Cameron Land the term “BS” is meant to stand for Big Society. I can think of another term that more readily applies. 
Of course Dave fought the 2009 Euro election on a “cast iron” promise of a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. 
You may have noticed that he failed to deliver. 
The best moment last night came when an audience member nailed Shapps on this and put it to him that the Tories are only now offering a referendum because the success of Ukip had left them no option. 
That is exactly right. 
But once all the elections are out of the way would you really trust them to follow through on the pledge this time round? I know that I wouldn’t.
Even more than the idea of a referendum on EU membership, one central idea is dominating the campaign for the European and local elections on May 22. 
It is this: the British people do not want open-door immigration. 
Those from white British backgrounds don’t want it and increasingly those from ethnic minority backgrounds do not want it either. 
But to deliver volume control and quality control in the immigration system we need to take back authority over who can come and settle in our country. 
And we can only do that by getting out of the EU.
BBC Question Time panel also featured Chuka Umunna,Caroline Lucas, Shirley Williams and Grant Shapps [BBC]
Last night’s Question Time ended on a note of absurdity. 
Umunna, who is the shadow secretary state for business after all, tried to talk over me when I pointed out that the European Commission had ultimate control of whether Pfizer’s takeover bid for AstraZeneca would be allowed to go ahead.
He tried to mock me as being obsessed with the EU. 
But the Hansard entry from the Commons statement this week is clear. 
John Redwood put it to Vincent Cable that “this is a concentration that falls to be determined by Brussels regulation”. 
And Cable acknowledged that “the main position is exactly as he described it”. 
That is what led me to accuse Umunna of either being pig ignorant or wilfully lying. 
I still am not quite clear as to which it is. 
But either way the whole affair demonstrates Britain’s loss of control over its political destiny. It is time to get it back.
Document EXCO000020140509ea59003h1
