{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2992"}
____
Cameron urges voters to steer clear of UKIP
By Lianne Kolirin   
534 words
9 May 2014
12:07
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
DAVID Cameron has urged voters not to use the upcoming European and council elections to cast a protest vote for the UK Independence Party.
The Prime Minister said "very unpleasant statements" made by some UKIP candidates and backers during the campaign for the May 22 polls had raised questions about the competence of Nigel Farage's party.
While he acknowledged that voters were "frustrated" about the pace of economic growth, immigration and welfare reform, he urged them to turn to a party that offers "answers" rather than simply protest.
Appealing to voters during a campaign visit to Bristol, Mr Cameron told BBC1's Breakfast: "Remember, when you vote, you are sending people to run your local council, set your local council tax, you are sending people to the European Parliament who will legislate on the regulations faced by British business and the bills paid by the British taxpayers.
"We need the politics of the answer. We need parties who have a plan, as we have a plan in the Conservative Party, to deal with these things.
"Just sending a message or making a protest doesn't actually, I think, achieve what people want."
One UKIP candidate has been suspended after describing Islam as "evil", while another resigned last week after tweeting that comedian Lenny Henry should emigrate to a "black country".
Last year MEP Godfrey Bloom lost the party whip after hitting journalist Michael Crick over the head in a row over the lack of non-white people in party literature. He had previously argued in a speech that 
foreign aid should not be sent to “Bongo Bongo Land”. 
The PM promises referendum on Europe [Reuters]
Asked if he regarded UKIP as a racist party, Mr Cameron said: "During this election we have seen some extraordinary statements - in many cases very, very unpleasant statements - by UKIP financial backers and candidates, and I think it does go to the issue of the competence of the party.
"What on Earth are they doing selecting people and allowing people like this to be in their party? It does go to my core point, which is that you have got to, when you think of voting, think about the competence of the people you are going to send to Brussels or Strasbourg, the competence of the people who are going to run your local council. If they can't control what they are saying, that does raise a very big issue of competence."
Mr Cameron said that only the Conservatives offer an in/out referendum on UK membership of a reformed European Union, and made clear he hoped to campaign for Britain to remain in the EU following negotiations with Brussels after the general election.
"My personal view is that Britain is better off in a reformed EU," he said. "I am confident I can renegotiate Britain's position in Europe."
He added: "My vision is very confident, very optimistic, very upbeat, very bullish about what Britain can achieve in Europe."
Mr Cameron repeated his suggestion that televised debates between party leaders could begin before next year's election campaign and could involve a variety of participants
Document EXCO000020140509ea59001rx
