{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3779"}
____
Neil Lennon stands by under-fire Leigh Griffiths
By Michael Baillie   
596 words
28 April 2014
01:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
NEIL LENNON has backed Leigh Griffiths after Celtic fans unfurled banners aimed at the hitman’s off-field indiscretions.
The flags were produced in front of the section which houses The Green Brigade before Celtic's 6-0 win over Inverness yesterday. One read: 'A man must be a Celt on and off the field otherwise he is of no value to this club', while another stated: 'Refugees welcome, created by immigrants'.
It was a clear reference to Griffiths, left, after the hitman was accused of racist chants before last month's capital derby at Tynecastle.
Lennon said: "We've all made mistakes. But I think the kid will come good. I think he'll learn from it and have a good career here."
Griffiths is facing a police probe, an SFA charge and Celtic are also investigating the allegations he indulged in the chant 'Rudi Skacel is a f****** refugee', along with other Hibs fans in an Edinburgh pub.
Celtic fined and warned Griffiths after initial footage of him mocking Hearts' financial woes came to light.
Lennon added: "I can't comment on the banner because I wasn't sure who it was aimed at. If it was aimed at Leigh, we're going through a process and we'll be able to speak more about it when that process finishes.
"I don't know if he was aware that the banner was aimed at him. If he did, we expect those kind of performances from him anyway. That's seven goals in 12 games so he's doing exactly what we brought him in to do."
Celtic racked up the league's biggest win of the campaign following an Anthony Stokes hat-trick and further goals from Griffiths, Efe Ambrose and sub Teemu Pukki.
Stokes took his tally to 19 and Lennon was full of praise for the Irish hitman.
He said: "He's been playing very well. Now he's getting the goals that his all round play deserves.
"That's his 19th of the season. More or less every season he's been here he's reached 20 goals so he's been a very important player since I came in the door. And he's improving.
"He has a good relationship with Commons and Griffiths. That augurs well for the future.
"I've no idea why it's all starting to click. It might just be maturity. It might be the arrival of Griffiths has kicked him on again after Gary Hooper left. I'm just delighted with the way he's playing."
Leigh Griffiths is facing a police probe [PA]
Stokes is determined to smash through the 20-goal barrier in the Hoops' last three games.
He said: "My form's been solid the last few weeks. The boys are creating opportunities, everyone is playing well, and I just want to keep it up until the end of the season.
"I'm confident. We've three games left and I'll do my best to get over 20 goals."
Stokes has formed a deadly partnership with Griffiths but isn't willing to compare him to Hooper just yet.
He added: "It's difficult to compare anyone to Hoops. He was a top-class player and scored 30-odd goals in a season here.
"I don't want to put any pressure on Griffs but he's come in, been outstanding, scored regularly, got assists and is playing well. I'm sure, given a full season, he'll be fine."
Document EXCO000020140428ea4s0000j
