{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"216"}
____
'Ukip is DELIBERATELY attracting RACIST voters': Ex-chairman of party's youth wing QUITS
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
724 words
13 May 2014
19:23
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
ONE of Ukip's most prominent youth leaders has sensationally quit the party today, accusing Nigel Farage of deliberately courting "the racist vote" ahead of the European elections.
Sanya-Jeet Thandi has quit Nigel Farage's Ukip party today[CHANNEL 4/GETTY]
Sanya-Jeet Thandi, a 21-year-old student who was previously the chairman of Ukip's Young Independence London branch, today accused the party of "exploiting the stupidity of ignorant anti-immigrant voters for electoral gain" and added "while the party deliberately attracts the racist vote, I refuse to be associated with them".
She also urged Ukip supporters to boycott the party in next Thursday's local and European elections, as it "has descended into a form of racist populism that I cannot bring myself to vote for".
Miss Thandi's accusations come less than a week after Mr Farage appeared alongside a number of black and ethnic minority candidates at a rally in London, in an attempt to shake off claims Ukip is a racist party.
Miss Thandi, a British-born Indian who joined Ukip when she was 18, said: "There was none of this 'they took our jobs' business in the party's youth wing when I joined three years ago. Ukip's immigration policy, to me, was all about equality for every nationality; it was about treating Europeans and people outside the EU equally.
"But the recent racism scandals suggest, it seems, that most other Ukip voters and members support the policy – and the party – for a very different reason.
Miss Thandi specifically attacked one of Ukip's campaign posters, which reads: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?"
She said: "The poster epitomises where the party is going wrong. This anti-immigrant campaign undermines Ukip's claim not to be a racist party. They are turning the election into a game of 'us' and 'them'.
"Well, I am with 'them'.
"Having worked so hard to help Ukip rid themselves of their "racist" label and denying comparisons to the BNP, this direction of campaigning really isn't doing my former colleagues any favours.
"I understand that British politics in the 21st century has become a dirty game of populism, but Ukip is straying further and further from the policies that attracted so many of its original supporters, instead cynically pursuing ever more aggressive anti-immigrant rhetoric."
The Ukip election poster which has attracted criticism [PA]
Miss Thandi, in an article for the Guardian website, also accused Ukip of abandoning its ambitions for "lower taxes, a smaller state, freedom of the individual, local referenda, and an immigration policy that offered fair and equal opportunities for everyone."
She said: "I am the daughter of Indian nationals and strongly support immigration. According to the Adam Smith Institute, GDP could more than double with the free movement of labour. There's no denying immigration is a positive thing.
"Yet if I voted Ukip, how many of those voting with me would privately prefer that my parents and I were not citizens of this country?"
At the meeting in London last week, Mr Farage acknowledged comments by a number of the party's candidates had caused embarrassment - including one candidate which tweeted that comedian Lenny Henry should emigrate to a "black country" and compared Islam to the Third Reich.
Mr Farage said such comments had been wrongly held up by the media as representing the views of the party as a whole.
"There will always be in any system a few people who creep over the line and cause us embarrassment. I would rather the 10 people - out of 2,234 - who said things that are either stupid or offensive in some case - I'd rather it hadn't happened," he said.
"The result of this has been huge sections of the British media defended their friends in the so-called main parties and the offensive, idiotic statements made by this handful of people have been lifted up and presented to the Great British public as if they represent the view of this party, which they do not.
"They never have and they never will."
Ukip has yet to issue any comment on Miss Thandi's accusations.
Document EXCO000020140513ea5d002xl
