{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1657"}
____
GPs meeting in York to discuss four-week wait to see doctor
By Lucy Johnston   
438 words
20 April 2014
02:19
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
DOCTORS’ leaders are holding a summit to discuss migrant patients, as new figures show family doctors are stretched to breaking point.
A poll of more than 2,300 Britons has revealed family doctors are becoming a thing of the past as many wait four weeks for an appointment.
It comes as official figures reveal GP surgeries in England have hit an all-time low, with 7,900 surgeries serving 56,000 patients.
In 2004, 8,833 surgeries served 52,700 patients.
This means people are increasingly relying on overstretched A&E services, two thirds of which missed waiting time targets this winter.
Meanwhile, surgeries are spending £5,000 to £20,000 a year on locums, according to Pulse magazine.
Dr Peter Graves, who represents GPs in Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire, will raise the issue at a meeting of GP leaders in York next month.
It will focus on pressures, including immigration, facing GPs and call on the Government to take action.
Dr Graves said: “People legally migrate to Britain for a better life. This is not about that decision. It is about the failure of successive governments to plan in response to the growing population.
“In hard-pressed areas, doctors could have up to 100 extra patients from legal migrant workers.”
But GPs are also concerned about illegal immigrants and asylum seekers who come here to get health services.
There are no reliable figures, but doctors in parts of London and other cities say it is widespread.
Dr Graves added: “Those of us who pay our taxes do not expect to see precious NHS resources abused by people coming from abroad.
“The Government needs to take action to ensure GPs should not have to police the abuse of the NHS by such visitors.”
His comments come as a new poll found just four per cent see their doctor every time they attend their surgery and 72 per cent no longer bother to ask for an appointment with their own GP.
Peter Savage, of Medical Accident Group, which carried out the poll, said: “Having a different doctor each time does not allow for a deeper understanding of medical issues. It can be easy to miss something.”
It is estimated nearly four million foreigners were allowed into Britain under Labour from 1998 to 2010, while a million Britons quit the country.
NHS England said: “Doctors are working extremely hard, even with a 20 per cent increase in GPs over the past decade. It is time to take a fresh look at how services are organised.”
Document EXCO000020140420ea4k000b7
