{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1394"}
____
The Government has lost its grip on immigration
415 words
3 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
GRANT SHAPPS’ assertion yesterday that the Government was still aiming to cut annual net immigration to “tens of thousands" is laughable because he and everyone else knows full well that as long as Britain is signed up to the EU’s freedom of movement rules there is absolutely nothing we can do.
The Home Secretary Theresa May has publicly accepted as much and if other senior Government figures continue to indulge in fantasies rather than a few hard truths they will lose the trust of the voting public even more.
Ultimately, the only way in which we can properly regain control of our borders is to leave the EU. However, there is a great deal more that we can do before then and that includes a fundamental reform of our benefits system which, despite recent tinkering, remains far too generous for people who have never lived here and never contributed to its upkeep.
As it is, Britain remains a soft touch, a target for the unscrupulous, rewarding the unworthy while our society continues to fall apart.
It is the clear will of the British people – and that includes recently settled newcomers to our shores – that immigration should be brought under control.
When will the lofty political class, clearly hoping that their empty promises will silence us, finally recognise that?
........................................................................
Stop this Tory infighting 
Chancellor George Osborne and Boris Johnson’s war of words is putting the Conservative party in jeopardy. Voters do not like parties that are at war with themselves and so reports that the two men are feuding behind the scenes will cause dismay to anyone who wishes for a Tory win.
John Major’s government was torn apart by infighting and that self-same internal strife helped keep the Conservatives out of power for 13 long years, during which time Labour nearly brought Britain to its knees.
If the Chancellor and the London Mayor continue along these lines they will have plunged a dagger into the heart of their own party.
........................................................................
George is already a star
At just eight months old little Prince George is set to become a seasoned traveller when he accompanies his parents on a tour of New Zealand and Australia in just over a month. There’s even a suggestion that he might play a role in public engagements.
So soon? Sometimes it seems as if working members of the Royal Family, like policemen, are getting younger all the time…
Document EXCO000020140303ea33000sk
