{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3740"}
____
Bizarre images of Labour's Ed Miliband eating a bacon sandwich sold to him by a TORY voter
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
499 words
21 May 2014
16:55
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
LABOUR leader Ed Miliband suffered another embarrassing moment on the campaign trail today, being snapped struggling to eat a bacon sandwich bought in a Tory voter's cafe.
Labour leader Ed Miliband gets to grip with a bacon sandwich[EYEVINE]
Mr Miliband, who yesterday struggled to identify the cost of an average weekly household grocery bill and also failed to identify the leader of the Labour group on Swindon Borough Council, was visiting a cafe in New Covent Garden flower market this morning where he was snapped enjoying the butty.
The Labour leader pulled a series of less than flattering faces as he munched on the sandwich and, according to reports, his aides tried to stop photographers taking close-up snaps of his feast.
Mr Miliband chatted with cafe owner Tony Foufas, before he went to buy 20 red roses as a gift for his wife, Justine.
Mr Foufas, whose son Christo is an LBC Radio presenter, told the Evening Standard he did not plan to vote Labour.
He said: "I find the Conservatives are more pro-business."
Aides to the Labour leader tried to stop photographers snapping him while he ate [EYEVINE]
Mr Miliband is currently undertaking a 10-stop tour of the country as he travels from London to his constituency seat in Doncaster in order to vote in tomorrow's local and European elections.
Aides said the Labour leader will use each of the 10 visits - which will take in towns in the South East, East of England, East Midlands and Yorkshire & Humberside - to highlight one of the 10 pledges from his "cost-of-living" contract with voters.
Urging voters to "vote Labour to make your family better off", Mr Miliband will say that his party has used the campaign for the May 22 elections to English councils and the European Parliament to unveil "positive" policies on rent caps, zero-hours contracts, guaranteed access to GPs and boosting the minimum wage.
And he will say that by contrast, the other parties have offered "nothing other than a policy vacuum and political posturing".
Cafe owner Tony Foufas says he backs the Conservatives [EYEVINE]
Mr Miliband said: "I will be going all round England - north and south, east and west - laying out Labour's 10 pledges from our cost-of-living contract.
"I will be urging people to vote Labour on Thursday because I know Britain can do better than this.
"And it is Labour MEPs and Labour councillors who can help deliver.
"We have shown in this campaign the difference we can make: on housing, on the NHS, on wages, on immigration, on all of the major issues the country faces."
A Tory Party source said: "It’s good to see Ed touring the country, meeting Conservative Party supporters who can teach him a lesson or two about our long-term economic plan."
Document EXCO000020140521ea5l002e5
