{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"117"}
____
Nonsense to claim that jobs will go if we leave the EU
By Leo McKinstry   
922 words
3 April 2014
01:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
BUREAUCRATIC, undemocratic and sclerotic, the EU has been a disaster for its member states.
The lengthening dole queues of the eurozone and the dodgy financial accounts of the European Commission are just two examples of this comprehensive failure.
So the pro-EU fanatics cannot point to any real, tangible successes in support of their cause. Instead they have to rely on ever more desperate scaremongering.
They therefore tell us that the British economy would be destroyed if we decided to leave the EU, that we would be left isolated from the global market place, with trade and investment drastically reduced. 
In particular, they claim our exit would put at risk more than three million jobs supposedly dependent on our EU membership. 
This is the line that Nick Clegg constantly peddled during his debates with Ukip leader Nigel Farage. 
Bereft of any positive case for the EU he tried to create a climate of fear by warning that our independence from Brussels would lead to mass unemployment. 
It is a profoundly defeatist argument, based on the unpatriotic belief that Britain is too weak to survive outside the EU.
It is also a wholly bogus argument.
The idea that all our trade with Europe will suddenly end if we leave the EU is nonsense.
Even when we are beyond the control of Brussels, German firms will still want to sell us their cars, Italian fashion houses their clothes. 
In the free market, international trade is carried out by consumers and businesses based on mutual interests, not by countries according to political diktat. 
We heard the same scare story about jobs when Clegg and the other pro-EU zealots were urging us to join the single currency. 
Staying out, they predicted, would lead to economic meltdown. 
But the opposite has happened. The euro has been a catastrophe whereas Britain is now enjoying faster economic growth than anywhere else in the western world.
Our unemployment rate at 7.1 per cent is almost half that of many large eurozone lands.
All economic growth ultimately depends on wealth creation by private enterprise. 
Yet the EU, a vast corporate empire built entirely through the largesse of the taxpayer, refuses to recognise this reality.
So Brussels continually undermines prosperity through its endless stream of regulations and edicts, all of them discouraging recruitment and the formation of new businesses.
This is an organisation that can expend 2,509 words on a directive about “the marketing of hazelnuts”. 
It is no wonder that the two most economically successful countries in continental Europe, Norway and Switzerland, are both outside the EU.
But the EU is an engine of unemployment in another, even more direct, way through its dogmatic insistence on the free movement of people across Europe. 
Nick Clegg’s argument about jobs in Britain completely falls apart in the context of mass immigration driven by Brussels. 
The truth is that by obliterating national boundaries and promoting a vast influx of foreigners to our shores, the EU has deliberately thrown millions of British people on to the economic scrapheap.
Far from protecting employment in Britain, the European Union destroys it.
The situation will soon become even worse as migrants pour into Britain as a result of the worsening unemployment in the eurozone, especially in Portugal, Spain, Italy and eastern Europe. 
Yesterday the think tank Migration Watch UK warned net migration from the EU to Britain is likely to be at least 130,000 a year up to 2018.
The gross total of EU migrants to Britain will be far higher.
In 2013 440,000 new National Insurance numbers were issued to new EU arrivals, up by 28 per cent on the year before. 
This unceasing tide not only distorts the labour market but also undermines the recent hard work of the coalition in reducing unemployment. 
Moreover the influx places an unsustainable burden on our civic infrastructure, particularly schools, the NHS and, above all, the welfare state. 
The pro-EU brigade is fond of trumpeting the contribution made to the economy by European immigrants but this is a myth.
The low wages often paid by employers to EU migrants can be supplemented by social security payments such as tax credits and child benefit. 
The employer gains from the competition but the British public ends up paying the real price.
It has been calculated that an EU migrant, on the minimum wage with two children, can expect to receive an income of £28,000 a year, with two thirds coming from the state.
Nor are there any tough restrictions on jobless EU freeloaders claiming social security, which is partly why so many eastern Europeans flock here.
Even selling the Big Issue allows a foreign sponger to claim self-employed status, thereby opening up access to a cornucopia of handouts.
Typically Brussels wants to go even further and give an entitlement to all EU citizens to claim British benefits without having worked even a day here.
Brussels Employment Commissioner Lazlo Andor, a Hungarian socialist educated at the Karl Marx University in Budapest, has launched a legal action at the European Court of Justice, complaining that the British welfare state discriminates “against non-British citizens”.
Well, we are after all the ones who pay for it. 
That is the kind of amoral madness that the EU wants to inflict upon us. 
We have to free ourselves from this Brussels straitjacket, before more British jobs are destroyed and our public finances ruined.
Document EXCO000020140402ea4300441
