{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1770"}
____
Frantic Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg fights to halt Ukip’s poll surge
By Macer Hall   
429 words
24 April 2014
01:47
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
PANICKING Nick Clegg will today launch a desperate attack on the UK Independence Party as they threaten to race ahead of the Lib Dems in the Euro elections.
The Deputy Prime Minister will brand members of Ukip “populists and xenophobes” in a speech at the launch of the Lib Dem campaign for the May 22 poll.
It follows Mr Clegg’s trouncing by Ukip leader Nigel Farage in two live television debates about Britain’s future in Europe earlier this year.
A dramatic opinion poll suggests that Ukip is on course to win a 27 per cent vote share at the Euro elections. The poll showed the Lib Dems on just 10 per cent.
The YouGov survey suggests Ukip are heading for the biggest protest vote in British electoral history, far outstripping the 16.5 per cent they won at the last Euro elections in 2009.
Ukip will take second place in the poll for the European Parliament, pushing the Tories into third place on 22 per cent.
Labour were tipped to come first with 30 per cent, with the Lib Dems fourth. But the YouGov poll also found many voters said they would abandon Ukip at next year’s general election.
Just 12 per cent of voters plan to back Ukip in June 2015. Thirty-seven per cent would back Labour and 34 per cent the Tories. Lib Dem support remained on 10 per cent.
Anthony Wells of YouGov said: “Ukip’s potential vote will be by far the biggest breakthrough by any party outside of the Westminster big three.”
In his speech today Mr Clegg will accuse the anti-Brussels party of “peddling myths” about the European Union. The Lib Dem leader is to claim that the Tories and Labour are “missing in action” in taking on Ukip, whose anti-immigration message in a series of election posters recently stirred controversy.
Addressing a Lib Dem rally in Colchester, Essex, Mr Clegg will say: “The fight is on. The isolationists are not going to get a free run of this debate any more – not with so much at stake.” Ukip spell European exit, he will say, “and they need to be stopped”. And he will ask Lib Dem activists: “If not us, who? The Labour Party? The Conservatives? Where are they? What are they doing to stop the populists and the xenophobes? Nothing.
“Miliband and Cameron are now officially missing in action...they are too scared of losing votes to Nigel Farage.”
Document EXCO000020140424ea4o00003
