{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1768"}
____
Shakespeare And The Countess by Chris Laoutaris: The woman who almost destroyed the Bard
By Chris Laoutaris   
1,140 words
24 April 2014
03:59
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE fearsome Elizabeth Russell nearly ruined Shakespeare's career and the lives of others as Chris Laoutaris, who has written a biography of this fiery woman reveals
William Shakespeare's career nearly came to an end in 1596 thanks to the extraordinary Elizabeth Russell. Entrepreneur James Burbage had built an indoor playhouse in London's Blackfriars that year. Like nothing residents had seen before, it would boast the very latest in special-effects technology and serve a well-heeled clientele prepared to pay extortionate ticket prices.
Opening its doors all year round, unlike the open-air theatres with which the playgoing public had been more familiar, it promised enviable returns.
Shakespeare, who would have been one of the lucky beneficiaries of Burbage's bold venture, was looking forward to staging his plays in the capital's newest landmark. He and his theatrical troupe were about to be evicted from their premises in Shoreditch so they were being rescued from financial ruin by the skin of their teeth... or so they thought.
What they could not have predicted was that the woman known to many as the Dowager Countess of Bedford would thwart their best-laid plans.
When Elizabeth Russell discovered that a "common" playhouse was about to open on her doorstep she was outraged. Leading an uprising against the backers of the Blackfriars Theatre, she complained to Queen Elizabeth I's Privy Council that Burbage's new venue would become a magnet for "all manner of vagrant and lewd persons", not to mention the "great inconveniences and ill rule" perpetrated by the likes of Shakespeare's fellow-players.
A petition was drawn up, with the doughty Dowager managing to convince another 30 of the district's most influential residents to sign it including Shakespeare's own patron George Carey and his publisher Richard Field.
It was after coming across this enigmatic petition in the National Archives in Kew that I became intent on finding out how the Dowager managed to convince Hunsdon and Field to betray the man whose interests were bound so closely with their own. I also wanted to know who their co-signatories were and why they supported Elizabeth's anti-theatrical crusade.
By sifting through early tax-returns, immigration records, voluminous legal suits, letters, indentures and leases, I was able to breathe life into the long-forgotten community which heeded her call to arms and to make new discoveries about this little-known episode in Shakespeare's life.
One of the most well-connected women in England, Lady Russell was confident that she would emerge the victor in her battle with Shakespeare's company.
Her brother-in-law, William Cecil, was Queen Elizabeth I's Lord Treasurer; her nephew, Robert Cecil, was Secretary of State; and her kinsman and neighbour in Blackfriars was William Brooke, Lord Cobham. All three were distinguished members of the Privy Council.
William Shakespeare is the most famous playwright in history [GETTY]
She was, furthermore, the daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke, one-time tutor of Edward VI, who gave Elizabeth and her sisters an education fit for a king in Gidea Hall. This Essex estate would come to be known as the "female university", its women scholars as "the wonders of the age".
Elizabeth Russell's contemporary, George Whetstone, had commented of her that "when she speaks the wisest silent stays". The Earl of Northampton failed to follow this advice, getting more than he bargained for when he dared to pronounce against the Dowager in a court of law. She responded by physically assaulting him, before pressing her case "violently and with great audacity" with a hair-raising speech which lasted for more than half an hour.
A shocked witness, John Hawarde, referred to her as "more than womanlike", possessing a "very great spirit and an undaunted courage", and was amused to note that the noblemen present on that occasion attempted "to stop her but in vain".
An early champion of women's rights, Elizabeth offered huge bribes to the Queen in exchange for being appointed England's first female Keeper of a castle, a post with martial responsibilities still classed under the feudal law known as "shield service".
As governess of her own fortress and armoury, she insisted that she was entitled to exercise powers normally belonging to a Sheriff and Bailiff in all her dominions. Her many enemies discovered how far she would go to protect these rights, including the Lord Admiral, Charles Howard, whose men clashed with her in a ferocious riot which culminated in a siege on the castle with "bars of iron and other engines".
The Dowager waged a battle with Richard Lovelace in 1594 over competing claims to a property on her Bisham estate. Elizabeth, who could often be found with her own band of armed foot-soldiers in tow, led a fullfrontal assault "in warlike manner", with many a sword and battle-axe brandished. The fracas ended with Elizabeth ordering the kidnapping of two Lovelace servants, who were dragged to her prison.
Over the years many men would serve humiliating spells in Elizabeth's dungeon, including a Bailiff whom she felt deserved a taste of his own medicine after arresting one of her men. Wrestling her servant from his grasp "with strong arm", she threw the Bailiff into her prison and demanded such a staggering ransom it required the intervention of the Queen to liberate him.
The monarch, however, could do little to help William Childe of Worcestershire, who found himself and his livestock evicted from one of Elizabeth's land-holdings in 1599. She expelled 800 ewes and 500 sheep, leaving a breathless Childe scrambling to gather them before they disappeared into the darkness.
This was the formidable foe Shakespeare found himself facing in 1596. Little wonder, for earlier that year he had mocked members of her coterie in his Henry IV, Part 1. This included a cowardly knight called Sir John Oldcastle and his drinkloving buffoonish comrade, John Russell.
The first name belonged to an ancestor of Lord Cobham, the second was Elizabeth's late husband. Cobham forced Shakespeare to replace them with Falstaff and Bardolph. Taunts at the Dowager's expense probably followed in The Merry Wives Of Windsor and Twelfth Night.
Still barred from the Blackfriars Theatre by the opening years of the 17th century, the canny playwright made one last-ditch attempt to reclaim it by flattering his nemesis into submission. The strong-willed but loveable Dowager Countess of Roussillon, in All's Well That Ends Well, may well have been based on Elizabeth Russell.
She clearly made a lasting impression on the dramatist, whose 450th anniversary we celebrate this week.
Shakespeare And The Countess by Chris Laoutaris is published on 24 April
Document EXCO000020140424ea4o000dx
