{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2944"}
____
Labour losing 'working class, low-educated' voters to Ukip, warns panel of political gurus
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
584 words
31 March 2014
18:22
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
LABOUR has the most to fear from the rise of Ukip as the disaffected working class flock to Nigel Farage's banner, a panel of experts have warned today.
A new book analysing Ukip's support shows the party is attracting those who feel 'left behind' by all three main parties - but in particular former Labour supporters.
Nineteen of the 20 most "Ukip-friendly" Commons seats in the country are held by Labour, a study for the book found.
The study, which was led by leading political academic Dr Matthew Goodwin, also shows that Ukip voters who previously backed the Tories are so dissatisfied with the mainstream parties they are unlikely to vote for David Cameron even if an in/out referendum in EU membership is delivered.
Mr Farage welcomed the study, and vowed that his party would be focusing their efforts and resources on winning votes in traditional Labour heartlands - including the north and cities - ahead of the European election and future ballots.
Dr Goodwin, co-author of 'Revolt on the Right: Explaining Support for the Radical Right in Britain' at a Chatham House debate in London this afternoon, said: "Nigel Farage and Ukip are tapping into who you might crudely term the 'left behind'; working class, low-educated, financially struggling; mainly white old men who look out at Britain and look at a country which, to be honest, they neither recognise nor want to be a part of.
"They are not just animated by the single issue of Europe, these are voters who care intensely about a broader array of domestic concerns: immigration, the perceived unresponsiveness of the Westminster elite.
Of the 15 by-elections Ukip has contested since 2010, it has come second on six occasions - most recently in Wythenshawe and Sale East in February this year.
Dr Goodwin, of Nottingham University, said the success of Ukip derives from communities which have decades of frustration at social changes in the UK, and voters who feel "cut out of our political conversation".
Dr Goodwin also warned that the Tory party campaigning line that 'Vote Ukip - get Labour' is likely to bear little fruit in elections, with as few as one in ten Ukip voters saying it would influence them against putting a cross in Mr Farage's party's box.
Nigel Farage during his LBC debate with Nick Clegg last week [GETTY]
Mr Farage, who took part in the debate chaired by BBC Radio 4 Today show presenter Sarah Montague, argued Ukip was successful as it appealed to people's class background, not their political allegiances.
He said: "There are countless millions out there who have no interest in ever voting Labour, Conservative or perhaps now even Liberal Democrat again."
Mr Farage also claimed that the success of Ukip has been one of the reasons for the demise of the BNP - despite former BNP members not being allowed to join the party.
He claimed this is because people who formally "held their nose" to back Nick Griffin's party as a protest vote are now voting Ukip.
Also on the panel was Joe Twyman, Director of Political Research at polling agency YouGov.
He argued Ukip had attracted the "dissatisfied, distrusting and disapproving" voters, and analysis of EU views across the continent showed a real lack of support for the project in general.
He added: "Europe has not won the argument among its members."
Document EXCO000020140331ea3v002uv
