{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3588"}
____
Not on our hymn sheet
By Nick Ferrari   
1,190 words
23 February 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
I WONDER if David Cameron feels he has had a touch of the King Henry’s after a week of “turbulent priests" lining up to attack him for his programme of cuts and his Coalition’s attempts to reform the welfare system.
This modern Church versus state row was kicked off by the most senior Roman Catholic in England and Wales, the Archbishop of Westminster Vincent Nichols. Before being made a Cardinal in Rome, the Archbishop embarked on a round of media interviews in which he made plain his concern at the level of the Government’s cuts. While he broadly accepted that budgetary control was needed, he spoke out about how the genuinely needy and vulnerable had been largely ignored.
He said that the changes had left many in “hunger and destitution" and accused politicians of all parties of a “lack of leadership", saying that he had been saddened and “inundated" with messages from people fraught with worry over the cuts. The Prime Minister, however, was not for moving. His reforms, he said, are “about doing what is right" and he likened it to a moral duty to get people who were “trapped in a cycle of dependency" into work and said it was wrong to “reward" those who can work but choose not to.
Take a trip to any town or city centre at the time of the day when people should be at work and you will see for yourself how the PM has got this one spot on. There are hordes of young and fit people trudging aimlessly through shopping centres pushing prams brimming with children and cheap toys and screaming at poorly behaved toddlers who are dancing around the dreary procession like handmaidens. Their eyes are glazed over, they are bereft of ambition or aspiration and fill their  existences with benefit payments, cheap lager and daytime TV.
There is no denying that there is a small minority of folk who are genuinely on struggle street but Cameron’s case was massively boosted by the employment figures that came out this week at the peak of the row between Cameron and the clergy. In the past three months of last year, 125,000 people found work and before any bed-wetting leftie starts bleating about the jobs being only part time, they should study it in more detail. Most of these jobs were full time or self-employed and the number of part-time jobs is falling rapidly. Indeed, the creation of self-employed opportunities is booming and the percentage rate of women in work, at more than 67 per cent, is the best on record.
What do you suppose the complaining clerics think lies behind this? It is not down to saying matins every day but rather people who were coasting on a life on benefits being nudged, or sometimes shoved, into work. In other words, a government doing what is right: giving its people hope and purpose by getting them to work.
Meanwhile, as the week progressed other clergy “flocked" to support the Archbishop’s view and show they were one psalm short of a hymn book. A total of 27 Anglican bishops and 15 other faith leaders signed an open letter attacking the Coalition for the “national crisis" it has created and saying that the PM has a “moral duty" to alleviate the suffering they claim he has created.
Sadly, this divine intervention is as misjudged as the destinations so many churches have for all the money their congregations raise. In an Anglican church in Kent all the money that is raised is sent to Eastern Europe, in a Catholic church in Hertfordshire it all goes to Africa and another Catholic church in London has been trying to strong-arm parishioners into pledging large sums of money by writing cheques, sometimes for thousands of pounds.
This is no isolated example. The chances are that if you are relaxing by reading this after attending service this morning, the posters on the notice board all boasted about the money raised for causes overseas.
With half a million people here visiting food banks since last Easter, any “moral duty" is surely for the church to look after those closest to it. Never mind helping those in Haiti, how about a handout for those on their own high street? Let the clergy stick to saving souls and the Government to trying to save the cash.
........................................................................
Sports Minister Helen Grant has said girls are put off playing sport because they hate getting sweaty and looking “unfeminine". she suggests, therefore, they should focus on ballet, roller-skating and cheerleading as they can then look “radiant".
It is a good job this dopey minister, who is also Conservative MP for Maidstone and The Weald, is a woman. Could you imagine the storm of manufactured fury had it been a man behind these asinine views?
........................................................................
WITHOUT question, David Bowie is a music legend, one of those rare, multi-talented geniuses who come along on only a handful of occasions in a lifetime and is fully deserving of his Brit Award last week.
However, for the love of all that is Holy, why do these undoubted musical superstars think they can use their unbelievable sound of music as a platform to preach? Down the years they have lectured us on just about everything from the rights of Amazonian Indians to the plight of badgers and climate change to vegetarianism. 
Bowie’s sermon, randomly delivered by Kate Moss, wearing one of the singer’s catsuits, was about the Scottish vote on independence.
Guys, just stick to belting out the hits. Otherwise, a scenario in which Messrs Clegg, Cameron and Miliband are vying for number one could be the flip side. And, as Bowie knows, they would be Absolute Beginners.
........................................................................
WHILE it behoves me to say I told you so, can I just say the news that the hideous NHS Care Data Programme is to be delayed is not surprising.
This was an ill thought out, obtrusive, boorish attempt to harvest data about us on everything from ingrowing toenails to insanity and was plain wrong. Red-faced NHS England bosses say more time is required to sell the scheme to the public. 
Hardly. This scheme is sick and is not deserving of resuscitation.
........................................................................
SO THE children of Chinese cleaners score higher in educational attainment than the children of British middle-class families. Why is anyone surprised? When we allowed education to be hijacked by the loony “no one is ever a winner" brigade, surely we knew an era of underachievement was being ushered in?
........................................................................
FOUR members of an immigrant child sex gang convicted of raping and sexually assaulting girls, some as young as 12, are from the Czech Republic or Slovakia. Their crimes earned them sentences of up to 20 years. In the view of Judge John Bevan QC, one is a “bully with an overgrown sexual appetite". We are powerless to boot these vile perverts out of the country when they are freed courtesy of their rights as Europeans. When can we have that vote?
Document EXCO000020140223ea2n0011i
