{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3614"}
____
Cameron pins hopes of EU reform on Merkel's London visit
By Jane Wharton   
669 words
23 February 2014
16:36
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
OVERHAULING EU immigration rules will be one of the key aspects discussed during Angela Merkel's visit to London next week, it has emerged.
David Cameron is said to be looking to build an alliance of "like-minded" countries in a bid to overhaul rules on free movement and welfare. 
The Chancellor's whistle-stop trip on Thursday is now tipped to be the start of an attempt to woo Germany, whose support is crucial for the Prime Minister's plans. 
Mrs Merkel, leader of the post powerful country in the EU, will be given the rare honour of addressing both Houses of Parliament before taking lunch with the Queen. 
Mr Cameron has called for sweeping reforms of the freedom of movement laws in which EU citizens can live and work within the bloc without the need for a visa. 
He has also raised concerns that the current rules on welfare are open to abuse with people from poorer countries heading to the UK for its generous benefits system. 
The European Commission has reacted furiously to the proposals of limiting welfare and accused the UK of becoming a "nasty country."
However it is hoped that he will find some sympathy from Mrs Merkel, who is also under pressure from her electorate to reduce immigration. 
British government sources have indicated they are hopeful that Mrs Merkel will be willing to support tighter rules on when migrants can claim benefits. 
She is also said to be ready to consider stronger "transitional controls" when a new country joins the EU. 
A government source said: "We are trying to get a group of like-minded countries together to do some specific work on what the options would be to tighten the rules. Merkel's visit is an opportunity to start those discussions."
Other countries likely to be favourable to reform include the Netherlands and several in Scandinavia. 
Foreign Secretary William Hague says the EU must be more accountable [EPA]
Today Foreign Secretary William Hague acknowledged that Germany was the "most important partner" on seeking EU reform because of its economic strength and key role in the eurozone.  
Speaking of Mrs Merkel, he told BBC1's Andrew Marr Show: "She knows, and I believe she understands, what our Prime Minister David Cameron has been putting forward, that this is the age - the 21st century is the age - of flexibility, accountability and competitiveness.
"And the European Union cannot be immune from those things. In every nation state we are having to adapt to those pressures and it's very important the EU does so as well."
He said discussions had not yet started with Brussels ahead of a planned EU referendum by the end of 2017. 
Asked whether reform of the free movement rules would be on the agenda during Thursday's trip, Mr Hague said: "I'm sure these subjects will come up. Germany also has strict benefit rules, Germany does not want its benefits system to be abused. 
"We support the principle of the free movement of workers, and many British people have rightly taken advantage of that in the rest of Europe.
"But we don't support people moving from one country to another because of the incentives of different benefit systems.
"With Germany we have a lot of common ground on that and there will be no problem discussing that."
He added: "Germany is our most important partner on seeking reform in the European Union because it's Germany that has such a strong position in the eurozone, that has managed to maintain a dynamic economy itself. Germany is in that key position in the European Union.
The tone of the visit will be in marked contrast to the meeting between the Prime Minister and Francois Hollande at RAF Brize Norton last month, where the two leaders discussed EU reform over a pub lunch following a summit overshadowed by questions about the French president's private life.
Document EXCO000020140223ea2n003s5
