{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2572"}
____
I’ll fight to loosen ties with Brussels, pledges David Cameron
By Alison Little   
520 words
17 March 2014
00:38
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
DAVID Cameron sought to reassure anxious Conservatives over his EU strategy yesterday by setting out a seven-point reform plan.
Ending the march to “ever closer union" was on the list, as well as cutting Brussels red tape, new powers for national parliaments and tighter immigration rules.
It comes as pro-European Tories today urge the party to campaign vigorously in favour of staying in the EU.
The Prime Minister confirmed that in the in-out referendum he promises before the end of 2017 – if re-elected – he will campaign for Britain to stay in under new terms he will negotiate.
He faces pressure to spell out more detail from Tories who fear losing seats to Ukip in May’s European Parliament elections and next year’s General Election.
Yesterday’s initiative got a scathing response from some who accused him of using the same formula offered by successive governments. Leading Euro sceptic Tory MP Douglas Carswell said it was time to be “a little more" specific. “We’ve got beyond the stage of thinking motherhood and apple pie is sufficient."
Mr Cameron said it would be bad negotiating tactics “to lay all Britain’s cards on the table at the outset".
But he understood people wanted more detail and would therefore set out some of his priorities which are:
Making clear that EU citizens’ right to move to work should not equal freedom to claim benefits.
Enabling groups of national parliaments to block EU laws. Powers “flowing away from Brussels, not always to it".
Freeing businesses from red tape and helping them prosper by “turbo-charging" free trade through EU deals with the US and Asia.
Freeing police and courts from interference by European institutions.
Supporting further EU enlargement but with new controls to stop “vast migrations" of people when new countries join.
David Cameron has set out a seven-point reform plan on Europe [GETTY]
Freeing Britain from the principle of “ever closer union" which every EU country must now sign up to.
He said he supported being a “family of nations" who were sometimes stronger when they worked together.
But he shared concerns about EU interference and “a United States of Europe".
He said his “ambitious" agenda would take “time and patience – goodwill, not shouting from the sidelines".
Tory MP Andrea Leadsom, co-founder of the moderate Eurosceptic Fresh Start group which has drawn up reforms, said: “I think he’s spot on.
“We are not the only country calling for reform.
“The rise of anti-EU parties across Europe is focusing minds of EU politicians on the need for change.
“The PM’s proposals are challenging but I am really confident he can achieve them."
Fresh Start member and Tory MP Dominic Raab said: “This is important meat on the bones of the Conservative renegotiation strategy."
Today the Conservative European Mainstream group will broadly endorse Mr Cameron’s strategy.
Europhile Minister without Portfolio Ken Clarke said yesterday that the UK would have “less say" in the world if it leaves the EU.
Document EXCO000020140317ea3h000gp
