{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2614"}
____
Business leaders warn of Yes vote consequences
By Rod Mills   
286 words
19 March 2014
00:35
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
LEADING business figures believe the costs of independence will outweigh any benefits, a new survey reveals.
The University of Edinburgh’s Business School carried out 60 interviews with senior business leaders to see how they are responding to the independence debate.
The bosses were from randomly-selected medium and large companies operating in the industries of energy, engineering and manufacturing, electronics and technology, financial services and life sciences.
In these sectors, 54 business leaders said the risks outweighed the opportunities, while just six thought that the opportunities outweighed the risks.
Across the five industries, business leaders said that the “fundamental challenge” is uncertainty, according to the The Scottish Independence Debate: Evidence from Business report.
The key risks cited included currency, regulation, taxes, recruitment and retention of employees, and EU membership.
The study’s authors concluded: “Uncertainty poses a tremendous challenge for business leaders. The perceived costs of independence to business appear to outweigh the perceived benefits that might accrue in 90 per cent of the interviews.”
The perceived opportunities for businesses after independence were stated as government funding or subsidies, income tax decreases, liberal immigration policies, and corporation tax cuts.
Edinburgh South MP and Labour’s shadow business minister Ian Murray, said: “The fact is that the majority of the employers surveyed here say Alex Salmond’s failure to be honest about what would replace the pound puts jobs in Scotland at risk.”
Business for Scotland, a network of business people who support independence, welcomed the interviews.
A spokeswoman said: “Ninety-two percent of business people said the prospect of independence has not impacted on their business decisions, indeed they indicated it is ‘business-as-usual’.”
Document EXCO000020140319ea3j0002y
