{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"852"}
____
UK ethnic population to boom to 1 in 3 Brits by 2051, new study reveals
By Martyn Brown   
518 words
6 May 2014
03:33
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
ONE in three people in Britain will be from an ethnic minority by the middle of the century, a report forecasts today.
It will rocket from the current figure of eight per cent to as much as 30 per cent – a total of 23 million – over the next 40 years, it said.
The study by influential think-tank Policy Exchange lays bare the effect of decades of immigration and reveals the huge impact of Labour’s open door policy to migrants between 1997 and 2010.
It also supports previous studies which have shown Britain will be the Western world’s most ethnically diverse nation after 2050.
The report reveals that the population from the five largest distinct black and minority ethnic communities could rocket from eight million to 23 million people by 2051.
By then the UK’s population is forecast to hit 77 million. One in three children at state schools today is from an ethnic minority.
The report, A Portrait of Modern Britain, draws on an extensive set of survey, census, academic and polling data to build up a detailed picture of the five largest minority groups in the UK – Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, black Africans and black Caribbeans.
It reveals that black Africans and Bangladeshis are the fastest growing of Britain’s ethnic minorities.
Adam Afriyie is the first black Conservative MP [REX]
The study also shows that while Britain has changed and is continuing to become even more multi-racial, people from ethnic minority backgrounds have a far stronger association with being British than the white population.
In the 2011 Census, only 14 per cent of whites identified themselves as being purely British, with 64 per cent seeing themselves as English.
All other ethnic minority communities were more than four times more likely to associate themselves with being British.
Some 71 per cent of Bangladeshis and 63 per cent of Pakistanis considered themselves purely British. A quarter of the black Caribbean community see themselves as English, while 55 per cent see themselves as just British.
Rishi Sunak, co-author of the report, said: “The face of Britain has changed and will keep changing over the next 30 years.
“From the post-war arrival of Jamaicans and Indians to the recent influx of Africans, the UK is now home to a melting pot of different cultures and traditions. These communities will continue to become an ever more significant part of Britain, especially in future elections.”
The think-tank says that currently voters from ethnic groups overwhelmingly identify with and vote for the Labour Party. Last month Adam Afriyie, the first black Tory MP and once touted as a future party leader, said the Conservatives will not be able to completely detoxify its brand in the eyes of ethnic minority voters in time for next year’s general election.
He admitted even if Prime Minister David Cameron “does everything perfectly” in the run up to the 2015 General Election, the party’s lack of support among minorities will persist.
Document EXCO000020140506ea56000b8
