{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1594"}
____
David Cameron promises to work closely with Germany to tackle 'welfare tourism'
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
428 words
27 March 2014
20:46
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
DAVID Cameron has vowed to work closely with German Chancellor Angela Merkel as her government considers proposals designed to clamp down on 'welfare tourism'.
The German government are examining a report recommending limiting the time unemployed migrants from other EU member states can stay in the country looking for a job.
It also recommends welfare abuses by EU migrants should be punished by a temporary entry ban.
Mr Cameron said that he would work with the Germans and other like minded allies to see if they could tighten EU rules further.
"We'll look very closely if the Germans want to take this further," he told BBC Radio Derby.
"I talked to Angela Merkel personally last week and we are going to work with her, with the Swedish prime minister, with the Dutch prime minister, on how we can tighten up in this area because it is worthwhile work."
He said that he wanted to ensure there was "free movement to come here and get a job but not free movement to come and claim benefits".
Nigel Farage and Nick Clegg clashed over free movement laws in the LBC debate last night [PA]
Late last year the mayors of 16 German cities made a public plea for help in coping with migrants from Eastern Europe, notably Roma from Romania and Bulgaria, who are accused of putting a strain on local welfare schemes.
Interior minister Thomas de Maiziere said the focus should be on those who exploit unskilled migrants.
"We have to look at the people and structures who bring migrants and exploit them for their own petty interests," he told the Rheinischer Post.
He said it cannot be that people who speak no word of German show up to the local benefits offices with perfectly filled-in forms and demand child support or a permit to set up a business.
Earlier this year the UK Government rushed through measures restricting EU migrants' access to benefits and enabling the expulsion of those found begging or sleeping rough ahead of the lifting of restrictions on migrants from Romania and Bulgaria.
The Prime Minister has been under intense pressure to strengthen EU immigration rules from Tory MPs worried about the growing strength of Ukip.
In a broadcast debate last night with Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, Ukip leader Nigel Farage repeatedly raised the issue, warning 485million people across the EU - many from very poor countries - were currently entitled to settle "unconditionally" in the UK.
Document EXCO000020140327ea3r003jt
