{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2615"}
____
State care for the elderly should be the last resort, not the first
By Ann Widdecombe   
1,268 words
19 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
PAUL Daniels is a fantastic entertainer and was obviously a good son, spending thousands on adapting his mother’s home so that she could stay in it and caring for her until she died.
He is however quite wrong to complain that he must now pay tax on the gain he will make when he sells her house.
He bought the house himself in his name and it therefore counts as a second home, thereby attracting capital gains tax. His complaint is that he has “saved the government a small fortune” by looking after mum at his own expense.
I have lost count of the number of times I have heard this sentiment expressed and it never fails to frustrate me. Why do we assume that it is the government’s responsibility to care for our parents and that we save it money if we take on the role ourselves rather than assuming it is our responsibility anyway and the government has a role only when we absolutely cannot do it?
Do we say that parents are “saving the government money” by looking after their children? Of course not and it is equally nonsensical the other way round but Britain appears to have lost sight of that. It is the welfare state gone mad.
We have reached a stage now when we think the state should be the carer of first not last resource. When the state rightly expects an elderly person to use his or her own assets to pay for care the offspring shout that it reduces their inheritance as if they have a God-given right to have that inheritance assured by the taxpayer. 
There are countries which, when assessing the entitlement of the elderly to help with care, take into account the children’s income as well as the old person’s and quite right too. Families are primarily responsible for their members whether young or old and claiming that one saves the government money merely by exercising that responsibility is ludicrous.
Meanwhile an appalling survey shows that half a million people over the age of 75 feel intensely lonely. For some that will mean they have no families but for others it indicates that the families live too far off to integrate granny into their activities.
So, sorry Paul but you already live in a house worth millions and you can afford to pay tax on the profit you make out of selling the other house.
You are not about to end up homeless or unable to afford a home. 
Your sole claim to not wanting to pay is that you did what any good son would have done anyway. That should be its own reward.
........................................................................
Pedantry is sometimes a bit of fun
A literal-minded reader has written to my website protesting at my use of the word “ignorama” in last week’s column. It does not, he fumes, exist. No, nor does gruntled nor plenty of other words which are regularly deployed in jocular English.
I suppose if I were to invite him into my house and say “take a pew” he would go hunting for a church bench instead of sinking into the nearest armchair.
It is an occupational hazard of columnists that readers sometimes take every word at face value.
Once when I referred sardonically in a church newspaper to Catholicism as the most exclusive salvation club in the world I received a long letter from a reader contesting my theology!
Occasionally however one does receive a gem which not only provokes guffaws but genuinely enlightens.
Some years ago I used the word “octopi” on air when referring to more than one octopus. I received a learned disquisition from a viewer examining the origins of octopus, establishing that the word originated in Greece not Rome and politely suggesting that I thereafter refer to octopodes. And I always have.
........................................................................
We need more of the David Cameron we saw in Israel
DAVID Cameron was at his serious best in Israel, looking and sounding like a statesman. He should now stay like that and forget selfies, positive discrimination, image, Twitter, gay marriage, wind turbines and all the other nonsense he has embraced in the name of “rebranding” and “detoxifying” the Conservative Party, which after all has hardly flourished under his direction with membership at an all-time low.
Unfortunately it seems that he is now intent on messing about with the Hunting Act when the rest of the country is preoccupied with the aftermath of the floods, the struggle to buy a house and the effects of rampant immigration.
If he persists in this madness then expect Ukip to have the last laugh.
........................................................................
Worse than a prison cell, eh?
PETER Rolfe is an unemployed father of 18 children by 10 different women who believes that it is the duty of the rest of us to supply him with a pair of council houses because his present accommodation is “worse than a prison cell”.
Am I the only one who thinks that this sort of behaviour is sufficiently anti-social to warrant a prison cell but this time a real one in a real prison?
........................................................................
David Frost's son was the star of the show
LAST week I attended the memorial service for Sir David Frost. It was a memorable occasion with royalty, politicians and mega-celebrities such as Joanna Lumley flocking to say goodbye. But the real star was George Frost, David’s son, who read a poem he had composed himself and which I predict will become as much a staple of funerals as is The Ship.
........................................................................
AT last the EU has done something I agree with. From 2017 all mobile phones will have to be compatible with a single charger.
One of the biggest frustrations of buying a new mobile is that one also has no choice but to purchase a new charger and new hands-free kit for the car. As most people have more than one charger that means a huge waste as well as huge inconvenience. A single charger design will have the same benefits as a single socket design for electrical gadgets.
Ukip huffs and puffs about it, claiming it will stifle innovation but when did a single design for an electric plug ever stop Dyson?
There is occasionally something to be said for uniformity and this is one of the rare occasions when it pays.
........................................................................
SORRY but I am not one of the many who have applauded Zara Tindall’s appearance when she attended Cheltenham.
Certainly she deserves credit for not fanatically losing weight the moment she had given birth but why was she teetering about on grass in high heels; why was that hat so divorced from the rest of her outfit and why was that outfit so visibly straining?
No I am not myself an exponent of fashion and if that is how Zara wants to dress that is all well and good but why on earth all the breathless oohs and aahs about such a daft ensemble?
........................................................................
SO the late Diana, Princess of Wales, handed out the palace phone directories to journalists. It was a breach of trust and meanly underhand but sadly I am not surprised. She did a lot of good for some very good causes but she was never the saint into which public sentimentality tried to turn her. She was unstable, flawed and bitter. Understanding that may make her less of an icon but makes her far more of a human being.
........................................................................
Document EXCO000020140319ea3j0003k
