{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2322"}
____
'It's the politics of anger' Cameron launches attack on Ukip
By Jane Mathews   
600 words
20 May 2014
12:52
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
AS THE European elections loom, David Cameron has urged voters not to be "tempted" to vote Ukip, branding Nigel Farage's recent remarks "appalling".
Cameron branded Farage's recent remarks "appalling" [EPA/REUTERS]
In his strongest attack on the party yet, the Prime Minister accused Ukip of trying to "frighten" the public.
Farage courted controversy last week after suggesting that he would be uncomfortable if a group of Romanians moved in next door to him.
He later appeared to backtrack, saying that "the vast majority" of Romanian would make "good neighbours".
However, Ukip then went on to claim that Romanian gangs were responsible for seven per cent of crime in the EU - a statistic that Farage admitted in an interview last night was inaccurate.
And he courted fresh controversy by suggesting that it was understandable that older candidates should hold homophobic views as they were brought up at a time when they were taught homosexuality was wrong.
Speaking to the Daily Mail, Cameron said: "Ukip have condemned themselves during this campaign with a succession of pretty unpleasant remarks. I think the whole country has heard enough to know what sort of party it is.
"Some of the messages have been about trying to frighten people. It's the politics of anger. 
"We've had financial backers and candidates saying black people should go back to Africa, that it's alright to rape your wife."
Farage said he wanted relations between communities to be "better not worse" [GETTY]
Cameron said he would not be uncomfortable to have Romanians as neighbours, adding: "What was wrong with that remark is it just branded all people the same because they come from one country. It was an appalling thing to say."
He was also asked why his pledge to hold an in/out referendum on the UK's EU membership by 2017 had not won voters from Ukip.
He said: "I think in many ways the referendum pledge will have its greatest relevance at the time of the next election when people will be choosing, do you want to have the Conservatives, David Cameron, continuing with a long-term economic plan that's turning the country around and an in/out referendum? 
"Do you want those things or do you want Labour - that will tax, spend and borrow - or do you want to vote for another party that could risk not having a long-term economic plan and a referendum?"
Ukip are widely expected to win the European elections, which take place on Thursday.
On Newsnight yesterday, Farage said: "Uncontrolled immigration has bred a new form of racism.
"All over the country I talk to people who say, 'I hate to say this, I've never felt like this, but I am beginning to feel a degree of enmity towards communities I am living with such is the pace of change'.
"If we have Romanians coming to Britain, on work permits with the necessary checks, then no one would feel if a group of Romanian men moved in next door that there would be a problem.
"So relations between communities would be better not worse."
He also accepted there were homophobes in his ranks, but added: "Can you name me a party that hasn't, particularly over the age of 70?
"This generation were taught to believe this was wrong and I think many people of that age still find it difficult."
His comments come after a Ukip candidate posted a message on Facebook suggesting that "poofters" should be "shot".
Document EXCO000020140520ea5k00105
