{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1344"}
____
Ed Balls' think tank wants immigrants to have full British citizenship
By Marco Giannangeli   
355 words
2 March 2014
00:09
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
ED BALLS faced mounting criticism last night after a call by his favourite think tank to give illegal ­immigrants full rights as citizens.
A new report, The Economic Case For A Clear, Quick Pathway To Citizenship, suggests there would be “significant" economic benefits in “opening a door for undocumented immigrants to earn legal status and, ultimately, citizenship".
It was produced by the Centre for American Progress, which pays for the shadow chancellor to fly to Washington four times a year to chair meetings.
The report refers primarily to the US but suggests European countries should take the same course.
Last night Conservative MP Priti Patel said: “For more than a decade Labour let immigration get out of control. Now Ed Balls’s own think tank wants an amnesty for illegal immigrants. This would put more pressure on public services from people who haven’t contributed with their hard work and taxes.
"The Conservatives want to reduce immigration so families get good quality healthcare and our children are taken care of. But Labour have opposed every step we have taken."
Last year Lord Mandelson, who served as a Cabinet minister under Tony Blair, admitted the New Labour government “sent out search parties" for migrants.
The think tank report comes as figures reveal a surge in immigration to the UK, with the number of migrants increasing by more than a third to 212,000 in the 12 months to September 2013.
The figures, said to have been boosted by Romanian and Bulgarian economic migration, are a bitter blow to Prime Minister David Cameron who has just one year to keep his pledge to cut immigration to under 100,000.
At Ukip’s spring conference last week, Nigel Farage said mass immigration had made parts of the UK unrecognisable: “Whether it is the impact on local schools and hospitals, whether it is the fact that in many parts of England you don’t hear English spoken any more, this is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren."
Document EXCO000020140302ea32000dy
