{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"644"}
____
Are the Tories on course to win the general election?
By Leo McKinstry   
974 words
10 March 2014
02:18
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE prospect of defeat is now looming for the Tories.
With little more than a year to go before the next general election David Cameron’s party is still languishing behind Labour in the opinion polls.
For all the gaucheness of his character and the Left-wing stridency of his politics Ed Miliband now seems likely to become PM in 2015 with a solid Commons majority.
Labour’s chance of victory next year has been boosted by the dramatic collapse in support for the Liberal Democrats since the formation of the coalition.
Studies have shown that the overwhelming majority of former voters for Clegg’s party have gravitated towards Labour rather than the Conservatives.
The extent of the Liberal Democrat meltdown was illustrated in hilarious fashion last Thursday at a council by-election to fill a vacancy on Nottingham City Council.
In the contest, which was easily won by Labour, the Liberal Democrats received just 56 votes.
That was an even smaller total than the 67 votes for the Bus Pass Elvis Party, whose candidate David Bishop goes by the name Lord Biro and whose main policy is the legalisation of brothels, with a 30 per cent discount for pensioners.
On the same night as this bizarre pantomime was unfolding in the East Midlands another municipal by-election was taking place to the northwest.
In the Ramsbottom ward of Bury Council in Lancashire the Tories upset the odds to gain the seat from Labour on a six per cent swing.
What makes this result significant far beyond Lancashire is that Ramsbottom lies in the constituency of Bury North, one of those crucial marginal seats whose outcome usually helps to determine the general election.
It was Conservative throughout the years of Thatcher and John Major, then Labour between 1997-2010 when it reverted to the Tories.
Were Labour really on course for a resounding victory next year then the party would not be losing northern council seats to the Tories.
Even more damningly just two years ago in this same Ramsbottom ward Labour won the contest easily with 49 per cent of the vote. There is a danger of reading far too much into one minor result.
Nevertheless the Ramsbottom upset could be an indicator that the conventional wisdom about the Tories’ inevitable doom may be wrong.
The crucial point about the next general election is that it will not be a referendum on the coalition but rather a choice between Labour and the Conservatives as to who governs. This is where Labour is bound to run into trouble because of its dire record in office.
Behind all his upbeat rhetoric Miliband will be asking the electorate to hand back power to a party that ruined the public finances, wrecked the economy and deliberately allowed immigration to spiral out of control.
In contrast the Tories will have a powerful narrative to tell.
They can legitimately declare that after years of Labour’s epic mismanagement they turned round the economy, have driven down unemployment and kept inflation low.
Thanks to the tough decisions they took in their austerity programme, every one of which Labour hysterically opposed, Britain now enjoys the fastest growth in Europe.
That narrative of economic success is likely to be enhanced over the coming year, not only by George Osborne’s forthcoming budget, which will probably contain significant tax cuts, but also by accelerating prosperity.
The run-up to the election will also show that much of the fashionable talk about the “shambles" in Government is grossly overblown, little more than a product of social media froth.
In fact Cameron is a far more assured, successful Prime Minister than most of his predecessors over the last 50 years.
Without indulging in the kind of noisy spin that characterised the Labour years his administration has made solid progress in a host of areas such as reforming the welfare system, reducing crime, cutting state bureaucracy and pushing up school standards.
There have of course been damaging failures, most notably on immigration, while Cameron has clung far too rigidly to the expensive metropolitan orthodoxies on overseas aid and the green agenda.
It is this series of failures that has fuelled the surge in support for Ukip, which has also benefited from deepening public exasperation at the political establishment’s reluctance to break free from the imperious, anti-democratic influence of Brussels.
But here we come to a fundamental paradox. The only way Britain can regain her independence is by voting to leave the European Union and the only major party that is offering a referendum on EU membership is Cameron’s.
Such a referendum might never happen if Ukip badly weakens the Tories and allows Labour into power.
Ironically, by splitting the Euro-sceptic vote, Nigel Farage’s party could end up as unwitting allies of the pro-European, anti-referendum cause – just as Labour’s Bennite Left inadvertently helped to back Thatcherism in the 1980s by so bitterly dividing the anti-Tory movement.
The message that a vote for Ukip is a vote for Miliband could be hammered home effectively by the Conservatives in 2015, prompting the return of many disillusioned voters. Certainly there is no reason for the Tories to despair at the moment.
One of the great myths of British politics is that sitting governments are certain to sink into fatal unpopularity.
In fact Ted Heath in 1974 is the only incumbent prime minister since the war to have lost power after his first electoral victory, while plenty of administrations have increased their share of the vote or number of seats, such as Harold Wilson in 1966 or Margaret Thatcher in 1983.
Although he is under siege now Cameron might surprise his critics by the time polling closes in 2015.
Document EXCO000020140310ea3a0012x
