{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2178"}
____
Outrage over plan to create easy entry visas for new migrants
By Martyn Brown   
612 words
8 March 2014
00:22
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A LIB DEM plan to open up Britain’s borders to thousands more migrants was savaged last night.
The party has proposed a relaxation of rules to make it easier for foreigners and their families to come and live in the UK.
A “grandparents’ super visa" to help migrants bring in elderly relatives is being considered, along with a cut in the amount an immigrant must earn before their spouse can join them.
Critics say that alone could mean thousands of extra people entering the UK and Nick Clegg’s party was branded “out of touch with ordinary people" by a Tory MP.
The Lib Dem plans come amid growing Coalition tension over immigration and as current figures show net migration is up to 212,000. David Cameron wants to bring this number down to the “tens of thousands" by next year.
A document prepared for the party’s Spring conference in York this weekend states: “Liberal Democrats propose to ask the Migration Advisory Committee to reconsider the minimum income threshold for a spouse to come to the UK in light of the principle that a person with the means to support their family should be allowed to do so."
It adds that the party proposes “the introduction of a ‘grandparents’ super visa’ that would allow grandparents to visit for a period of up to two years".
Critics blasted Mr Clegg’s party for wanting to “re-open the door" to “uncontrolled immigration".
Conservative MP Charlie Elphicke said: “This once again shows the Lib Dems are out of touch with the concerns of ordinary people.
“Since 2010 the Conservatives have taken tough measures to reverse Labour’s uncontrolled mass immigration and take back control of our borders. Now the Lib Dems want to re-open the door to uncontrolled immigration."
Tory MP Charlie Elphicke criticised the border plans proposed by the Lib Dems [GETTY]
Other plans for discussion in the policy document, Making Migration Work For Britain, suggest removing foreign students from any migration target.
This would, in effect increase the target for the number of migrants by over 150,000 people a year.
The Liberal Democrats would also allow these students to remain after their studies, despite the challenges faced by recent graduates to find work.
Ukip’s director of communications Patrick O’Flynn said: “There will have to be firm restrictions of the ability of migrants to bring in extended family members, especially when these people may be more advanced in years and they are liable to run up higher costs.
“It seems as if the Liberal Democrats still want to turn the NHS into the World Health Service and the British welfare state into the world’s welfare state.
“Hardworking people in Britain cannot afford this reckless and ill-considered approach to immigration."
A Lib Dem spokesman said: “These measures are basically about British people’s family lives. The income threshold is set too high at £18,600 and we want that reviewed. It is not fair to say that it will lead to thousands more people coming." Details emerged days after a furious Coalition row over the impact of immigration on jobs
Conservative Minister James Brokenshire accused Lib Dem Business Secretary Vince Cable of being “condescending" after he said he was “intensely relaxed" about large-scale migration to the UK.
The spat came as Government analysis concluded migrant workers had replaced Britons in jobs during the economic downturn.
At the last election the Lib Dem’s radical policies included offering an amnesty to 600,000 illegal immigrants allowing them to remain in the UK.
Document EXCO000020140308ea3800105
