{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"829"}
____
Romanians and Bulgarians make up a QUARTER of all those sleeping rough across England
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
952 words
26 February 2014
14:52
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
BULGARIANS and Romanians make up almost one in four rough sleepers in England, according to new figures which show a rise in homelessness across the country.
The number of Romanians sleeping rough has risen by 50 per cent in just 12 months, and the majority of homeless people on London's streets now come from overseas.
The figures were compiled from surveys conducted in October and November last year, meaning the actual number of eastern Europeans sleeping rough could be much higher after labour restrictions affecting Bulgaria and Romania were lifted on January 1.
Ukip's Communities spokeswoman Suzanne Evans described the figures as "a shocking legacy and sad result of open door EU immigration".
She said: "Homelessness is something we should be trying to eradicate, but our EU membership is simply increasing the problem.
"This is surely proof that unrestricted immigration is forcing upon Britain migrants we would be much better without.
"It makes absolutely no sense for people from countries with some of the cheapest housing in Europe to come to a country with some of the most expensive and end up living on the streets as a result.
"It is clear that we need a comprehensive points-based immigration system that allows into Britain only those who make a net contribution to our society and who have the skills required for a job."
A 12-month re-entry ban for EU nationals who have been removed for begging or sleeping rough is among restrictions brought in by the Government last month in a bid to curb arrivals.
Counts and estimates compiled by local councils in the autumn put the number on the streets at 2,414, 105 more than the previous year and a 37 per cent increase over three years.
Of the 2414 rough sleepers, 497 were Romanian - up from 329 last year - and 60 were Bulgarians – up from 53.
There was a small drop in the number of street sleepers in London - which still accounts for more than a fifth of all cases
Most rough sleepers in the capital - 53 per cent - were found to be from overseas, the same proportion as last year, and more than one in four of all those on the streets coming from central and eastern European countries which joined the European Union over the past decade.
The plush Park Lane area of London has become a magnet for Eastern European rough sleepers, and last July immigration enforcement officers from the Home Office detained and quizzed 63 Roma travellers, around half of them women.
There was a seven per cent rise in rough sleepers across the rest of the country.
Housing Minister Kris Hopkins [PA]
Labour said the rise was a "direct consequence" of Government policies and charities pointed to benefit cuts and demanded more help to prevent people becoming destitute.
Shadow housing minister Emma Reynolds said: "It is appalling that on David Cameron's watch the number of people sleeping rough has soared by more than a third.
"The Prime Minister once said homelessness and rough sleeping were a disgrace. But warm words are cold comfort to those sleeping rough if you fail to act.
"The Government was warned its policies risked increasing homelessness and rough sleeping but these warnings fell on deaf ears.
"What we are seeing now are the direct consequences of David Cameron's failure."
Rick Henderson, chief executive of umbrella body Homeless Link, urged ministers to take notice of the "clear warning sign" of the consequences of reducing housing-related support.
He said the problem was partly being "contained" by many town halls protecting homelessness services from severe local government funding cuts - and that rough sleepers were getting help more quickly.
But the numbers in Derby had nearly doubled after it "slashed" funding, he said.
"There are many issues, such as welfare reform, that could lead to further rises in rough sleeping," Mr Henderson cautioned.
"This should serve as a clear warning sign that cutting funding for housing-related support now will have a serious impact in the future."
Charles Fraser, chief executive of the St Mungo's charity, said: "It is deeply depressing that we are seeing yet another rise in rough sleeping.
"A tragic amount of people have been let down before having to face the misery of sleeping on our streets.
"Our clients tell us they don't know how to find help, or it's not available when they ask. That is the time to stop homelessness, before it starts."
Housing Minister Kris Hopkins said: "For years, the national figure on the numbers of rough sleepers failed to reflect the true situation on our streets.
"We've changed that so every council now has to report the scale of the problem in their area.
"We've also introduced the No Second Night Out initiative, which actively seeks to find and help hidden rough sleepers and means that 70% of rough sleepers spend no more than one night on the streets.
"And with the majority of rough sleepers in London being foreign nationals, we've ensured European nationals sleeping on our streets are removed, and we've toughened the immigration rules."
Leslie Morphy, chief executive of Crisis, said: "Behind these statistics are more and more real lives being devastated by the traumatic experience of homelessness.
"The Government must take real steps to address the chronic lack of affordable housing and urgently consider the impact its cuts are having, particularly to housing benefit and local homelessness services."
She welcomed the extension of government funding for a scheme which helps single homeless people into private rented homes.
Document EXCO000020140226ea2q0048x
