{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1565"}
____
Tories would be on the money if they axe inheritance tax
By Leo McKinstry   
925 words
27 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
TAXES should be levied only to provide essential public services and to promote economic prosperity. But in modern Britain they have become instruments of aggressive social engineering, punishing success, destroying freedom, undermining enterprise and promoting class divisions.
We now have a perverse, expensive fiscal system that confiscates the wealth of the hard-working to reward the idle or bankroll the state’s ideological projects, such as mass immigration or overseas aid.
We can see this all too graphically with inheritance tax. A measure that was first conceived as a means of raising cash from only the rich, particularly large landowners, now hits those who stand to inherit even modest homes.
In recent years, the mix of house-price inflation and the relentless lowering of the tax threshold in real terms means that anyone who is left an estate worth more than £325,000 is dragged within the clutches of state expropriation. All assets, from property to paintings, valued above this level incur a death tax of 40 per cent.
Now £325,000 is hardly an enormous sum when the average house price in England is £264,000. According to figures published yesterday by the Office for National Statistics, in the South-east the average house is worth £316,000, almost the same level as the inheritance tax threshold.
It has been estimated that in the past three years the number of households caught in the inheritance tax trap has doubled to 42,000. If present trends continue 176,000 estates will incur the tax by 2018. All this is grossly unjust, a form of state-organised larceny to penalise those who want to look after their own families.
Such institutionalised seizure of private property runs counter to the values of a strong society. The desire to pass wealth down the generations is instinctive. It is a practice that should be cherished for it promotes family stability, personal responsibility and hard work, the very pillars of civilisation. That is why the Tories are right to talk again about raising the inheritance tax threshold.
Meant to raise cash from the rich the inheritance 'death tax' now affects many [ALAMY]
This week David Cameron said that he hopes the next Conservative manifesto will include a pledge to raise the level from £325,000 to £1million, thereby liberating most of Middle Britain from the tentacles of the property grabbers. Many voters will be cynical about this promise given that as Shadow Chancellor George Osborne famously proclaimed at his party’s conference in 2007 that he would raise the threshold to £1million if the Tories came to power. It was this statement that led to a dramatic rise in the polls for the Tories and deterred Gordon Brown from holding a general election that autumn.
Yet in office the Tories have done nothing about the hugely popular pledge. To be fair to them that is because they failed to gain an absolute majority at the polls in 2010 and, as part of the coalition agreement, the Lib Dems forced the abandonment of any changes to inheritance tax. Indeed Nick Clegg’s party wants to move in precisely the opposite direction by imposing yet another assault on property through the so-called mansion tax. That just reveals the destructive mentality of the Left with its worship of state control and its belief that a huge proportion of private wealth should really be in the hands of official bureaucracy.
That is the attitude which has been gaining ground ever since the first heavy death duties were introduced by the Liberal government in 1894. At the time the prime minister Lord Rosebery warned his overbearing chancellor Sir William Harcourt of the damage that would ultimately result, with the state inevitably ratcheting up the tax bills and grabbing ever more property. But Harcourt was in no mood to back down.
“We are all socialists now,” he triumphantly declared. Ineffectual but far-sighted, Rosebery was right. Inheritance tax has become ever more unjust over the years. In many cases it is a particularly brutal form of multiple taxation. For the money used to build any estate, many people have already been subject to income tax, council tax, stamp duty and capital gains tax.
The great irony is that for all the envious Left-wing shrieking about the need to make the rich pay, it is often the wealthiest who manage to avoid inheritance tax through complex accounting arrangements and the creation of trusts whereas ordinary families are the people who are caught. The Labour peer Lord Lipsey revealingly – and patronisingly – admitted recently that inheritance tax is largely paid “by the unwise and the unlucky”.
Supporters of the present iniquitous regime bleat about the potential lost revenue from any change, for last year the tax brought in £3.1billion, a figure that is expected to rise to £5.6billion by 2018. But it is absurd to pretend that there are not savings to be made in Government spending. For a start we could slash our grotesque annual international aid budget of £11billion or reduce our £14billion yearly contribution to the EU or further cut the lavish bills of the £210billion welfare system.
This month the Tories have shown a welcome faith in financial freedom through the radical pensions reforms contained in the Budget. Now they need to do the same with inheritance tax. The end of socialist robbery is the right policy for the country and it will prove a vote winner. 
Document EXCO000020140327ea3r0003g
