{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1909"}
____
American lessons on benefit tourism
By Frederick Forsyth   
1,503 words
7 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
PERSONALLY I found the smoochathon last week between David Cameron and Angela Merkel pretty heavy going.
Rather like an eager puppy trying to persuade a great big rottweiler to make space in the fireside basket.
Lots of friendly licking but no hint that the bigger beast was going to tolerate any change to the shape of the basket.
Except in one area. The German Chancellor agreed that she and her people had had enough of immigrants wafting in and heading straight for the generous tap of the social security system, enriched by the taxes of hardworking Germans and Merkel voters.
Now it happens that here also, whenever the polls are taken on what really gets up people’s noses, whether Tory, Labour or Lib Dem voters, it is the same issue at number one. Right across the board. 
So… might there be a solution?
The German Chancellor made plain she would not tolerate any altering of the basic law of the EU: that any citizen of the EU may travel anywhere in the EU and settle down. 
But I heard it suggested the day after Frau Merkel left that the law might be elastic enough to decree that social security benefits only apply to those in legal gainful employment. 
That is to say not tourists, not over-staying students, not family visitors.
But how to prove it? 
The Americans are also inundated with sneak-ins wanting to settle down and get a job. They respond with the Green Card system.
If you have a Green Card you can work and have access to benefits. 
Without one you are illegal if you try to get a job – and even if you employ such a person.
It is not up to the authorities to prove you do not have one, it is up to the immigrant to prove it by carrying the Green Card at all times. It counts as a stay-visa and a work permit.
So how do you get one? You apply before arriving .
If you are young, healthy, educated, qualified, in funds or with specialist knowledge some employer will offer a job and issue the required letter. 
If not you are on a tourist or student visa with strict limits. 
Inside the EU we could not stop them coming but we might be able to stop them dipping straight into the honeypot without proof of a taxliable job. 
At the moment no one in officialdom has a clue who they are, where they come from, when, what they do or where they live.
And human rights do not prevent them lying. But a card is a card.
No card? We can’t send you back but you cannot dip the hand into our social security benefits.
It might work but would take a lot of steely political will. 
I do not see that coming out of forelocktugging Whitehall but Merkel might stand up to the European Commission and its smirking president Manuel Barroso.
........................................................................
Still sodden but nature will not be denied
ALL right, winter is over, the calendar says so. 
The sun is trying its best but the legacy of weeks of rain isn’t so easy to shake off. 
The lawn outside the window is a fine display of brown mud – the contribution of the CO’s half-dozen ducks.
Every piece of timber in the garden – shed doors and so forth – is so water-swollen nothing will close any more.
The ground is sodden umpteen feet down. But there is a more powerful voice in the land. Nature says it is spring and will not be disobeyed.
The blue tits are frantically site-hunting, the doves are scooting in and out with twigs as they build their nests, the grey squirrels are back racing around after girlfriends, the cock wood pigeons are somehow aware the shooting season is over.
In the pond the clogged frogspawn will become tadpoles and the carp will start to drift up from the winter depths. 
It would have been much the same many centuries ago in a monastery garden when the monks farmed the doves for eggs and the carp for meat. 
Watching the changing of the seasons in an English garden gives me an enormous sense of belonging.
We just have to be patient and the sun will keep coming – with the warmth we can dry out and repair our drenched country.
And then the new generation will be born right across the land. 
It was always thus.
........................................................................
Immunity for the IRA, what about troops?
FRESH revelations about the turpitude of our establishment when the lights are off. 
A hundred and eighty IRA killers have now lived for two decades safe in the knowledge that even if they admitted all, they can never be prosecuted. 
They were issued “comfort letters" giving them lifelong amnesty for anything they ever did.
But not our soldiers. For them no mercy, no pity, no amnesty.
The threat of yet more prosecution still stalks the lives of those who wearing the Queen’s uniforms fought bigoted terrorism in Northern Ireland.
Terrorists immune, Tommies threatened – but it’s all coming out only now.
And who was behind this secret deal with killers? Yes, once again, it was “hand of history on my shoulder" Tony Blair. 
Was anything ever touched by that man that was not later to be revealed as shabby, sly and dishonourable?
........................................................................
Priti Patel is expected to pull vital votes [PH]
THERE may well be a reshuffle as soon as David Cameron seeks to create a team that is not entirely public school. And one who may be rising within it is Priti Patel. 
I went over to speak two elections ago when she was competing for her Essex constituency, a first-timer, and liked what I saw. 
The child of Ugandan Asian immigrants she went to a comprehensive, was very bright and pretty with it. 
More to the point she can pull votes and DC is going to need that as an orchid needs water.
Because of her ethnicity, background and personality she could go down a storm in any of the 80 marginals that are going to control the next election.
........................................................................
Shale gas can get us out of Putin's pocket
The people of western Ukraine, in throwing out his choice and protégé, utterly humiliated Vladimir Putin but he has had his swift revenge. 
And as usual a ruthless dictator has run rings around the West and its posturing ninnies.
The EU has very predictably proved useless, shipping in its foreign high representative Cathy Ashton – why does she always look so utterly bewildered? 
It is all beginning to look like a replay of 1938. Back then Hitler was determined to rape Czechoslovakia. 
So he concocted nonexistent persecutions by the Czechs of the Sudeten Germans and then raced in to “rescue" them. 
At his leisure he then gobbled up the rest.
Out of reach and out of touch we sent over Neville Chamberlain to wave things and utter platitudes. 
Now we have William Hague to do that job but it is still the same job. 
 
The simple truth is that, as with Syria, Putin has won hands down. 
But it need not continue like that – it is up to us. 
Putin has one strength and only one: his huge reserves of gas and oil and our dependence on them both. 
We not only make our main enemy mega-rich we put our jugular vein in his grip as well.
Germany has made her insane choice: to abolish her clean, safe and German nuclear reactor generation of electricity to become his servant but we do not have to follow suit. 
Beneath our feet lies our salvation: shale gas which has transformed the USA and set her free from oil-rich tyrants. 
We could do the same but we have to stop faffing and sweep aside the placard-waving beardies – the same today as the CND Greenham Common nutters of 30 years ago.
........................................................................
AFTER the party conference the oxygen of publicity wafted over the person of Nigel Farage to mix with the cigar and beer fumes.
But there is something that has always puzzled me about Ukip and still does. 
Apart from Fag-Ash himself, who else is there? 
I mean, if there was a general election tomorrow and he won a clear overall majority Nigel would have to go to the palace and ask permission to create a government… the Queen would say, “Oh well, I suppose so" and he would start to form a cabinet. 
Of whom? Who is the foreign secretary, home secretary, chancellor of the Exchequer? 
Who are the secretaries for defence, pensions, health, education, transport, industry and on and on? 
They couldn’t all be Nigel could they? Surely he wouldn’t be all of them?
There would not be enough time, what with wandering from Downing Street to the Bull and Bush.
That’s my problem with Ukip.
Apart from Nigel who is there?
Document EXCO000020140307ea37000hd
