{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"660"}
____
Freeloading migrants are a burden we can’t afford
417 words
10 March 2014
05:29
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
DECEITFUL propaganda is the weapon of the fanatical pro-immigration brigade.
Desperate to foist their ideology on a reluctant public they trumpet the diligence of all new arrivals, without whose hard work our economy and public services would supposedly collapse.
The emptiness of that claim has been exposed by shocking new figures obtained by this paper.
These show that in February 2013 no fewer than 397,000 immigrants were living off benefits provided by the taxpayer, a phenomenal increase of 110,000 in five years.
That rise makes a mockery of the sanctimonious rhetoric in favour of unrestricted free movement and open borders.
The truth, as today’s statistics demonstrate, is that many foreigners who come here are freeloaders eager to exploit our absurdly generous benefits.
The ease with which migrants can claim social security is profoundly damaging to our country.
First, it is completely unaffordable, especially since our welfare bill is already more than £220billion.
Second, it destroys the welfare contract: support is meant to be based on past payments of tax and national insurance. By definition newly arrived migrants have made no contribution to our society.
A simple solution would be to bar all migrants from claiming benefits until they had paid tax for at least five years but sadly, given the feebleness of our political class combined with the despotism of the EU, there is no sign of that happening. So we will have to keep on subsidising scroungers.
--------------------------
Nick Clegg’s no democrat
Beleaguered Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg has a novel approach to politics. He has decided that the only way to drag his party out of the mire of unpopularity is by reiterating his slavish devotion to Brussels.
In a cliché-ridden speech at the Liberal Democrats’ spring conference in York he sneered, with typical metropolitan arrogance, at the “parochialism dressed up as patriotism" of Euro-sceptics.
It is noticeable, however, that Clegg does not want to put his enthusiasm for Brussels to the test.
This so-called democrat remains as hostile as ever to a referendum on our membership of the EU.
--------------------------
Let the sunshine flood in
The long, damp winter seems finally to be over. After the record-breaking deluge of recent months Britain is finally enjoying a deserved spell of glorious sunshine.
Yesterday parts of the country were even warmer than Madrid and Athens. We can only hope that the good weather now lasts longer than those miserable floods. 
Document EXCO000020140310ea3a001xh
