{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2991"}
____
Nigel Farage says he WILL run in general election
By Benjamin Russell   
806 words
9 May 2014
13:02
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
NIGEL Farage has said he will stand for parliament in next year's general election, regardless of what happens in the European elections.
The Ukip leader didn't specify where he would be running, but did say he was looking for a seat in the south-east.
He said: "I'm going to stand in the general election at the head of a Ukip team regardless of what happens in two-weeks’ time." 
When asked by the show's host Nick Ferrari if he had his eye on any seat in particular he replied "several".
"I'm going to be standing somewhere in the south-east of England, that's where I'm from", he said. 
He went on to say that he would welcome the chance to have a live television debate with David Cameron, but claimed the prime minister was trying to avoid that happening.
He said: "He doesn't want to have a debate with me. Of course he doesn't, because he knows that there are two issues on which he can't win. One is the European question - the promise of a referendum. 
"Five years ago, this bloke won the European elections giving us a cast-iron guarantee that if he ever became Prime Minister there would be a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty, and he let us down.
"But the big one and the one that no-one wants to debate, and the reason they are throwing all this abuse at us, is this - it is completely pointless to talk about immigration figures and targets while we are members of the EU and we have a total open door to nearly half a billion people and we cannot control the numbers that come.
"If you look at just how bleak things in the eurozone now are - they are going into deflation, you've got youth unemployment approaching 60 per cent in two of those countries - if I was living on the Med and young and out of work, I would come to London too.
"Migration Watch says at least another half a million will come in the next five years. That's conservative. At the moment 4,000 a week are coming from the European Union and settling, and Mr Cameron does not want to have that debate with me."
Asked whether he would debate with Mr Farage, Mr Cameron told BBC Breakfast: "I have suggested perhaps we should have one debate with all of the parties and so everyone can have their say, and perhaps we need a debate where the two people who could be Prime Minister debate directly with each other.
"You can have a debate where you have all of the parties. I don't think we could have a party like Ukip without an MP if you don't have a party like the Greens who have an MP."
Asked about the furore over comments made by Ukip candidates and supporters, Mr Farage acknowledged that there were "a few idiots" in his party but insisted it was not racist. He argued that media coverage of their comments reflected an effort by the establishment to counter the party's challenge to the status quo.
He said: "This is the political class clubbing together, using their mates in the media and doing anything they can to stop the Ukip charge... It's because we are challenging the establishment and this is what the establishment does."
Mr Farage added: "Because we've got a few idiots in our party - as by the way does every other party - somebody in some part of England says something stupid or offensive on Twitter at midnight, and this is held up as being representative of the view of the party.
"We are a non-racist, non-sectarian party and two nights ago in London we had a big get-together of all of our ethnic, Indian, West Indian candidates on a stage. These people wouldn't have joined Ukip and be standing for Ukip if they thought that.
"Interestingly, as a party we are now getting growing support amongst the ethnic communities. I hope that those images from the platform the other night will stop elements of the press and our opponents in politics throwing this label at us."
Mr Farage highlighted the case of a Lib Dem councillor in Surrey convicted of racially aggravated assault and a Conservative candidate in Lincolnshire who was previously a member of the BNP, pointing out that neither case had attracted widespread attention in the national media.
"Imagine if one of mine had been a former BNP officer - there would be hell to pay," he said. "Scrutiny is fine, but it should be applied evenly across all of the parties and it is not."
Document EXCO000020140509ea590020b
