{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1914"}
____
Lib Dems: Give more benefits to asylum seekers
By Macer Hall   
361 words
7 March 2014
01:55
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE LIB Dems are to demand an urgent increase in benefits paid to asylums seekers.
A party policy document also argues that restrictions on asylum seekers taking jobs should be relaxed.
It alleges the thousands of claimants for refugee status awaiting a decision on whether or not they can stay in the UK are becoming “increasingly worse off" under the current rules.
The Lib Dem demand for more cash for migrants provoked anger last night and fuelled the growing row between the party and its Tory Coalition partners.
The document, called Making Migration Work for Britain, is to be discussed at the Lib Dems’ spring conference in York this weekend.
It was drawn up by a committee of senior party members chaired by MP and former Lib Dem minister Sir Andrew Stunell.
It says the current level of benefit payments for asylum seekers “has not risen in line with inflation or other benefits since 2008, causing asylum seekers to be increasingly worse off".
It adds: “Uprating asylum benefits would allow asylum seekers a modest, but more humane, subsistence in the UK."
It went on to call for asylum seekers’ handouts to be uprated regularly in the same way as other benefits.
Under current immigration rules, asylum seekers cannot legally undertake paid employment. But the Lib Dems also want the rules changed “so that asylum seekers can better support themselves, while contributing to the public purse."
It says the Liberal Democrats would make all working age asylum seekers look for work if their case has not been resolved within six months.
The document says its plans are to ensure that asylum seekers are “kept from destitution".
Tory MP Henry Smith said last night: “It’s astonishing that when Conservatives are fixing Britain’s benefits system to make work pay the Lib Dems are now proposing ‘uprating’ benefits for asylum seekers."
Robert Oxley, of the TaxPayers’ Alliance, said: “At a time when taxpayers themselves will likely have not seen a rise in their wages in a long time, it would be better in the long-term to link benefits to average earnings."
Document EXCO000020140307ea3700105
