{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2571"}
____
The Conservatives are getting more people off the dole
By Leo McKinstry   
897 words
17 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
IT WAS not supposed to be like this.
The Tories are meant to be the party of mass unemployment and lengthening dole queues.
Yet since coming to power in 2010, the Conservatives have presided over a remarkable expansion in job creation.
As Chancellor George Osborne prepares his Budget this week he can reflect on an increasingly striking record on employment. The reduction in joblessness is probably the greatest of the Coalition’s achievements during the past four years, making a mockery of all Labour’s predictions about economic meltdown.
None of those doomsayers was more vociferous than Shadow Chancellor Ed Balls.
In a March 2012 interview he argued the coalition’s approach would lead to “a lost decade of slow growth and high unemployment".
He even demanded an apology from Osborne for his alleged failure to get the country back to work.
But his forecasts have proved hopelessly inaccurate. Unemployment has been dropping continuously. In the last quarter alone, the overall figure for people out of work fell by 125,000, preceded by 167,000 in the previous quarter. Every single day the economy is creating 2,000 new positions, with the jobless rate now standing at just 7.2 per cent, far lower than in most of Europe. Similarly, the number of those claiming jobseekers’ allowance has now dropped for an astonishing 15 successive quarters. 
Labour and the embittered Left pretend the fall in unemployment is not really happening. It is all an illusion, they cry, driven by nothing more than meaningless part-time jobs and brutal zero-hours contracts. But 70 per cent of all the new jobs in the economy are full-time.
Moreover, with record numbers of women in the workforce, many employees want to work part-time to fit jobs in with other commitments.
One study last year found that 82 per cent of part-timers are content with this arrangement.
Similarly a recent study found that staff on zero-hours contracts are happier than full-time salaried employees, precisely because they enjoy greater flexibility. Nor should the influence of the “zero hours" culture be exaggerated. Just 3.1 per cent of the workforce are on these contracts.
Even more damningly for Labour, the overwhelming majority of new jobs in the economy under the Tory-led coalition have gone to British workers rather than immigrants.
During the years of Gordon Brown’s epic misrule around 80 per cent of new posts were being filled by foreigners. In the past year British recruits have accounted for 86 per cent of the rise in employment.
What is just as impressive is how all this job creation has occurred against the backdrop of heavy cutbacks in the public sector. Since 2010, almost one million state-funded jobs have disappeared – a reduction Labour said would lead to economic disaster – but this loss has been far outweighed by jobs growth in the wealth-producing private sector.
Britain’s jobs success under the coalition exposes not just the emptiness of the Left’s predictions but also the folly of their socialist policies. For much of the explanation for his accomplishment lies in measures that Labour opposed with ideological fervour, such as the reform of the welfare system. 
Steps such as the benefits cap, tighter rules on eligibility for disability payments and sanctions for persistent refusal of job offers have played a key role in making it much harder for freeloaders to remain on the dole as a lifestyle choice.
In the same vein, while Labour remains committed to high taxation, the coalition has dramatically cut taxes by raising the personal allowance, thereby taking millions out of tax altogether and making work far more attractive.
Businesses, especially small firms, have also been encouraged to take on more employees through cuts in corporation tax and the removal of excessive regulations, all part of a climate that favours enterprise.
As David Cameron said recently, his will be “the first government in history to end a term with less regulation on the statute book than when it came to power". Those words contrast with the threat from Labour’s Harriet Harman in 2009, when she was introducing another batch of equalities rules, to “shine a spotlight in every workplace". 
The enterprise environment is further reflected in the growing practice of “reshoring", whereby British companies are bringing back their manufacturing to this country from overseas, especially China and India. This is occurring partly because of rising labour costs in Asia, partly because of fast-turnaround times for completing orders at home and partly because of Government policies.
“This country is becoming more competitive," says Denver Hewlett, head of cooker manufacturer Stoves which has recently created 200 new jobs in Merseyside.
The rapid growth in apprenticeships is another indicator of this enterprise culture. Labour’s obsession with pushing young people through university has been replaced with a welcome emphasis on real skills for the workplace. More than 1.5 million apprenticeships have been created since 2010 and over half of all businesses plan to take on new apprentices in the next five years.
Partly because of the myths peddled by Labour’s pernicious propaganda machine the Tories have not received the credit they deserve on reducing unemployment.
But their record far surpasses anything achieved in office by blustering Balls and miserable Miliband.
Document EXCO000020140317ea3h000en
