{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3311"}
____
Top Government legal adviser warns Cameron of ‘Mexican stand-off’ over EU renegotiations
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
659 words
14 May 2014
17:36
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
ONE of the Government's top legal advisers last night warned that David Cameron could find himself in a protracted "Mexican stand-off" with other European states if he tried to renegotiate Britain's EU membership.
Martin Howe QC[YOUTUBE]
Martin Howe QC, who advises the Government on constitutional matters, said even if the Prime Minister were able to renegotiate significant powers back from the EU, voters in other countries could wreck his plans through national referendums.
Addressing a meeting of the social and economic think tank Politeia in London last night, which included former Tory cabinet minister Peter Lilley and Ukip treasurer Stuart Wheeler, he warned Britain to brace itself for possibly years of negotiations and stalemate.
Mr Howe suggested one way Mr Cameron could speed up the negotiations would be to invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty after next year’s General Election.
That would give the EU two years' notice of Britain's desire to quit the organisation in the lead up to an In/Out referendum in the UK in 2017.
However, he said that would be a risky move as other member states could attempt to call Britain's bluff and not offer any concessions during those two years of negotiations.
Mr Howe said: "If that was invoked, then to get out of the Mexican standoff you have the time limit which is the [2017] referendum.
"But at the end of it you would have to either sign what was put in front of you - which you may not like - or leave.
"It would cause considerable difficulties to industries which would be languishing between this country and other member states."
David Cameron has pledged to hold an in/out EU referendum in 2017 [PA]
The Prime Minister has set renegotiating the UK's relationship with the EU at the heart of his attempts to keep Britain in the institution.
Mr Cameron wants to see changes to immigration rules, welfare and the single market and also see UK excluded from the goal of "ever-closer union", as contained in the Treaty of Rome.
Mr Howe argued that when it came to renegotiations, Britain should adopt a "zero-plus" approach of effectively starting with a blank sheet of paper and then deciding what it actually wanted from the EU.
The alternative approach, which would involve going through all the treaties and regulations which are part of the EU and renegotiating on them individually, would be an almost never-ending exercise.
Mr Howe said: "The British government's own renegotiating strategy and objectives remain shrouded in mystery - no doubt for good political reasons.
"Concrete proposals are not clear."
He also warned that even if the leaders of the member states backed any changes, referendums across the continent could see millions blocking reform.
And given the volatility of political systems in Southern European countries such as Italy and Greece, the situation may arise that a country's leader approves a new treaty, but is forced from office before it can be implemented.
Mr Howe said: "This could be a big obstacle to implementing a renegotiated solution even if agreement is reached at a political level with the key member states.
"There maybe significant resistance from one or more member states, and then attempts to block a renegotiation with the UK.
"Even if such an amending protocol was signed, we could face a situation where politically a renegotiation might be held up for years by attempts to get it through the treaty ratification procedure."
Ukip's head of policy Tim Aker today said Mr Howe had showed that "once again the facade of renegotiation has been shown to be complete nonsense".
He added: "The only people who really do think EU renegotiation works just aren't honest enough to admit that they really want Britain to stay in the EU."
Document EXCO000020140514ea5e002xo
