{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3398"}
____
'All anyone wants to talk about is the idiots in Ukip' ANOTHER tough interview for Farage
By Jane mathews   
503 words
16 May 2014
18:52
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
NIGEL Farage has been questioned about comments he made about foreigners during a testing radio interview today.
Nigel Farage was in the hot seat again today as he was quizzed on his views [LBC]
The Ukip leader, who has a German wife, was challenged over a remark that he made about parts of the UK being "like a foreign land" where "you don't hear English spoken any more".
At the time, he described being on a rush-hour train leaving London's Charing Cross, saying: "It was not until we got past Grove Park that I could hear English being audibly spoken in the carriage".
In an interview with LBC radio today, he was asked whether his wife Kirsten and the couple's daughters spoke German.
Farage replied: "No, because they can speak English."
Pressed again on the issue, he said that he didn't believe his wife spoke German on trains.
The politician was also forced to defend his party once more against claims of intolerance today.
An candidate is accused of posting a homophobic message on Facebook suggesting that "poofters" should be "shot". Ukip have said they are looking into the incident.
Farage said: "All anyone wants to talk about is the idiots in Ukip," Mr Farage said. "Wherever we have found people who have had extreme, racist, unpleasant views we have unceremoniously got rid of them...
"To hold out the views of handful of people as being representative of Ukip frankly is not the truth."
Farage was also pressed on a comment he made claiming he would feel uncomfortable if a group of Romanians moved in next door to him.
Presenter James O'Brien conducted the challenging interview [LBC]
Presenter James O'Brien asked: "What about if a group of German children did? What's the difference?"
"You know what the difference is," Farage replied, adding: "We want an immigration policy that can control not just quantity, but quality as well."
David Cameron, campaigning in Lancashire, said that some of Mr Farage's comments had been "pretty unpleasant".
He said: "I just hope people will look at this and recognise that we are an open, tolerant, compassionate country.
"Yes we want to have a controlled immigration system, yes we want to sort out the welfare system but we shouldn't put these labels on as Ukip do.
"I hear people say, look this is not the sort of country we are, I'm not voting for this sort of thing, it just sends out a terrible message about Britain."
Last month, Farage was challenged by BBC political editor Nick Robinson over his decision to employ his wife as his secretary.
Referencing a Ukip poster campaign accusing immigrants of taking local jobs, Mr Robinson asked Farage whether he should have hired a British secretary instead.
However, Farage insisted that "nobody else could do that job" because of the unsociable hours involved.
Document EXCO000020140516ea5g003e9
