{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3690"}
____
Man with the EU plan: David Cameron speaks exclusively ahead of European Elections
By Macer Hall   
1,075 words
22 May 2014
09:38
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
DAVID Cameron last night insisted that only the Tories have a positive plan to bring “real change in Europe” and give voters an in-or-out EU referendum.
Cameron believes that the Tories will lead the UK in the right direction[GETTY]
The Prime Minister used an exclusive interview with the Daily Express on the eve of the European and local elections to promise that the Conservatives will stand up for the UK in Brussels.
“In the European elections we are the only party that has actually got a plan to bring real change in Europe.
“Labour and the Liberals think there is nothing wrong with Europe.
"Ukip think we should just walk away.
“We’re a trading nation that needs to have those markets open.
"We’ve got a plan for getting our relationship right, standing up for Britain in Europe and then giving the British people a choice in an in/out referendum.”
Mr Cameron talked to the Daily Express on the train back from a campaign visit with London Mayor Boris Johnson to Newark, Notts, the scene of a crucial Westminster byelection next month.
The Prime Minister was in a relaxed mood and upbeat about his party’s campaign for today’s polls.
But he was determined to use the final hours of campaigning to make a “positive” case for fighting for a new future for Britain in Europe.
He said: “I’m very positive about the campaign; I think we’ve had a good campaign but obviously we need to do everything we can to encourage people in the remaining hours.”
He said Britain needs a strong team of Conservative MEPs in Brussels to support his bid to renegotiate EU membership.
He said: “The worry I have is that if people vote Ukip, you’ll get a bunch of MEPs that will be ignored in Europe.
"That’s not in Britain’s interests.
"We need Conservatives in the Parliament who can get change in Europe and stand up for Britain’s interests.”
IMMIGRATION
Ministers need to do more to bring down annual net immigration, Mr Cameron said.
He added: “I think we have made some really big steps.
"We have closed down 700 bogus colleges, we’ve reduced migration from outside the EU by over a third, we’ve put a cap on economic migration from outside the EU, we’ve insisted that people who come here have to learn English, we’ve made sure that EU citizens who travel here can’t claim benefits straight away.
“Overall, net migration is down.
"But I share people’s frustrations and we need to do more.”
UKIP
Mr Cameron insisted the Tories had been right to go on the attack against Ukip.
Polling for both Labour and the Tories is understood to suggest that attacks on Ukip have actually helped firm up support for the anti-Brussels party.
The Prime Minister said, however: “My argument is we have the answers and we should encourage people to opt for the politics of the answer, not the politics of anger that the cheap rhetoric of Ukip provides.”
Cameron said he will stand up for the UK in Brussels [GETTY]
The Prime Minister said that he had to hit back at remarks by some Ukip members on race, gays and other issues.
“I would say I have fought a very positive campaign,” Mr Cameron said.
“Of course I’ve been endlessly asked about Ukip’s views, what their candidates have said and what their backers have said.
"And you can’t ignore these things.”
LABOUR
The Prime Minister accused the Labour leader and his team of having nothing to say about Britain’s role in Europe.
“They don’t seem to have anything to say about the European issue and that’s what these elections are about.
"When they do get a bit of air time, all they have to say is entirely negative.
"We are less than a year from a general election; they don’t seem to have anything to say about how to improve the state of the British economy.
"They have run a shambolic campaign, demonstrating they have got nothing to offer.”
Mr Cameron also laughed off Mr Miliband’s recent claim to have the most “intellectual self confidence” of the two leaders.
“I will leave it to others to judge this issue.
"It’s not for me to mark my own homework,” he said.
PATRIOTISM
Mr Cameron took a swipe at Lib Dem Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg over his recent claim that anyone who wants Britain to quit the EU was “unpatriotic.”
“Patriotism is about loving your country and wanting the best for it and believing in its history and its institutions and its role in the world,” he said.
“I think we are a very patriotic nation but you can be patriotic and want Britain to be in the European Union or you can be patriotic and want Britain to be out of the European Union.
“Obviously what we want in Europe is the best of both worlds.”
COUNCIL ELECTIONS
Voters should also remember to back the Tories in today’s local elections to keep their council tax low, Mr Cameron said.
“Conservative councils cost you less; less than Labour councils, less than Liberal Democrat councils,” he claimed.
“Ours have a really good track record of achievement.”
FUTURE IN EU
Returning from Newark, the Prime Minister pointed to Britain’s manufacturing base in the Midlands as a key reason for Britain to stay in a reformed EU.
“Here in the Midlands you have got Britain’s manufacturers and great businesses like Toyota and JCB.
“We need to have not just Europe’s markets open to us; we need a say about what the rules are.
“My concern about leaving the European Union is that you lose that say on what the rules should be.”
GENERAL ELECTION
The Tories are facing a “tough battle” in next year’s general election but can win, Mr Cameron said.
He said: “We’ve got just over 350 days to go.
"I think people can see we’ve got a long-term economic plan that is working.
“Our message at the election will be – we’re on the right track; stick with the team that has turned it all around and don’t put it all to waste.”
Document EXCO000020140521ea5m0048u
