{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3028"}
____
INTERVIEW: 'I was called an UNCLE TOM for backing Ukip' Members speak out on racist abuse
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
1,328 words
8 May 2014
16:03
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
UKIP leader Nigel Farage last night appeared on a platform with dozens of black, Asian, mixed race and other ethnic minority party members in an attempt to fend off accusations of racism.Before the meeting, Express.co.uk's Political Reporter Owen Bennett spoke to two leading Ukip members from minority backgrounds to find out why the party had decided to fight back against the "racism" charge.
SINCE promising to cause an "earthquake in British politics" at the party's Autumn conference last year, Nigel Farage's Ukip has been subject to levels of media scrutiny usually reserved for the three main political parties.
As a result, Twitter feeds belonging to Ukip candidates for the European and council elections have been trawled, and unsavoury comments - including that comedian Lenny Henry should "emigrate to a black country" - have hit the headlines.
Partly as a result of these posts, and partly because of the party's strong focus on immigration reform, Ukip has had to deal with the accusation it is a "racist party".
It is not a label the party's economic spokesman Steven Woolfe recognises at all.
Mr Woolfe, who has an Irish grandmother and a black American grandfather on one side of his family, and a Jewish grandmother and English grandfather on the other, joined Ukip four years ago after leaving the Conservatives.
He said: "As a mixed race person, a lot of people said, 'You're joining this political party called Ukip - is it not a racist party?'
"When I first went down to speak in their Torquay event in 2010, I went with open eyes and caution, like anybody would do.
"I didn't want to get involved in politics again, and I wanted to observe what was happening.
"When I got there, I found there was no racism.
"What I found was ordinary people like my mum, like my grandma, like my neighbours, who were simply worried about the direction their country was going in.
"I actually felt very comfortable in their presence because there were people who were very wealthy, from good backgrounds; there were people from the North, there were people from Wales, there were people from all over the country,
"It was a unified party with people from different backgrounds and different cultures.
"I felt comfortable joining them. I didn't see any of these arguments of xenophobia and there are hundreds like me who feel the same."
Protestors outside the Ukip public meeting last night [REX]
Mr Woolfe - a trained barrister who now works in the City of London - is both typical and atypical Ukip.
With the City background he is very much in the mould of leader Nigel Farage, but he has experienced a tough upbringing, initially in the notorious area of Moss Side in Manchester.
He said: "I was born in Manchester, grew up initially in Moss Side and spent most of my life in Burnage.
"I grew up a few streets away from the Gallagher brothers [Noel and Liam who formed Britpop group Oasis]
"I was the only 'coloured' face, as it was then called - black face as we call it now, in my primary school, and I used to get a fair amount of abuse.
"Proper racial abuse - name calling and physical abuse with it."
Mr Woolfe was speaking less than an hour before he took to the stage to deliver a passionate riposte to those calling the party racist, flanked by other ethnic minority party members.
It was a step he - and the party as a whole - was extremely reluctant to take.
He said: "Because of the last few weeks, this has been driven and demanded by our own members who are mixed race, Jewish, Catholic, Muslim, North and South, who are tired of being called racists, tired of being abused on the doorsteps.
"I myself have been called an 'Uncle Tom', I have been called an apologist.
"We are not going to let the agenda be driven anymore by those who are calling us racist or xenophobic when our party is completely the opposite.
"If anyone has a care to look at our immigration policy they will see it is the most ethical immigration policy."
But even with the rally, it does not detract from the fact that some members of Ukip have expressed racist views.
Does Mr Woolfe have a hard time justifying his membership of Ukip to his friends and family?
He said: "We had a dinner recently of family members who are from different backgrounds - my wife is from Winchester, so a middle class family, and I come from a Northern working-class family.
“We were sitting there at dinner and they said 'Why are you in Ukip allowing these people in?'
"The problem with it is we get frustrated as well. We bang our heads against the table when we see these people.
"But we do what other parties don't do. We find them when they are observed and we deal with them and get them out and that's our procedure because we recognise that there may well be bad people in all political parties but at least we are making an effort.
"We are going to review the systems we put in place after this week when we have seen one or two candidates.
“It will stop and it will get better because we don't want to face it anymore and we don't want those bad apples ruining it.
"But the key point is no one turns round and says because you've got Muslim bomber in a different country that the whole of Islam is wrong.
"No one turns round and says 'You've got a Catholic priest which is an abuser so all Catholic priests are the same'."
Nigel Farage attempts to dispel accusations of Ukip being a racist party [PA]
Ukip's small and medium business spokesman, the Pakistan-born but Yorkshire-raised Amjad Bashir, believes the accusations of racism are the being thrown by "the status quo, the parties in power" which are "feeling threatened" by Ukip.
"That's why they get their archaeologists digging up Facebook and Twitter," he said.
"Is it right that we demonise the whole of the Lib Dems for Cyril Smith being a paedophile?
"We don't say that about the whole of the Lib Dems, and the same is for us.
"As a party if there are a few nutters, as there are in all parties, but we don't demonise the whole of the Lib Dems or Conservatives for that."
A few "nutters" on social media is one thing, but some at the very top of the party have also expressed views and used language which has provided fuel for those attacking Ukip.
Former Ukip MEP Godfrey Bloom referred to foreign aid being sent to "Bongo-Bongo Land" and kept his job as the party's defence spokesman.
Gerard Batten, another MEP, commissioned a "charter of Muslim understanding" in 2006, which called on followers of Islam to sign a declaration rejecting violence.
It also says parts of the Koran promote "violent physical Jihad" should be regarded as "inapplicable, invalid and non-Islamic".
Despite the document being commissioned eight year ago, Mr Batten said in February this year he stood by the proposal.
Mr Bashir, who is a Muslim, said he had not spoken to Mr Batten about the document, but it had been raised by members of his Islamic community.
He said: "The views put forward by an individual at a time of the 7/7 bombings are not the views of the party as a whole.
“That party has dismissed these views, the party never subscribed to these views.
"The party believes all people, all British people, who live in this island are equal, and all religious beliefs are to be respected."
Document EXCO000020140508ea58002s2
