{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3327"}
____
We CAN hit migrant cuts target, insists David Cameron despite continued flood from EU
By Macer Hall   
343 words
14 May 2014
09:53
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
DAVID Cameron insisted last night that his target for cutting immigration was still “achievable” – despite a continuing flood of new arrivals from EU countries.
David Cameron spoke yesterday but Keith Vaz argued it was an impossible task[PA]
Official figures are expected to show today that at least 30,000 Romanians and Bulgarians came to Britain since the beginning of the year.
Net migration soared to 212,000 last year, raising fears that the Home Office will not meet its target of reducing the annual figure to “tens of thousands” before next year’s General Election.
Mr Cameron said he had not given up on the target but conceded the Government has limited powers.
“The target remains, I think it is absolutely achievable,” he told a committee of senior MPs.
But apparently admitting the target could be missed, he accepted there were “big increases” in the numbers of newcomers from economically struggling eurozone countries, including Spain, Italy and France. Labour MP Keith Vaz, the chairman of the Commons Liaison Committee, told the Prime Minister it was not possible for the Government to control net migration.
He said: “You simply can’t control the numbers of people who leave the country. So you aren’t going to make that target.”
Mr Cameron responded: “The figures will be what the figures are. But my job is to do everything I can in order to make progress towards that target.”
The PM admitted cutting migration was harder than delivering other policy commitments. He said: “When we took power in 2010, net migration was well over 200,000 every year. That is much too high and I want to get it back under 100,000, which it was in the 1980s.”
The Government has succeeded in cutting the influx from outside the EU by a third, he added.
Bogus colleges that allowed foreign workers to pose as students have been shut and widespread abuse of family visas has been tackled.
Document EXCO000020140514ea5e000rv
