{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1050"}
____
British patients put at risk by care workers with poor grasp of English
By Sarah O’Grady   
334 words
8 May 2014
03:16
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
FOREIGN care workers should sit compulsory tests to make sure they have an adequate command of English, the Government was told yesterday.
Poor language skills could lead to bad treatment and even abuse as elderly patients struggle to make themselves understood, said Dr Shereen Hussein, a scientific adviser to the Department of Health.
To have people who cannot speak, read or write even basic English in charge of medication and with a res­ponsibility to follow medical instructions is a recipe for disaster, she said.
Immigrants from countries outside of Europe such as Pakistan and India already have to prove they can speak English before they settle here, but those from the EU do not.
Dr Hussein, of King’s College London’s Social Care Workforce Research Unit, is now calling on agencies who recruit people as carers to make sure staff can speak English. She said: “Workers are placed in the homes of vulnerable adults with complex needs and communication problems can result in bad treatment.”
There are currently 1.2 million care workers in England and 204,000 of them are foreign. From March 2015, care workers will be expected to hold a certificate showing they have been properly trained – but English ability is not included.
Alp Mehmet, of MigrationWatch, said: “It’s a no-brainer that people working here should be able to speak our language. It is just common sense.” Care Minister Norman Lamb said: “For people to get the care they want they need to be able to communicate.”
Ukip last night said not just care staff but all EU migrants should take a language test. Head of policy Tim Akers said: “It’s better for Britain and for the migrants if we ensure they can speak English as a condition of entry.
“Being able to communicate properly is essential for migrants to integrate and contribute to our economy, community and society.”
Document EXCO000020140508ea58000gp
