{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3129"}
____
Ukip suspend poster boy Andre Lampitt after claiming Ed Miliband was 'not a real Brit'
By Dion Dassanayake   
405 words
24 April 2014
21:24
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE UK Independence Party have suspended member Andre Lampitt for "repellent" comments he made on Twitter, it emerged this evening.
A party spokesman said they were aware of at least six posts expressing "extreme racists views" including anti-Islamic sentiments.
In the past few months Mr Lampitt had called Labour Ed Miliband not a "real Brit" adding that the Labour leader was Polish and also called slavery an "act of war" on Twitter.
The Zimbabwean decorator and kitchen fitter was hoping to become a Ukip candidate for local elections and appeared in a party political broadcast.
In it he wore a builders hard hat and said "since the lads from Eastern Europe" had moved to the UK he had struggled to provide for his family.
A party spokesman said they were aware of at least six posts expressing "extreme racists views" [YOUTUBE]
A Ukip spokesman said Mr Lampitt's membership had been "suspended immediately pending a full disciplinary process."
They added: "We are deeply shocked that Mr Lampitt has expressed such repellent views."
Since Ukip suspended Mr Lampitt's membership it appears his Twitter account has been deleted.
In one post Mr Lampitt claimed Mr Miliband was "not a real Brit...He was only born here" and suggested the Labour leader was Polish.
In another tweet written to a user he said: "Oh for Gods sake get over it slavery was an act of war you lost stop being so damn jealous and move forward."
While in another post Mr Lampitt said: "I want to start a website islamoutofuk.co.uk".
Posts made by Ukip hopeful Mr Lampitt in the past few months [TWITTER]
Before the account was taken offline, the Ukip hopeful described himself on Twitter as: "Born British in Rhodesia and proud of heritage sad at how Britain is run."
It comes after party leader Nigel Farage was forced to defend the latest Ukip European elections poster against accusations of being racist.
One poster read: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?"
Alongside the anti-immigration message was a picture of a giant hand pointing at whoever would be reading the poster.
Labour MP Mike Gapes had blasted the posters as "racist" while former Tory minister Lord Debden said "UKIP stands for the worst in human beings".
Document EXCO000020140424ea4o003pd
