{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1395"}
____
The UK must not be sucked into the conflict in the Ukraine
By Leo McKinstry   
880 words
3 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE drumbeat of war is echoing towards the Black Sea.
As Russian troops enter the Crimean peninsula and the provisional government of Ukraine orders a full military mobilisation, conflict now seems increasingly inevitable.
“We are on the brink of disaster,"
says the Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk.
In the face of this escalating crisis, Western politicians have queued up to denounce President Putin’s regime. Quivering with all the synthetic moral indignation that their hollow souls can muster, they express their outrage over the troop movements and demand that the integrity of Ukraine be upheld.
“Europe must send a clear signal that it will not tolerate any acts of aggression," says the Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk, though he fails to explain how Europe will enforce this stern policy. Our own Foreign Secretary William Hague has joined in the chorus of outrage, ordering Britain’s withdrawal from preparatory talks with Russia in advance of the G8 summit at Sochi. That must have really shaken them in Moscow.
But all this condemnation is just meaningless verbiage, unsupported by any genuine determination to confront Russia.
It is nothing more than empty prattle designed to feed the vanity of European politicians who love to strut on the global stage but are clueless about how to conduct an effective foreign policy. “Speak softly and carry a big stick," said the great US President Teddy Roosevelt of his approach to foreign affairs in the early 20th century. The self-serving political class in today’s Europe takes exactly the opposite line over Ukraine, bold in language but not in action, as Putin knows only too well. 
And typical of this ineffectuality is Baroness Catherine Ashton, who goes by the grand title of High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs.
The manufactured grandeur of her position is matched by her verbal pomposity. “I call upon the Russian Federation not to dispatch such troops," she declared yesterday of the Russian incursion into Crimea. “I call upon all sides to decrease the tensions immediately." Her self-delusion is as expansive as her self-importance.
The truth is that Lady Ashton does not have a shred of credibility. She might be paid over £250,000 a year and be head of a vast EU diplomatic operation costing an annual £442million, but she is a lightweight socialist apparatchik who has never been elected to any public position. She represents no threat to Putin. This is, after all, the woman who for several years was vice-chair of that posturing gang of noisy defeatists, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
What makes the current antics of Baroness Ashton and Brussels all the more absurd is that they helped to provoke the current crisis with their megalomania.
The EU has been desperate to extend its sphere of influence. Ukraine, despite its severe economic problems, was a prime target. But with breathtaking incompetence the EU’s imperialists failed to think through the consequences of their drive to pull Ukraine away from Russia, nor of the reality that large parts of the country, especially in the east and on the Crimean peninsula, actually feel a greater affinity with Moscow than with the West. The present chaos is partly a mess of the EU’s own creation.
Even more sickening is to hear the EU hectoring Russia about the need to protect “the integrity and sovereignty" of Ukraine. For the very existence of the EU is predicated on the destruction of sovereignty and contempt for the traditional concept of nationhood. Indeed, the abolition of the nationstate across Europe is one of the central goals of the EU, reflected in its obsession with the single currency and free movement. So, according to the duplicitous mindset of Brussels, nationalist spirit is heroic when it comes from western Ukraine but is nasty bigotry when it exists elsewhere.
The same double standards exist in Britain. While now blathering about the independence of Ukraine, our treacherous political class has colluded in the demolition of our national integrity through its surrender to Brussels, its imposition of mass immigration, its promotion of the ideology of multicultural diversity and its disdain for our national heritage. 
Yet all this happened without any consent of the British public. The social revolution and the takeover by Brussels were both imposed against the overwhelming will of the people.
That is why it is so hard to listen to any lectures from Europe’s politicians about Ukrainian democracy. Indeed, the fashionable doctrine of globalisation, which has caused such damage in our country and is such a burden through the £11billion aid budget, is exactly the same political creed that demands our involvement in the quagmire of Ukraine.
It is this arrogant, globalist dogma that brought us the disastrous wars in Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya. The crisis in Ukraine is none of our business. Since we have nothing to contribute beyond empty words we should stay out of it.
What does it matter to us if the Crimea leaves Ukraine? Why should British taxpayers have to fund the rebuilding of the Ukrainian economy? Our politicians should concentrate on dealing with issues at home instead of indulging in these endless pathetic power games abroad.
Document EXCO000020140303ea33000sl
