{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2228"}
____
BBC's Left-of-Centre viewpoint frustrates Conservative MP Phil Davies
By Marco Giannangeli   
581 words
9 March 2014
03:09
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE BBC is so politically biased it should lose taxpayer funding and be made into a voluntary pay subscription service, a senior MP said last night.
His call comes after the Sunday Express was handed a list of more than 50 items purporting to demonstrate left-wing bias in BBC news reporting last year.
It includes items from the flagship Radio 4 news programme Today, BBC 2’s Newsnight, internet coverage and the 24-hour news channel.
For example, on June 27, Today co-host Evan Davis challenged the Government’s position on fracking with the words: “The Government appear to be proposing some kind of community compensation, let’s call it a bribe, let’s call it a bribe shall we?"
On the day it was reported that recorded crime figures had dropped by 10 per cent since the Coalition Government took office, the BBC’s website led with a story about police budget cuts.
Many of the examples are sins of omission. For example in ­October, Will Straw, director of the Institute for Policy Research think-tank was interviewed about Ed Miliband’s pledge to freeze energy prices for two years. The think-tank was described as “centre left" but it was not disclosed Mr Straw was a Labour parliamentary candidate, even when Labour policy was discussed.
A report by BBC News in July quoted “university think-tank" Million’s assertion that England was facing a shortage of teachers without saying the think tank is run and staffed almost exclusively by Labour insiders.
On March 19, Today failed to point out the Resolution Foundation is a centre-Left think-tank, though it made clear that Policy Exchange is right of centre. Last year BBC political editor Nick Robinson admitted the BBC had made a “terrible mistake" by not reflecting public concern about immigration during Blair’s years.
Last night Phil Davies MP said: “There is without a doubt an institutional left-wing bias at the BBC. I don’t say it is always deliberate. The problem is there are so many like-minded people in the organisation who don’t see there is any challenge to the way their metropolitan, metrosexual view of the world.
“They need to get out more and mix with the ordinary ­people outside of their middle-class, champagne-socialist circles. As long as the law exists that forces us all to pay for the BBC from our taxes, it is going to have to do a damned sight better at being impartial.
“In my opinion the licence fee must be replaced by a voluntary subscription service."
A recent report on BBC bias by the right-of-centre Centre for Policy Studies found only one centre left think-tank received a “health warning" more than once in every 10 times it was mentioned while right-wing think- tanks were introduced that way one in four mentions.
Director Tim Knox said: “We are very concerned that there is a left bias within the BBC."
Former BBC journalist David Keighley now runs Newswatch, and has monitored BBC bias towards the EU for more than 15 years. “What we have found is a systematic under-representation of the case for withdrawing from the EU," he said.
Last night a BBC spokesman said: “BBC News provides impartial and independent coverage across all outlets and we have a responsibility to report a range of different viewpoints."
Document EXCO000020140309ea390015x
