{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2533"}
____
Vince Cable tells bosses: Stop treating willing-to-work migrants as a problem
By Macer Hall   
321 words
6 March 2014
01:55
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
VINCE Cable will today intensify the angry Coalition row over border controls by delivering an outspoken defence of mass immigration.
The Lib Dem Business Secretary will use a keynote speech in the City to accuse the Tories of putting the economy at risk by seeking to stem the tide of new arrivals.
“We just have to stop treating people coming to work here as if they are a problem; we need to kill all the scare stories," he will say, before going on to deny that migrants “sponge" off Britain’s generous welfare system.
Mr Cable will admit that the issue has become “politically toxic" but will insist that politicians have a duty to confront anti-immigration views from voters.
And, in a highly provocative statement, he will declare: “I am intensely relaxed about people coming to work and study here."
His remarks to City chiefs at the Mansion House are bound to irritate Home Secretary Theresa May and infuriate Tory backbenchers.
He broke ranks last week by hailing a shock rise in official net immigration figures as “good news" for the economy.
And he will step up his onslaught tonight by saying: “We cannot duck the issue of immigration.
“It is all very well ministers and others promising to emphasise engineering in schools, but business cannot afford to wait years for the specialists which they can currently only obtain internationally."
Tory MP Philip Hollobone said: “Daily Express readers will be disappointed to hear that a senior member of the Cabinet holds these views, despite overwhelming polling evidence that the British people feel there are too many migrants coming to these shores."
Downing Street was forced into an embarrassing denial yesterday that it had withheld an official report suggesting the impact of immigration is less than feared. No 10 insisted it would be published “shortly".
Document EXCO000020140306ea360015p
