{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3318"}
____
INTERVIEW: 'Ukip's divisive politics are driving voters to the Greens,' says party leader
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
697 words
14 May 2014
14:22
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
GREEN Party leader Natalie Bennett believes voters are flocking to support her pro-European party as people rally against Ukip's "damaging and divisive" rhetoric on immigration.
Natalie Bennett, leader of the Green Party[EXPRESS]
Ms Bennett claims the rise of Nigel Farage's eurosceptic party, which is opposed to the free movement of people across the EU, has motivated pro-immigration supporters to pledge support for the Green Party in next week's European election.
The Green Party leader believes a European election poll published yesterday backs up this claim, with the Greens in fourth place on 10 per cent - three per cent ahead of the Lib Dems.
In an interview with Express.co.uk, Ms Bennett - who was born in Australia but moved to the UK in 1999 - also attacked the Tories, Labour and Lib Dems for trying to "out-Ukip Ukip" by chasing the anti-immigration vote.
She said: "There's been a very strong trend with the rise of the Ukip vote, there's a significant - I can't put numbers on this - but I have seen a significant number of people saying 'I'm voting for the Green Party because I want to vote against Ukip'.
"A lot of people don't really trust the political system, and like a lot of Ukip voters are concerned about corruption and about what difference will my vote make, but are saying now that Ukip's collecting all those votes I've got to get off the fence and vote Green - as that's the only way I show I'm opposed to everything Ukip is saying."
Ms Bennett said she and her party were "very angry about the race to the bottom rhetoric" on immigration led by Ukip.
She also accused the eurosceptic party of stirring up anti-immigration sentiment to such an extent Eastern Europeans living in the UK are becoming victims of "hate crimes".
Ms Bennett said: "The way Ukip have raised the immigration debate is not a good thing.
"I was in Great Yarmouth [in Norfolk] talking to an organisation that talks to Eastern Europeans living in that area - and this is anecdotal - but they are saying they have seen an increase in hate crime.
"Lots of it isn't being reported to the police, partly because victims are saying: 'That's how the British people feel and that's what we expect' because of what they are seeing in the media, because of what they are seeing from Ukip."
"It's extremely damaging and divisive.
"That's the reality of what Ukip's doing, but lots of people are reacting against that."
Natalie Bennett speaks to Express.co.uk's political reporter Owen Bennett [EXPRESS]
Ms Bennett believes the majority of "the population do want to remain in the EU", but the debate is being framed by eurosceptics as people "don't go on the streets to wave a banner saying 'maintain the status quo' - this is not the sort of thing people do unless they really genuinely feel threatened."
The Green Party currently have two MEPs - compared to Ukip's nine - but sit in the fourth largest group in the European Parliament, the Greens–European Free Alliance.
Ukip's MEPs sit with the Europe of Freedom and Democracy group - the seventh largest in the European Parliament.
Ms Bennett said it would be "disappointing" if the party did not increase its number of MEPs after the election next week, but conceded Ukip were dominating the headlines.
She admitted she had "seriously considered whether or not I should go out and say stupid things" to raise her profile, but added: "We are seriously in this for the long haul, we are a serious political party, that option isn't available to us."
She said: "We are serious long-term party with a democratically developed program, with people who get elected to be councillors who stay there for the long haul, just like our MEPs who do the work in Europe.
"Whereas Ukip goes to Europe and basically swan around in the bars."
Document EXCO000020140514ea5e001xh
