{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2121"}
____
Probe into language school where 'migrants can buy crucial English certificates for £500'
By Dion Dassanayake   
377 words
17 May 2014
19:57
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
IMMIGRANTS who speak no English are able to buy a crucial certificate which shows they have passed a "secure" language test, it has been reported today.
A language school has been accused of selling crucial qualifications for £500[PA]
The documents, which are required by anyone who wants to permanently stay in the UK and apply for British citizenship, are allegedly being sold for £500.
The accusations surround one language school in London and Home Office staff have today searched the premises.
Immigration and enforcement teams have attended the Learn Pass Succeed school in Upton Park following an undercover newspaper sting.
The Daily Mail filmed the documents allegedly being sold at the examination centre for £500.
The accusations have been levelled at the LPS school in the capital [PA]
Immigration and Security Minister James Brokenshire told the paper: "The Home Office takes any allegation of fraud extremely seriously and we have already begun a full investigation.
"We will take the strongest possible action against anyone who is found to have abused the rules - including the possibility of criminal prosecutions for fraud."
Examinations watchdog Ofqual are aware of the allegations and said they were seeking further information "as a matter of urgency".
The investigation into the school was carried out after the newspaper received a tip-off from a whistleblower.
Uzwan Ghani, one of the directors of LPS, said the problem was confined to its Upton Park branch.
Immigration and enforcement teams have attended the school today [GETTY]
The school have four branches in London and said tests at Upton Park have been suspended.
Speaking to the paper, Mr Ghani said: "I'm shocked that this has happened and am very concerned as to how it could have happened.
"We are very thorough when it comes to checking IDs of candidates before they take the test, so I will have to investigate which of the centres the test was taken in and who the assessor was.
"I've been in the business for five years and I've never come across something like this and I would not allow it. It is wrong and ridiculous."
LPS have not commented on the allegations.
Document EXCO000020140517ea5h0038p
