{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1429"}
____
Jail for Romanian crook in UK border shambles
By Anil Dawar   
404 words
4 March 2014
00:00
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A Romanian crook who exposed shambolic UK immigration controls by fleeing the country and returning while a warrant was out for her arrest has been jailed for nine months.
The case of Nicoleta Bala, who lured elderly men for a gang of pickpockets, had prompted a furious judge to describe Britain’s borders as “like a sieve".
The attractive east European acted as bait to distract victims who were targeted at cashpoints.
Accomplices, who had already watched the men enter their PIN numbers, then stole their bank cards. She was arrested but then went on the run and returned to Romania.
When she was picked up at Folkestone ferry terminal in Kent last May, the shocking truth emerged that she had entered and left the UK twice before without being spotted.
The revelations at Lincoln Crown Court court last December provoked Judge Sean Morris to say: “Something has to be done. This is something the police at a senior level, the Home Office and the Ministry of Justice are going to have to take up. You can get in and out of this country. The borders are like a sieve."
Bala, 28, from Leicester, had admitted two distraction offences against 82-year-old men in Grantham, Lincolnshire, and Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, in 2008.
Judge Morris waited until he had seen her criminal record from Romania before sentencing her last Friday. They showed she had no previous convictions. But he rejected Bala’s plea to be spared jail because she had given birth to her first child.
The exasperated judge said: “The public would be outraged if somebody who is part of a gang targeting elderly men did not get locked up.
“You are an attractive young lady who played the part of the polite, pleasant, innocent who would engage the victims in conversation whilst they were being fleeced without their knowledge.
“Other young attractive women thinking of getting involved in gangs like this will now know where it leads. Babies or no babies.
“This was sophisticated thieving. It was professional crime." He warned foreign gangs: “The lesson is, don’t come here and commit crime."
The court heard that both victims were vulnerable elderly men who have since died.
Judge Morris, 55, the Recorder of Lincoln, was praised in 2011 after ignoring sentencing guidelines to jail a violent burglar for 15 years.
Document EXCO000020140304ea34000p1
