{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1313"}
____
Why such surprise at these soaring migration figures?
By Douglas Murray   
929 words
1 March 2014
01:29
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
SCAREMONGERING! That was the accusation from certain quarters when this paper warned about further relaxing of EU border controls.
“Scare tactics" they said, over warnings that lax border controls would mean an increase in the thousands of Eastern Europeans already coming to this country.
“What happened to your migration wave?" they taunted in the first days of January when the whole of Romania and Bulgaria did not move to the UK in two days . How they sneered.
And yet the figures from the Office for National Statistics are in.
And once again it is those who have warned of an increase in the number of immigrants who have been proved right and the sneering mass-immigration lobby who have been proved wrong.
But none has been proved more wrong than the Government.
David Cameron promised to bring down net migration drastically.
Indeed the Conservative Party’s online manifesto still promises “to bring annual net migration down to the tens of thousands – rather than the hundreds of thousands we saw under Labour – by the end of this Parliament".
So how well is that going?
Not very, according to the new figures. Far from immigration coming down it has soared in the past year.
And the numbers arriving from the EU went up most of all.
In the year to September 2013 net migration from within the EU rose from 154,000 the previous year to 212,000, despite the Prime Minister’s spokesman saying this week it remained “absolutely the objective" of the Government to bring immigration down.
This rise in migration from within the EU is a massive blow to the coalition.
As it happens – and this is something for which the coalition ought to be applauded – migration into the UK from outside the EU fell again last year, down by almost 90,000 from two years earlier.
That is because this is an area that our Government can do something about.
And to give ministers credit they are trying to do something about it even though they are still far off their own targets.
But the real issue is that despite all the grandstanding they simply cannot fulfil their promise.
Because the largest cause of migration is at present beyond this or any other government’s control.
And unless this country gets out of our current arrangement with the EU there is no prospect of us regaining control over our borders.
So the situation will only get worse.
After all we must remember that these new figures are only for the period up to September last year. That is – they are from before the opening up of Britain to anyone from the new member states of Romania and Bulgaria.
And as the Daily Express reported earlier this week the ONS figures show that 24,000 citizens from the two countries arrived in the year up to September 2013.
This presents an almost three-fold increase on the numbers – 9,000 – who arrived in the 12 months before that.
Is there anybody outside of the major political parties who remains in denial of the fact that the figures for the present year are going to be many times that number?
Sadly these figures have already become a football for a political class that is incapable of dealing with this problem.
Prominent figures from the Labour party – which lost control of our borders utterly while in government – have seized the opportunity to criticise the Government’s immigration policy Labour MP Keith Vaz has called the Government targets “totally unrealistic".
But far more infuriating for Conservative ministers must be the glee of some of their Liberal Democrat colleagues – who have actually welcomed these appalling figures. Senior Lib Dems have been saying that these figures are “good news".
Their glee will be shortlived because poll after poll shows that a vast majority of the British people want immigration brought down not just by a little but by a lot.
Any party which continues to argue for unalloyed immigration will rightly suffer at the ballot box. Because this is not primarily about the politicians but about us, the people.
And although politicians in favour of mass-immigration forever praise its advantages the immigration which is currently soaring brings more problems than it does benefits.
This is not just because of the strain on our schools and hospitals but because most of the migrants from within the EU – including 70 per cent of those Romanians and Bulgarians – are looking for work.
Many others are fleeing countries such as Spain which have been wrecked by the euro.
It is no fault of these – often young – people that they cannot find work at home.
But with one million young Britons unemployed here what is the sense in importing vast numbers who will make things even harder for our own young?
Of course some unemployed British people do not want to work but the vast majority do.
And their ability to find a paying job is undermined by each of these waves of migrants.
Any party truly wishing to sort this out must start by finally addressing the fundamental problem – that our borders are currently controlled not by Westminster but by Brussels.
There are elections coming up for the EU in May and for Westminster the May after that.
Those are the best two moments we have to tell our politicians finally that our concerns are not to be sneered at.
And they are not simply to be “listened to". They are to be acted upon.
Document EXCO000020140301ea31001b9
