{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1564"}
____
Nigel Farage bashes Nick Clegg in live LBC debate on EU
By Alison Little and Martyn Brown   
578 words
27 March 2014
00:08
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
NIGEL Farage emerged triumphant last night with a confident and combative performance in the first of his Euro showdowns with Nick Clegg.
The UK Independence Party leader confounded Lib Dem prejudices by proving he had done his homework on facts and figures and taking on Europhile arguments.
Mr Farage, establishing himself as a major threat to the three main Westminster parties, was rewarded with frequent applause from the studio audience.
And later a YouGov poll made him a clear winner – by 57 per cent to Mr Clegg’s 36 per cent – on who voters thought performed best.
The hour-long LBC radio debate – staged live in London and carried also on TV networks – was the first of two clashes between the anti-Brussels and pro-EU leaders.
They are being held ahead of the May 22 European Parliament elections, in which Ukip hopes to improve on its current nine out of 73 seats and where the Lib Dem leader fears losing all 12 of his party’s MEPs. The two men face each other again next Wednesday in a live BBC2 TV debate.
Deputy Prime Minister Mr Clegg had challenged Mr Farage, who mocked David Cameron and Ed Miliband for staying away.
Mr Clegg, a former MEP and ex-EU official, is gambling on mobilising the pro-European vote by campaigning as leader of the “party of in” the EU.
Mr Farage, a former City trader and an MEP since 1999, lived up to his reputation for pint-drinking bonhomie by announcing on his arrival that he had been at “a dress rehearsal” in a nearby pub.
The Ukip leader declared Mr Clegg had “never had a proper job” and was now part of the Westminster “bubble”.
The two men clashed on a raft of subjects – raised by the studio audience, listeners and LBC host Nick Ferrari – including referendums, low-skilled EU immigration, European criminal justice rules and the two men’s credentials.
Mr Farage destroyed Mr Clegg’s case that three million British jobs and massive inward investment depend on being in the EU.
He declared: “I want us to be Great Britain not Little England.”
Mr Farage said Britain’s inability to control EU immigration was the key factor that had “woken people up” to the European issue.
He urged voters to ditch the “tired status quo” and opt for a “fresh approach that says let’s be friendly with Europe but not be governed by their institutions”.
Mr Farage added: “I’m British and I believe the best people to govern Britain are the British people. I think the majority of people are now on our side.”
He said voters invited now to join the EU would say ‘No’ because of its £55million a day membership fee, thousands of laws they had no say over and “total open door, unconditional” potential immigration for 485 million Europeans. Mr Clegg challenged Ukip claims about potential Bulgarian and Romanian immigration and the cost of Europe.
That prompted one of the few humorous moments – with Mr Farage claiming cuisine was the only area where Britain could learn from Europe. Yet Lib Dem Treasury Minister Danny Alexander claimed later that Mr Clegg had “won hands down” despite the YouGov poll findings.
A Ukip spokesman said: “The poll shows what we knew: Nigel Farage won the debate and has the better argument on Europe.”
Document EXCO000020140327ea3r00034
