{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1634"}
____
Germany backs 'two-speed' Europe in boost to David Cameron's EU renegotiation bid
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
521 words
28 March 2014
14:11
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
GERMANY'S finance minister has backed a 'two-speed' Europe which would make sure Britain was still involved in key European Union decisions, despite not being part of the eurozone.
In a joint article for the Financial Times, Chancellor George Osborne and his German counterpart Wolfgang Schauble said any changes to EU treaties must "guarantee fairness" for member states outside the single currency bloc.
The article will boost Prime Minister David Cameron's hopes of renegotiating Britain's relationship with the EU ahead of the UK's in/out referendum in 2017, as it meets one of his key negotiating demands - that the rights of non-eurozone states must be protected.
In their article, Mr Osborne and Mr Schauble said both Britain and Germany accepted the eurozone crisis means members of the single currency need to establish a common fiscal and economic policy.
"The UK fully recognises the progress made so far in responding to the crisis, and it supports the case for further steps forward. But as the euro area continues to integrate, it is important that countries outside the euro area are not at a systematic disadvantage in the EU," they wrote.
"So future EU reform and treaty change must include reform of the governance framework to put euro area integration on a sound legal basis, and guarantee fairness for those EU countries inside the single market but outside the single currency."
Angela Merkel came on an official visit to London last month [PA]
The statement will be seen as evidence that Mr Cameron's assiduous efforts to court German chancellor Angela Merkel - including rolling out the red carpet for a high-profile visit to London - are bearing fruit.
Earlier he indicated they intended to work closely together on measures to enable the expulsion of EU migrants who fail to find work.
Germany's coalition government is considering proposals to limit the time unemployed migrants from other EU member states can stay in the country looking for a job. An official report also recommended that welfare abuses by EU migrants should be punished by a temporary entry ban.
Mr Cameron said he would now seek to work with the Germans and other like minded allies to see if they could tighten EU rules further.
"We'll look very closely if the Germans want to take this further," he told BBC Radio Derby.
"I talked to Angela Merkel personally last week and we are going to work with her, with the Swedish prime minister, with the Dutch prime minister, on how we can tighten up in this area because it is worthwhile work."
The Prime Minister has been under intense pressure to strengthen EU immigration rules from Tory MPs worried about the growing strength of the UK Independence Party.
In Wednesday night's LBC radio debate with Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, Ukip leader Nigel Farage repeatedly raised the issue, warning 485 million people across the EU - many from very poor countries - were currently entitled to settle "unconditionally" in the UK.
Document EXCO000020140328ea3s002e5
