{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3080"}
____
Flip-flopping Cameron is beginning to sound like my little echo, says Nigel Farage
By Nigel Farage MEP   
851 words
25 April 2014
17:17
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
WHAT a brilliant poll it was over the weekend showing that 70 per cent of Express readers are intending to vote Ukip in the European elections.
I know from the response this column gets that the overwhelming majority of you share the concerns that I have been raising for years - whether about uncontrolled immigration, the downgrading of Christianity in our national life, the mad dash to heavily-subsidised windfarms, the profligate spending of the State, the lack of the public being allowed to have their say on EU member ship and much else besides.
We’ve been on the same page on this stuff for years – guided by plain common sense and by our deeply held political principles and beliefs.
But I’ve noticed someone else saying similar things in recent months, someone who not so long ago was saying the opposite on nearly all the points I’ve listed above. The person is David Cameron. It’s like he’s become a little echo and I find this most curious.
After all, when he first became Tory leader, Mr Cameron downplayed concerns about immigration, saying he liked the country as it is and not as it was. He said his Christian faith faded in and out. He was all in favour of pouring your money into windfarms, telling people to “vote blue to go green”.
He made a big point of backing Labour’s Climate Change Act that costs British citizens £18billion a year.
GREEN: Whatever happened to Cameron's 2006 love affair with huskies, asks Farage [ALPHA]
He backed Gordon Brown’s excessive public spending – pledging to match Labour’s bloated spending levels even while we were warning that borrowing was running out of control and taxes on working people were too high.
And of course, he was dead set against letting you have a referendum on EU membership. He said that would be against the national interest, implying that you could not be trusted to reach a sensible decision on such an important issue.
Indeed, he even put down a three line whip in the Commons ordering Tory MPs to vote against a motion calling for a referendum after a debate instigated in large part by a public petition from Express readers. That was back in October 2011. It was round about then that Ukip really began to surge in the polls.
On every one of these issues David Cameron has done a flip-flop – with the emphasis on the flop.
He now berates Labour at every turn for letting public spending run out of control – conveniently forgetting that at the time he endorsed the profligacy. He admits now that immigration is far too high – but won’t take the decisive action needed to get it under control. Indeed, net migration is rising fast again and has topped 200,000 a year thanks to the uncontrolled and fast-rising influx from the EU.
This week Mr Cameron suggested that a future majority Tory administration led by him would stop building onshore windfarms – a meaningless gesture because there won’t be a future majority Tory administration led by him. But how far removed that is from the Cameron who hugged huskies in front of TV cameras and put a windmill on the roof of his Notting Hill home early in his leadership.
Of course, early last year he discovered that an In-Out EU referendum would be a good idea after all. But he says he won’t give us one till 2017 – after the next general election. And this time it’s not even a cast-iron guarantee!
Over the Easter weekend Mr Cameron even got back in touch with his Christianity, remembering that we are a Christian country. It’s a shame he never thought of that when he ignored the opposition of the churches as he pushed through same-sex marriage without even having bothered to secure a mandate for the measure in his election manifesto.
You see, I really have doubts about my little echo. The way I do politics is to say what I actually think. Sometimes people strongly disagree with me. 
But I hope that everyone realises that my opinions are quite straightforward and are based on profound beliefs. Unlike Mr Cameron’s they are not changed more often than many people change their socks.
Indeed, I sometimes wonder if the Prime Minister actually believes in anything much at all, apart from furthering his own career prospects. That’s why I find it so laughable when people blame me for him being in the doldrums. I’ll take my share of the blame – or should that be the credit? – but most of it he has brought on himself.
To the 70 per cent of you who intend to vote Ukip next month, I pledge that we will carry on battling for common sense in the same straightforward manner. You can depend on us.
And let’s leave Dave to be a dedicated follower of fashion.
Document EXCO000020140425ea4p0030d
