{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3643"}
____
Nothing to do with Facebook then: WhatsApp says SORRY for Saturday outage, blames computer
By Jane Mathews   
416 words
24 February 2014
12:05
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
INSTANT messaging sensation WhatsApp has apologised for Saturday's outage, blaming the three-hour failure on a network router fault.
Users took to Twitter in their droves to complain about the downtime, which came just days after Facebook bought the messaging service for £11.4billion.
WhatsApp founder Jan Koum apologised to users yesterday in a message which read: "We are sorry about the downtime. It has been our longest and biggest outage in years. It was caused by a network router fault which cascaded into our servers.
"We worked with our service provider on resolving the issue and making sure it will not happen again." 
WhatsApp was down for more than three hours on Saturday evening, news of which was broken first by Express Online.
The five year-old company currently has about 450 million users worldwide, 70 per cent of which use it daily, and is the leading smartphone-based messaging app.
Twitter users began to complain about the service at around 7pm, and the company tweeted shortly afterwards confirming that they were experiencing server issues.
The company tweeted again at 10.48pm to say that the issue had been resolved.
Among those who took to Twitter to discuss the outage was Olympic diver Tom Daley, who asked his 2.62million Twitter followers: 'Anyone else's WhatsApp stopped working?'
The takeover was followed by a three-hour outage [REUTERS]
Others poked fun at the situation, with Tweeter Liat commenting: 'Facebook is in a relationship with WhatsApp and it's complicated'.
On Thursday Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg hailed the acquisition of WhatsApp and said the service was on track for one billion users worldwide.
He  said: "No one in the history of the world has ever done something like this."
Facebook announced that it would pay £2.4billion in cash and £9billion in Facebook shares as part of the deal to buy the real-time messaging service.
The app's founders and employees will get £1.8billion of the shares.
The purchase marks the largest single acquisition in Facebook's ten-year history.
WhatsApp would "continue to operate independently and retain its brand" despite the acquisition, Facebook said.
The application was founded by Jan Koum, Ukrainian immigrant who dropped out of college, and Stanford alumnus Brian Acton.
Facebook is known to make bold moves to thwart competitors - it famously bought Instagram for £600m after a weekend of negotiations.
Document EXCO000020140224ea2o002gy
