{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2504"}
____
Number of Brits made jobless by migration has been overstated, says new Government report
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
537 words
5 March 2014
14:25
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A GOVERNMENT report which plays down the negative impact of immigration will be published before the EU elections in May, the Prime Minister's official spokesman indicated today.
The cross-government report is believed to undermine ministers' claims that the number of UK workers unemployed as a result of immigration is 23 for every 100 additional migrants.
The report argues that figure is much lower, although the official number has not been disclosed.
The Government have been accused of suppressing the report but today - when asked if it would be published before the European vote on May 22 - David Cameron's spokesman said: "It will be published shortly, and shortly sounds very consistent with that."
The spokesman denied the report had been suppressed, saying work on it still needs to be completed.
He added: "Things are published when they are ready to be published, and the work has not been completed yet."
"When it has been, I expect it to be published shortly."
Asked whether Mr Cameron thought it the right time to now drop his ambition to reduce annual net migration below 100,000, the spokesman said: "No. It is the objective which we are very much working towards."
The Government is under pressure over immigration after figures released last week showed net migration increased to 212,000 in the year to September 2013, up from 154,000 in the previous year.
Nick Clegg said he was not aware of the report [GETTY]
The report was apparently completed last year but has not been released amid concerns it could prove politically awkward.
Liberal Democrat MP Julian Huppert told Newsnight: "It's obvious that this report should be published as quickly as possible.
"We have to have the right figures, so we can make the right decisions, so that we get the best people here to help our economy."
Shadow immigration minister David Hanson said: "The British people should have information made available to them so they can make a judgement about the impact of immigration on jobs.
"This should be done on the basis of fact, not more empty rhetoric or spin from the Government."
Ukip leader Nigel Farage told BBC Radio 4's Today: "I think there is no doubt that British people have lost their jobs because there is too much labour coming into the market.
"The other factor, which is not in this report but is perhaps even more pertinent, is the effect on wages of people in work.
"We have had wage compression and it has meant lower wages for millions and millions of people."
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said he had not previously been aware of the report but that it would be published when it was ready.
"It is not a report that has percolated its way up to my desk. When it is ready, of course it will be published," he said.
"It is really important that the debate on immigration is based on facts. Where these statistics are complete, where they are credible, where they have been stress-tested, they should be put out into the public domain."
Document EXCO000020140305ea3500335
