{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2919"}
____
Why won't church leaders fight for Christian values?
By Leo McKinstry   
911 words
31 March 2014
02:38
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE Church of England used to be known as the Tory Party at prayer. Today it is increasingly the Labour Party on its knees.
Anglican leaders spout dreary Left-wing pieties that pass for socialist thought, whether on Europe, immigration, or welfare.
Yet this establishment, so eager to parade its progressive credentials, is utterly craven towards militant Islam, which represents a growing threat to Christian and liberal values here and abroad.
The Church of England’s transformation into a handwringing pressure group is typified by former Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams.
Throughout his undistinguished time in charge he was loquacious in support of socialism but silent in the face of Muslim fundamentalism.
In retirement he continues to mouth the platitudes of metropolitan political orthodoxy.
So yesterday he produced a banal newspaper article moaning that affluent Western lifestyles have produced the “catastrophe” of global warming. The arguments of Williams are as woolly as his beard.
Even if there is a long-term rise in global warming we cannot be sure that industrialisation is to blame since climate change has occurred long before mankind.
Williams would never dream of using such judgmental language about the menace of Islamic aggression.
Dogmatic about a disputed threat from Western capitalism he says nothing about the real threat from global jihadism.
There is a crisis facing the world’s Christians as a result of mounting persecution by Muslim hardliners.
Yet the Anglican Church prefers to show solidarity with environmentalists in pursuit of a green agenda rather than with its co-religionists in defence of their faith and lives.
On the day Williams’s article appeared it was reported from Pakistan that Christian Sawan Masih has been sentenced to death for blasphemy after allegedly insulting the Prophet Muhammed during a conversation with a Muslim friend.
When the accusation was first made against Masih about 3,000 protesters set fire to Christian homes and churches in his native city of Lahore.
This is the terrifying reality of life for Christians in much of Asia and Africa, though you would hardly know it from the muteness of our established church.
Leo McKinstry finds issue with Muslim-specific schools, as opposed to Christian schools [GETTY]
Again in Pakistan, Christian Asia Bibi has been on death row since 2010 after her conviction for blasphemy.
Two Pakistani politicians who dared to speak up for her have been assassinated while her family has gone into hiding. It is the same grim pattern elsewhere.
In Nigeria at least 119 people were killed in three Christian villages by Muslims armed with guns and machetes.
In Kenya gunmen stormed a Christian church, shouting “Allah is great” as they killed seven worshippers.
We in Britain have experienced nothing like that kind of violence but disturbingly Muslim zealots are gaining in confidence, particularly as they perceive the failure of society to defend our traditional values of tolerance and equality.
In refusing to stand up for our Christian heritage the Anglican Church has shamefully colluded in the creeping Islamification of Britain, as was illustrated by Williams himself when as Archbishop of Canterbury he called for Islamic sharia law to be accepted as part of our justice system.
In the name of cultural diversity he sought to destroy the concept, stretching to Magna Carta in 1215, that we are all equal before the law.
Sadly his bleak vision is becoming a reality with a parallel Islamic code now effectively in operation.
A network of more than 85 sharia courts has been established in Britain, while the Chief Inspector of the Constabulary Tom Winsor warned in January of inner city “communities from other cultures who prefer to police themselves” and “have their own forms of community justice”.
Last week the Law Society, the governing body for British solicitors, issued official guidance that enshrines sharia requirements in wills written for Muslims, treating women as second-class citizens and making a mockery of all our anti-discrimination laws.
The disturbing process of Islamification can be seen in other ways such as the remorseless campaign by hardliners to take over certain state schools by driving out secular head-teachers and promoting Islamic practices.
A primary school in Birmingham, Oldknow, is reported to conduct Friday Islamic prayers, teach compulsory Arabic to all pupils and organise trips to Mecca in Saudi Arabia, funded by taxpayers’ money.
In a school assembly near Christmas there was said to be a session of anti-Christian chanting.
Respected former head Bhupinder Kondal, who objected to this “Islamising agenda”, was reportedly forced out after being placed under “impossible pressure” and is suing the governors.
At another Birmingham school, Park View Academy, it has been reported girls are encouraged to cover their heads, hardline preachers have participated in assemblies and £70,000 has been spent on playground loudspeakers to summon pupils to Islamic prayers.
Only yesterday it was reported that Islamic fanatic Sajeel Shahid, suspected of training the ringleader of the July 7 bombers, has been allowed to set up an independent Islamic school in Essex.
And figures from the Home Office yesterday showed that no fewer than 42 per cent of prisoners at top security Whitemoor prison are Muslims, prompting fears it has become a breeding ground for jihadists.
Our society needs courage and conviction from our civic leaders in the face of this extremist menace.
But all we get from the established church is cowardice dressed up as compassion.
Document EXCO000020140331ea3v0001p
