{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"827"}
____
EU warns UK to 'think twice' over curbing migrants benefits or face 'conflict'
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
815 words
26 February 2014
12:09
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
BRITAIN is set for "conflict" with Brussels unless it "thinks twice" about curbing benefits for migrants from the European Union, a senior EU official has warned.
EU migrants will have to show they are earning at least £149 a week for three months to be eligible for benefits under changes that come into force in the UK from Saturday.
This morning EU Employment Commissioner Laszlo Andor said the organisation may well challenge the reforms.
His comments come a day before German chancellor Angela Merkel visits the UK to discuss possible EU treaty change.
Asked if the rules were legal in EU law, Mr Andor told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: "I believe we will have some difficulties because workers in the European Union have rights.
"This is something you have to understand and you cannot judge the working status of somebody after the level of earning.
"The case law in the European Union actually points to the opposite direction.
"What I understand is that in the last few months some members of the British government did not really mind that what they say is confronting the principles in the legislation of the European Union.
"Government should think twice before launching such new initiatives because, unfortunately, that can lead to a kind of conflict."
Asked if that meant it would be challenged, he replied: "First we need to see in writing what the new system will be and after we can make a conclusion."
Mr Andor's previous criticism of David Cameron's "nasty" looking restrictions on benefits for foreigners led the angry Prime Minister to lodge a formal complaint.
He told the programme: "There is so much in the tabloid newspapers about Romanians and Bulgarians that people probably believe that there is a kind of influx while in reality the Romanians and Bulgarians are just a minority among the so-called EU migrants.
"The EU migrants, those coming from other EU countries to the UK in the last 20 years, never came up to the half of total immigration, so what exactly is the problem and what exactly can be remedied by tinkering with the rules, and the rights and the entitlements of EU citizens should be explained in a more factual way rather than just responding to gut feelings."
David Cameron and Angela Merkel are due to meet tomorrow [AP]
Mr Cameron's meeting with his German counterpart tomorrow comes after a poll of both countries found widespread support for reform of the EU.
Clear majorities in both the UK and Germany thought that decisions on EU migrants' access to benefits, laws on policing and criminal justice, employment laws and regional development subsidies should be taken at a national and not EU level, the YouGov poll for the pro-reform Open Europe thinktank found.
And more than half of those taking part in each country - 58 per cent in Germany and 73 per cent in the UK - believed that it should be possible for either a single national parliament, or a group of national parliaments acting together, to veto proposed EU laws coming out of Brussels.
Only eight per cent of Britons and 21 per cent of Germans thought the right to block EU legislation should be kept by the European Parliament.
More voters in Germany - 38 per cent - and Britain - 47 per cent - thought the EU's budget should be cut than thought it should stay the same or rise .
Securing support from Berlin for reform is crucial to Mr Cameron's hopes of renegotiating the terms of UK membership of the EU ahead of an in/out referendum in 2017 if Conservatives win power in next year's general election.
The Prime Minister is hoping to persuade Mrs Merkel to accept the need for treaty change, which would allow him to table demands for the return of powers from Brussels to national parliaments and protection for non-euro members of the EU as the single currency area integrates more closely.
Open Europe's research director Stephen Booth said: "That a majority of people in Britain and Germany want decisions over many key policy areas made nationally rather than at the EU level is an encouraging basis for David Cameron's bid to secure Angela Merkel's support for a reformed EU that does less but better.
"If he is to make this a reality, he must now set out a series of proposals for reform that can be road-tested with leaders and electorates across Europe.
"It is clear that Britons and Germans agree that the European Parliament is not the answer to the EU's democratic deficit. National parliaments remain the ultimate source of democratic legitimacy and accountability and must therefore be given a greater say in the EU decision-making process."
Document EXCO000020140226ea2q003e9
