{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"329"}
____
'All talk and no delivery' Cameron takes a pop at Farage as he renews EU referendum pledge
By Alison Little   
858 words
2 May 2014
14:07
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
DAVID Cameron has today vowed to do “whatever it takes” to give the people of Britain an EU referendum and in so doing took a pop at rival Nigel Farage.
The Prime Minister made the pledge as he launched the Conservative Party’s campaign for the local elections.
They are being held in England on May 22 alongside elections for the European Parliament – in which the Tories are tipped to come a poor third to Ukip and Labour.
With his party trailing, Mr Cameron denounced Nigel Farage's party as "all talk and no delivery" and dismissed Labour as "all short-term gimmicks and no long-term plan".
Mr Cameron told the audience in the West Midlands that anyone doubting his pledge to renegotiate Britain’s EU membership and put the deal to an in-out referendum by the end of 2017, if he is re-elected next year, should judge him by his record.
He pointed to how he vetoed a European treaty, cut the EU budget and got Britain out of an obligation to bail out debt-ridden eurozone countries.
He said: “Others talk about acting in the national interest or standing up to Europe.
“I do it, time and again – often in the teeth of opposition in Brussels...
"I have a track record of delivery – and believe me, whatever it takes, I will deliver this in-out referendum.”
He added that only the Conservatives' economic plan can maintain the "great British revival" seen in recent months, which have seen the UK economy growing faster than most of the developed world and achieving higher employment rates than the USA.
And he argued that only a Conservative-led government can deliver the EU referendum which he has promised by the end of 2017, repeating his pledge that he will not serve as Prime Minister in any coalition administration which fails to uphold this commitment.
Mr Cameron took aim at his rivals: "Frankly I don't need to discredit Ukip - they do a good enough job themselves. Their own leader admits they 'cannot change a thing in Brussels'.
"This is who we're up against: Labour - all short-term gimmicks and no long-term plan. Ukip - all talk and no delivery.
"The choice is clear: If you want a serious party with a credible long-term plan and a party that's delivering on that plan, then you only have one choice: you have got to vote Conservative."
Ahead of polls taking place in local councils across England, the Prime Minister said that the effects of recovery were being seen in all parts of the country.
"Britain is coming back," he said. "We came through the Great Recession together. We are building the Great British revival together.
"And all this didn't just happen. The economic pendulum didn't just swing our way. It's happening because of the people in this country who worked their hearts out, the businesses that hung on through the hard times and yes - it happened because this is a Government with a long-term economic plan to secure Britain's future.
"And we've got to be very clear. The Great British revival doesn't come with a life-time guarantee. The job is not done. If we want to keep making progress, keep creating jobs and securing this country's future, then we've got to carry on working through the plan.
"And coming up to these elections on May 22, this is what our message is all about.
Mr Cameron sought to counter the growing appeal of Mr Farage's eurosceptic party by highlighting his own record of "standing up" to Brussels by vetoing an EU treaty, cutting the budget and getting the UK out of the euro bailout scheme.
The Tory plan for Europe had "three words at its heart - Britain's national interest", he said.
"I have a track record of delivery - and believe me, whatever it takes, I will deliver this in-out referendum. Labour won't. Ukip can't. I will.
"Earlier this week I made clear I would not lead a Government that either could not or did not deliver an in-out referendum.
"Let me be absolutely clear. The British people need to have their say on our membership of the EU. For me this is a fundamental principle. And I would not be Prime Minister of a government unless we could carry out our pledge of an in-out referendum.
"Because the British people deserve their say. And I will make sure they get it."
A YouGov poll at the weekend put the Conservatives in third place in the Euro-elections, with 19% support, well behind Ukip on 31% and Labour on 28%.
Ukip responded to the Tory launch with another stark campaign poster highlighting immigration from the EU.
It shows an escalator running from the English Channel up the White Cliffs of Dover with the slogan: "No Border. No Control. The EU has opened our borders to 4,000 people a week."
Document EXCO000020140501ea52004v2
