{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1397"}
____
Conservatives: We will meet targets for migrants by the general election
By Macer Hall   
476 words
3 March 2014
00:54
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A TORY Cabinet minister yesterday insisted the ­Government still aims to cut annual net immigration to “tens of thousands" despite the latest surge in ­new­comers.
Conservative Party chairman Grant Shapps expressed “hope" that the target will be reached by next year’s General Election in the face of growing scepticism.
Official figures last week showed a 50,000 rise in the net influx to 200,000 migrants in the year to September.
It sparked calls for the Government to publicly accept the policy had flopped and scrap the target.
Even Home Secretary Theresa May appeared to acknowledge the “tens of thousands" target cannot be reached as long as Britain is signed up to European Union freedom-of-movement rules.
But Mr Shapps said the Government was not dropping the target. “That’s still our goal, to bring the numbers down," he said. Asked on the BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show if it was still possible, Mr Shapps said: “I very much hope so."
He pointed out that ministers had succeeded in cutting the number of migrants coming to Britain each year from outside the EU.
And he argued that measures introduced this year by the Home Office are yet to have an impact on the immigration figures. “When I talked about preventing people coming here even from within the EU and immediately claiming welfare, they now can’t do that for the first three months and then have to stop after six months.
“Those are measures that have been taken, but you’ve yet to see them in the immigration figures. That won’t be till next year."
Theresa May said there was still an incentive for people to move from poorer nations to richer ones [GETTY]
Mr Shapps spoke out after former Tory Defence Secretary Liam Fox described the immigration target as “statistical nonsense". He urged the Tories to come up with a clearer message on border controls to stop their supporters switching to Ukip.
The Home Secretary yesterday admitted EU rules were hampering her task.
Mrs May said: “Whatever the Government does to reduce the pull factors that draw people to Britain, as long as there is such an enormous disparity in income per head there will be an overwhelming incentive for ­people to move from poorer nations to richer states."
She also took a swipe at Lib Dem Business Secretary Vince Cable for saying last week’s rise in immigration was good news. “I do not agree," Mrs May wrote in an article.
Ukip leader Nigel Farage said Britain could not control immigration while remaining an EU member.
“You look at the eurozone, you see how badly they’re doing. There’s nothing we can do to stop many hundreds of thousands of more people coming to Britain."
Document EXCO000020140303ea3300105
