{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"21"}
____
Independent Scotland ‘would need a million migrants to fund pensions’
By Paul Gilbride   
409 words
24 March 2014
23:17
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
AN independent Scotland would need an extra million immigrants over the next 50 years to fund pensions, according to an expert.
The prediction comes from David Davison, founder of leading pensions consultancy Spence and Partners and a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants pensions committee. 
Even taking into account the Scottish population growing to more than six million by 2066, the extra workers will be needed to match pension and welfare levels in the UK.
If Scotland remained part of the UK, liabilities would be shared across a bigger population and fewer migrants would be needed.
In its White Paper, the SNP acknowledges it will have to attract more immigrants, and, according to Mr Davison, a separate Scotland would need to open its doors to at least 20,000 people every year for the next half-century.
He said the ratio between those working and paying tax to fund pensions and those receiving them will narrow in Scotland over the next few decades, making payments “unaffordable”.
He said: “By 2023, the rest of the UK pensioner dependency ratio will be at 3.14 compared to 3.02 for Scotland.
"This is as a result of a lower projected growth in working age population in Scotland at four per cent, compared to 12 per cent in the rest of the UK, and a significant increase in Scotland’s pensioners.”
Currently each worker pays around £2,420 of the £7,500 state pension via tax, but in future they would have to pay the equivalent of £3,125, an increase of 30 per cent.
Mr Davison added: “To keep pace with the rest of the UK ratio would require an increase in the Scottish working population over this period of around 300,000 people.”
Shadow Pensions Minister Gregg McClymont MP said: “The experts are clear, Alex Salmond could not afford to pay Scots the same pension as the UK unless he raised taxes, cut public spending or increased immigration.”
A Scottish Government spokeswoman said: “In an independent Scotland, pensions will be fully protected and more affordable.
“An independent Scotland would address long-term pension affordability by focusing on boosting sustainable economic growth through increasing productivity, the working age population and labour participation.
"Also, Mr Davison’s analysis ignores the overall dependency ratio, including children and pensioners, which is lower in Scotland than the rest of the UK.”
Document EXCO000020140325ea3o00005
