{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"438"}
____
Father kicked out of Britain because he has CANCER
By Benjamin Russell   
749 words
11 March 2014
16:35
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A BRITISH mother has been left to bring up her daughter alone after her American husband was kicked out of the country - because he had cancer.
Distraught Lorraine Marx, 56, nursed partner Ralph Marx, also 56, when he was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
But the former Royal Navy chief petty officer watched helplessly as her husband was escorted onto a plane, and deported against medical advice.
The Home Office ruled he had become a burden on the taxpayer and the NHS billed him £98,000 for the cancer treatment he had received.
The couple - who have ten-year-old daughter Alexandra - married in 2001 but Ralph had chosen not to apply for residency status.
It meant the chemical engineer was only allowed to stay in Britain for up to six months at a time before leaving and coming back.
His work for an international company meant he often travelled abroad on business and this was not an issue.
But his cancer diagnosis and resultant stay in hospital meant he was at risk of over-staying his visitor status.
Mr Marx surrendered his passport in 2012 and applied for Family Leave to Remain at their home in Chidham, near Chichester, West Sussex.
However, the Home Office rejected his application and ordered he leave Britain immediately.
A later application from his new home in Tennessee, United States, was rejected when the Home Office ruled he was at risk of drawing on public funds.
A judge upheld the family's appeal in January this year, and said: "On no occasion, save the time when he was gravely ill, did he fail to comply with the terms of his visa."
He also acknowledged the family had private medical insurance and the invoice from the NHS came at the same time as the Home Office refused Mr Marx's application.
This led him to believe "the impetus for the bill came from the Entry Clearance Officer" rather than the hospital.
The NHS has since dropped its bill but the Home Office is appealing the appeal over residency and Mr Marx continues to live in America.
His case is to be heard tomorrow.
Schoolgirl Alexandra has only seen her father once in the past year, and has to speak to him via video chat service Skype.
He is currently in remission but has not had access to his medical team since he has been away.
Furthermore, he is unable to work because he does not have his passport.
Mrs Marx said her husband had private health cover but nurses told him his treatment would be the same on the NHS because his life was at risk.
She said: "I pointed out that Ralph wasn't British but they were wonderful, telling me not to worry - as my husband, he was entitled to treatment.
"I was stunned when the Home Office rejected Ralph's application.
"We'd tried so hard to be positive, and after Ralph had been so sick, it was almost too much to bear.
"To then receive the NHS bill made me feel like someone had thumped me in the stomach.
"I just don't know where to go now or what more we can do.
"We've provided every document they've ever asked for and abided by all the rules.
"With all the major issues the government has to tackle, I can't believe they are working so hard to keep a decent, tax-paying, family apart.
"It can't benefit anyone.
Mr Marx said: "The Home Office is well aware that we are financially stable for the long term.
"Additionally, I have now lost two, possibly three, jobs which would have resulted in significant revenues coming into the UK from overseas business.
"The greatest tragedy though is in the pain and destruction of a British family at a critical time in their lives.
"We will never get this time back."
A spokesman for the Home Office said: "We are appealing the tribunal's decision because we believe it did not apply the immigration rules correctly.
"Mr Marx's application for a spousal visa was rejected because he did not show that he met the financial requirements of the rules.
"Our family rules have been designed to make sure that those coming to the UK to join their spouse or partner will not become a burden on the taxpayer and will be well enough supported to integrate effectively."
Document EXCO000020140311ea3b004ef
