{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2736"}
____
EU DEBATE: A bluffer's guide to the EU and why tonight's Clegg vs Farage showdown matters
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
1,580 words
2 April 2014
18:41
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
TONIGHT Ukip leader Nigel Farage and the Lib Dem's Nick Clegg will go head-to-head in a second broadcast debate on Britain's relationship with the European Union.
The two party leaders will spend an hour exchanging statistics about the EU's influence on jobs, Britain's place in the world and the influence of European law.
Fundamentally, Mr Farage believes Britain is better out of the EU, and Mr Clegg believes the country is better off in.
But how did we get here? What are the key issues? And why does tonight's debate matter?
Ted Heath took Britain into the EEC when he was Prime Minister [GETTY]
EU - The Beginning
The EU began as the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, with France, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg and West Germany as founder members.
This created the predecessor for today's European Commission and European Parliament.
In 1957 the European Economic Community was created, with the goal of creating a common single market.
Great Britain joined the EEC on January 1 1973, with negotiations for the UK's entry led by pro-European Conservative Prime Minister Ted Heath.
A referendum on whether Britain should remain in the EEC membership was held in 1975, under Labour Prime Minister Harold Wilson.
Britain's membership was endorsed by 67 per cent of the vote, on a turnout of 64.5 per cent.
Margaret Thatcher chairs the EEC Economic Summit in 1986 [AFP/GETTY]
Margaret Thatcher - 1979-1990
Margaret Thatcher was initially a supporter of Britain's place in a free trade network within Europe, but as her premiership went on, she became more sceptical about the European project.
She felt too much power was heading to Brussels, and vocally opposed any movement towards a single European currency.
Her refusal to agree a timetable for Britain to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism led long-term ally Geoffrey Howe to resign as Deputy Prime Minister.
His resignation sparked Mrs Thatcher's downfall, as she stood down as PM less than a month later.
John Major in 1994 [EXPRESS]
Post-Thatcher
Despite a large eurosceptic section of the Conservative Party, Britain continued to integrate closer with Europe during John Major's spell as PM from 1990 to 1997.
The biggest crisis over Europe for Mr Major came with the signing of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, which created the EU as exists today and started moves towards the euro.
Mr Major had managed to secure an opt-out for Britain joining the single currency, but a large group of Tory backbenchers - known as the "Maastricht Rebels" - repeatedly voted against implementing the treaty.
The Labour Party continued Britain's integration with Europe, although Tony Blair did not take Britain into the euro when it launched in 1999.
European Commission headquarters in Brussels [GETTY]
The EU today
The European Union today has 28 member states - stretching from Portugal in the west to Cyprus in the east.
It has a European Commission, a Council of the European Union, a European Council, the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Central Bank, the Court of Auditors, and the European Parliament.
The European Parliament is elected every five years by EU citizens.
The next elections take place on May 22 this year.
Ukip leader Nigel Farage [EPA]
Rise of Ukip
The United Kingdom Independence Party was founded in 1993 by politicians opposed to the Maastricht Treaty, but did not achieve prominence until 2004 when chat-show host Robert Kilroy-Silk stood as a candidate in the European Parliament elections.
The party came third in those elections - winning 12 seats.
Ukip's profile increased dramatically when former City trader Nigel Farage became party leader in 2006.
He briefly stood down as leader in 2009 to contest a seat at the 2010 General Election, but after failing to get elected to Westminster, returned as leader later that year.
Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg [PA]
Nick Clegg
Before entering the UK parliament in 2005, Nick Clegg was a member of the European Parliament from 1999 to 2004.
Fiercely pro-European, Mr Clegg speaks English, French, Dutch, German, and Spanish.
His mother is Dutch, and his wife is Spanish.
He became leader of the Lib Dems in 2007, and after the 2010 General Election became Deputy Prime Minister after entering into a coalition Government with the Conservatives.
Abu Qatada used the European Court of Human Rights to escape deportation for many years [GETTY]
The battlegrounds
There are five main areas on which pro and anti EU politicians differ.
1) Immigration
This is arguably the key issue which sets Ukip apart from the Conservatives, Labour and Liberal Democrats.
Under the EU's freedom of movement laws, any EU resident can work in any other EU country.
Nigel Farage argues this system works well when it is restricted to countries of similar economic development, but extending the freedom to poorer countries, such as Poland, Bulgaria and Romania, leads to mass migration of low-skilled workers to richer countries.
He argues this forces down wages in those countries, and allows 'benefit tourism', where migrants are attracted by richer nations's welfare systems.
Ukip believe freedom of movement is such a fundamental principal of the EU it is impossible for the UK to reform it, and so Britain must leave to 'regain control of our borders'.
Pro-Europeans, including Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg, believe having a large fluid European workforce actually boosts Britain's economy.
Regulations preventing 'benefit tourism' have been tightened under the current Government.
EU supporters also argue freedom of movement laws also benefit Britons working elsewhere in Europe.
2) Jobs
This issue dominated last week's LBC Radio debate between Mr Farage and Mr Clegg.
It boils down to this: Nick Clegg believes if Britain left the EU millions of jobs would be at risk as companies would prefer to do business with firms based within its borders.
Mr Farage believes this is a pessimistic view and Britain could thrive on its own.
3) Trade
The arguments around trade are similar to those for jobs.
Mr Clegg argues without being part of the EU, Britain would lose access to beneficial trade deals across the world, not just in Europe.
Mr Farage believes Britain is an attractive place to do business with regardless, and could negotiate its own trade deals.
4) Justice
The European Convention of Human Rights was created in 1953 and it is enforced by the European Court of Human Rights.
Eurosceptics feel it effectively trumps British law, and it has been blamed for giving protection to numerous criminals, such as hate preacher Abu Qatada.
Mr Farage has frequently criticised the Convention, and believes the UK does not need Brussels to tell it about the concepts of liberty and freedom.
But Mr Clegg is proud of the Convention, and believes being in the EU allows Britain to work closely with European neighbours to help tackle cross-border crime and capture criminals fleeing justice.
5) The Euro
It is perhaps no coincidence that as the wheels came off the single currency, the popularity of Ukip increased.
Movements towards a single currency in the early 1990s lead to the ousting of Margaret Thatcher from Downing Street, and was the direct instigation for the creation of Ukip.
Unsurprisingly, Mr Farage loudly and proudly said 'I told you so' as the eurozone collapsed in 2008 - and regularly repeats this mantra.
The Lib Dems were at the forefront of the pro-euro campaign, but even though support for the project has been muted in recent years, many in the party still believe the project will work.
As recently as 2011, senior Lib Dems including former leader Sir Menzies Campbell said the euro would be a success if the financial rules surrounding the project had been enforced properly.
Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage will debate the EU on the BBC tonight [BBC]
Five reasons why these debates matter
1) It is the first time since the 1975 referendum that the issue of Britain's role in Europe has been discussed in such an open and confrontational way.
2) If Nigel Farage can persuade enough Britons they are better off out of the EU, Ukip could win the European elections in May. That could well force Labour leader Ed Miliband to back David Cameron's pledge to hold an in/out referendum on the UK's membership of the EU in 2017.
3) If Nick Clegg comes out on top after the debates, Ukip may lose momentum and not cause the 'political earthquake' Nigel Farage predicted last year at his party conference. He has already indicated that were Ukip to fail to come in first or second in the Euro elections, he will step down as leader of the party.
4) Prime Minister David Cameron and Ed Miliband will be seen as ducking the issue. Even those most fervent Ukip supporters respect Nick Clegg for having the courage to take part in two broadcast debates. But where are the leaders of the Conservatives and Labour? Voters respond better to conviction than disappearing.
5) These debates are a dry run for the campaigns ahead of the 2017 referendum - should it take place. Both sides will be able to develop their arguments and also pick out the weaknesses in their opponents' campaign.
Document EXCO000020140402ea42002uv
