{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2920"}
____
Taxed when we're alive... and when we're dead too
459 words
31 March 2014
03:21
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
SOME taxes are a necessary evil.
Inheritance tax, however, is theft by the state and the Daily Express’s growing crusade to reform it will continue until politicians stop using family wealth as an easy source of revenue.
It is immoral that you pay tax all your life then pay it again when you die.
With our penal rate among the highest in the world and set to make the Treasury £24billion over the next five years, Ukip peer Lord Stevens is right to warn that the more tax the Government takes the greater control it has of the economy – and we all know what politicians do with economies.
Allowing money to cascade down through generations is a perfect way to fund family businesses and encourage entrepreneurship.
Governments only create wealth – and with it jobs – when they get out of the way of people with talent and drive, not tax their deceased relatives.
That’s why Australia, Israel and New Zealand have abolished inheritance tax and why in America you only pay if your estate is more than five million dollars.
The Prime Minister hints he might revive his promise from the last election to raise the threshold to £1million.
That would be a good start although we need more than hints, we need action – even if that means parting company with the tax-happy Lib Dems.
If you want to win the election, Mr Cameron, you know exactly what to do. Reform this tax!
Free NHS is under threat
THE idea of everyone paying £120 a year to belong to the NHS is preposterous.
Unsurprisingly the idea is dreamed up by a former Labour health minister to try to tackle the crisis caused in part by the massive increase in immigration his party brought about.
Anyone who’s been in a hospital knows two things: the staff are brilliant and the system’s rubbish.
The amount of waste is staggering and if those with vested interests such as unions, bureaucrats and, yes, doctors would agree to widespread reforms there’d be no need to think about charging.
At the same time as this idea is being aired a survey of MPs finds that nearly half agree that a free NHS will be unsustainable if pressing problems are not tackled – though with their salaries and gold-plated pensions will they be unduly concerned?
---------------------
Queen rules by example
JUNE’S a lovely month to put your feet up. But not for our tireless Queen, who’s got a packed month because her schedule has been messed up.
She won’t complain of course, just get on with it. What a wonderful example you set for us all, Ma’am.
Document EXCO000020140331ea3v0001w
