{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2479"}
____
Yet again Britain picks up the tab for EU incompetence
428 words
5 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE European Commission is again asking the British taxpayer to cover up for its mistakes.
Incompetent Brussels politicians have managed to leave a glaring £19.3billion hole in their budget which they have shamefacedly blamed on the late arrival of invoices.
The UK has been told it needs to hand over a whopping £2.4billion extra on top of the vast contribution we already make every year to keeping the EU afloat.
The financial hole is a result of the incompetent management of the EU’s Cohesion Fund. The Cohesion Fund accounts for almost one third of the EU’s spending and is designed, in the EU’s words, to “reduce economic and social disparities". This entails taking money from the rich nations of Europe – including Britain – and dishing it out to places such as Greece, Bulgaria and Romania where the record of fiscal and economic management is less than exemplary.
It is ridiculous that the British Government – currently working so hard to balance the twin demands of delivering continuing economic growth and scaling back the size of the budget deficit – is being forced to hand over money to make up for the EU failing yet again to live within its means.
........................................................................
Suburban shanty towns
Harrow council’s decision to use a plane fitted with thermal imaging equipment to detect illegal structures in back gardens used to house exploited immigrants has provided some shocking findings. The so-called “beds in sheds" were discovered to be four times more prevalent than the concerned council in north-west London initially thought.
This newspaper has repeatedly warned that Britain does not have the infrastructure to cope with the huge influx of new migrants. There are 4,000 people in Harrow alone already on the waiting list for social housing.
This has provided an opportunity for renegade landlords to create small-scale shanty towns that are dangerous, unsightly and inhumane. The whole situation is drastically unfair on the rest of Harrow’s residents who are being forced to endure criminality right on their doorsteps.
........................................................................
A century of good living
Congratulations to Mollie Bennett, the third person in her family to reach the age of 100. She puts her longevity down to “hard work, helping others and good food".
This no doubt makes for not just a long life but a happy one too.When it comes to ageing we should stop emulating the fad diets and cosmetic surgery of the rich and famous. Mrs Bennett is a far more worthy role model.
Document EXCO000020140305ea35000n3
