{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2664"}
____
There are now double the amount of Romanian job applicants ... and it's driving wages down
442 words
1 April 2014
04:12
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
WHEN the entire population of Romania failed to enter Britain on January 1 many were scornful of those who had warned that a massive influx was inevitable. The impoverished state joined the EU in 2007 but their nationals’ rights to work across Europe were restricted until the start of this year.
But since then the number of Romanians seeking employment in this country has doubled. There have been an estimated 42,562 applications for British jobs through just one Romanian recruitment website.
While unemployment is falling under this Government there are still 2.4 million people in Britain who do not have a job and youth unemployment is a huge problem. That is not to mention the destructive effects of wage depression caused by the arrival of foreign workers willing to undercut British workers.
It is difficult to understand how anybody can believe that the intense competition for jobs from so many new immigrants will help. As this newspaper has long stressed the enforced opening of our borders has been disastrous for our economy and culture. We need to wrest back control and end the scandal of unfettered immigration.
NHS wasting vital funds
IT WAS only yesterday that the think tank Reform was suggesting that we should all be charged an extra £10 a month to use the NHS. New figures released today by the TaxPayers’
Alliance make a mockery of their claim that it is extra funds that are needed when the vast sum of money available to the NHS is being spent in such a profligate manner.
It turns out that £46million was wasted by the NHS last year hiring 1,129 staff to do “unnecessary jobs”. 
That includes 826 public relations staff at a cost of £36million a year. The money being spent on this could be used far more effectively to provide a higher standard of patient care – after all that is the main point of the NHS. Most Britons are rightly grateful for the work of the health service – in particular its doctors and nurses – but asking us to stump up more cash when there is no guarantee it won’t just be spent on superfluous backroom staff is unacceptable.
---------------------
A polished performance
HATS OFF to the small number of husbands whose wives trust them to do a proper job when it comes to the dusting, mopping and tidying. The results of this survey should serve as an overdue rallying cry to the millions who are letting their other halves down. It’s time for them to clean up their act.
Document EXCO000020140401ea410005x
