{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"719"}
____
'We'll start selling Nick Clegg mops, so YOU TOO can wipe the floor with him,' says Farage
By Nigel Farage MEP   
707 words
4 April 2014
17:17
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
MANY kind people have suggested that I utterly demolished Nick Clegg in debates over the past couple of weeks - and that is certainly what the polls indicate.
One wag even suggested that the Ukip shop should start selling Nick Clegg mops - so you can wipe the floor with him like I did. 
That's possibly a little unkind. 
In fact, I really was grateful to Mr Clegg for instigating the two televised EU debates and it was an honour to put the case for leaving the EU against the chosen representative of the political establishment. 
I believe that my party and I are now almost universally acknowledged as the standard bearers for the millions of people who want to get our country back from remote and unelected bureaucrats in Brussels and especially to take control of our own borders again.
In that regard, it may be that the leaders who did not come to debate against me are seen as even bigger losers than the one who did.
I would like to thank Express readers for all the wonderful support you have given to the anti-EU cause down the years. 
We have fought together shoulder to shoulder, covering the hard yards when the political climate looked much less promising for us than it does today. 
Most of all, you, like me, have never given up. 
We have never stopped believing that our country is good enough to run its own affairs again.
And I tell you what; the events of the past 10 days or so have left me more than ever convinced that we are going to win.
On Wednesday evening, near the end of my second debate with Mr Clegg, I invited television viewers to come and join UKIP's People's Army. 
I really meant it. 
And I am delighted to report that the people are answering the rallying call in record numbers - more than 1,000 new membership applications so far and more flooding in by the hour.
David Cameron and Ed Miliband do not want to debate against me. 
They are even talking about shutting me out of general election debates. 
What insufferable arrogance! In a democracy the people should be able to hear and scrutinise the ideas and policies of every significant party leader. And they should be able to see how these leaders fare against each other in debate as well.
I think Mr Miliband must finally have got wind of the threat my party poses to him in working class communities neglected by Labour for far too long. 
During Wednesday's debate, I made the point that uncontrolled immigration has caused huge problems in such communities. 
It has been associated with wage compression and a massive rise in youth unemployment too. It has put huge pressure on social housing and on public services too.
Mr Miliband can run but he cannot hide. If he has no convincing answers to these points - and I believe that he has not - then I will expose him one way or another.
As for Dave, oh dear. 
Does the man have a political principle in his body? He has been the leader of his party for nearly a decade and I have yet to discern one. He wouldn't come and debate against me but he popped up on television the next morning to have a go at me - labelling me an extremist for wanting Britain to become a self-governing country again. 
Such an approach - hurling jibes but ducking debates - does not amount to leadership in my book. 
In fact it looks like running scared.
We in UKIP go into the European and local elections campaigns on the front foot, with morale sky high and with our People's Army growing fast. 
I tell you what; we really are going to cause that political earthquake I have talked about. And then we are going to go and get our country back. 
So why not come and do it with me - you'll never regret being a part of it and we'll have a lot of fun along the way.
Document EXCO000020140404ea44003mm
