{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"3304"}
____
The Two Faces Of January: A Hitchcock-style thriller that harks back to classic Hollywood
By Henry Fitzherbert   
449 words
14 May 2014
20:53
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A pleasant throwback to the character-driven thrillers of Alfred Hitchcock starring Kirsten Dunst
Viggo Mortensen and Kirsten Dunst in thriller The Two Faces Of January[FACEBOOK]
Director: Hossein Amino; starring: Viggo Mortensen, Oscar Isaac, Kirsten Dunst
Americans abroad in cream linen suits. Sex and murder under the hot sun. Southeast Europe redolent with history and intrigue.
Set in 1962 and based on the Patricia Highsmith novel, The Two Faces Of January is a pleasurable throwback to the character-driven thrillers of Alfred Hitchcock, rich in atmosphere and immaculately tailored.
Like many of Highsmith’s works, including Strangers On A Train and The Talented Mr Ripley, it finds two men from opposing backgrounds forging a potentially catastrophic alliance.
They are suave, worldly businessman Chester who is holidaying in Greece with his young wife Colette and a handsome tour guide, Rydal with an eye for the main chance.
Like Chester, Rydal is American but he’s younger, considerably poorer and very much alone having lost contact with his family and not even attended the recent funeral of his father.
He latches onto the sophisticated American couple but finds the tables turned when Chester’s own suspect dealings come back to haunt him.
Writer-director Hossein Amini cleverly toys with our assumptions as he strips away Chester’s integrity and composure while suggesting that Rydal may be more sincere than appearances suggest, in particular in the attention he pays to Colette.
More character drama than thriller, the story explores the shifting dynamics amongst the trio as events force them to hide out in Crete while waiting for false passports which will allow Chester and Colette to make their escape.
The sun-baked locations are beautiful and the ancient sites are nicely redolent of the decaying relationships unfolding before us.
Best of all, the acting is terrific especially from the magnetic Isaac who is as irresistibly watchable here as he was in Inside Llewellyn Davis. He also plays the most intriguing character, a man you are constantly trying to second guess.
However, none of the three command much sympathy and the suspense never really cranks up.
There is one tense sequence when Rydal and Chester have to bluff their way through immigration but otherwise little to make us sweat.
Meanwhile, the relationships don't quite draw you in emotionally, especially that between Rydal and Colette on which the whole drama really hangs. It should be intense but feels perfunctory.
Yet there’s much to savour in the fabulous location work, intelligent writing and Marcel Zyskind’s exquisite cinematography.
Amini directs with elegance and subtlety.
Document EXCO000020140514ea5e003ux
