{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2553"}
____
Iraqi sex predator defies deportation for six years
By Nick Jedrzejewski   
431 words
16 March 2014
23:45
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
AN IRAQI sex offender who hid a conviction for assaulting three teenage girls from immigration officials is still living in Scotland six years after his deportation was ordered.
Howri Hamad Garib’s case has infuriated critics who said it highlighted justice system failings.
The pervert indecently assaulted three 14-year-old girls at a swimming pool in 2004, just a month after arriving in Scotland.
In May 2006, Garib applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain ] in the UK, two months after he was convicted of the assault and placed on the Sex Offenders’ Register.
Despite it being a requirement for the application to disclose any criminal convictions he only revealed a road traffic offence.
Garib appeared in court again in 2007 where he was admonished and removed from the register.
During September 2008, the application for the ILR was refused by the Home Secretary, who said that sexual offences against children are “particularly abhorrent to society" and a deportation order was served. 
However, the 39-year-old is still at large after the authorities failed to eject him while taxpayers funded an appeal against the decision.
Last May, the Secretary of State rejected an appeal and also noted his failure to disclose the conviction.
Garib’s lawyers argued the Home Secretary’s decision was not reached fairly but in a judgment from Lord Boyd of Duncansby at Edinburgh’s Court of Session last week, their claims were rejected. 
Lord Boyd said: “While it appears that the Secretary of State has not relied principally on the failure to disclose the conviction it is the case that such failure could, on its own, be sufficient to justify refusal of ILR."
Labour shadow minister for immigration, David Hanson said: “When foreign criminals have committed crimes and an order has been made to deport them, there is no excuse for keeping them here."
The Taxpayer Scotland campaign group claimed politicians were failing to deal with the effects of human rights laws. Its director, Eben Wilson said: “Where is the statesmanship in our parliament and the UK parliament that can protect us?
“They’re asleep on the job and unwilling to take a stand. It’s time they did."
A Home Office spokesman said: “We have always been clear that we will seek to deport those who break our laws and in 2012 we removed more than 4,500. Those who abuse our country by committing serious crimes here have no place in the UK and we are determined to see more of them deported."
Document EXCO000020140317ea3g000b5
