{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"481"}
____
Hidden cost of migration is too high a price to pay
432 words
13 March 2014
00:01
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE Daily Express has long warned that a failure to clamp down on immigration would have a devastating impact on Britain’s economy and culture.
It has been revealed that between 1995 and 2011 immigration cost us a staggering £148billion which equates to £5,600 per household.
Such an amount of money would be heartily welcomed by the British people who are sick and tired of working hard to get ahead while immigrants pick up jobs and benefits.
The figures unequivocally show that the Left’s claim that immigration benefits this country is simply untrue. Uncontrolled immigration from the EU and a failure adequately to regulate immigration from the rest of the world has caused far more harm than good.
Net migration to the UK was up 30 per cent this year with the number of immigrants rising above half a million. This is far more people than the UK can accommodate and a clear recipe for disaster.
A series of weak and misguided immigration policies costing us billions of pounds is outright scandalous and the politicians must recognise that they have to listen to the people.
We have had enough of soaring immigration. It is damaging our public services, it is eroding our sense of community and it has left us billions of pounds out of pocket. It has to be stopped before it costs us even more.
Labour shows EU colours
Ed Miliband’s latest attempt to fudge the issue when it comes to EU membership has been an unmitigated disaster. His promises are confused and ineffectual.
As columnist Leo McKinstry notes today, in 2007 Labour refused a referendum on EU membership despite promising us that there would be one if Britain was asked to sign up to a new treaty.
The right of the British people to have a referendum before giving away more powers to Brussels has since been enshrined in law by the current Government but Miliband’s love for the European project is such that we can be sure he will do anything he can to deny us a vote.
One thing is for certain. A vote for Miliband is a vote against a British referendum on EU membership.
After the wet now it’s dry
We are now on course for the driest March on record. Following months of rain we have certainly earned a spell of nice weather.
At this rate by the time April arrives we’ll be hearing the phrase that characterises the British summer for so many people: “Hosepipe ban."
Document EXCO000020140313ea3d000pa
