{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"321"}
____
'These Far Left egg-chucking protesters look like they need a good wash,' says Farage
By Nigel Farage MEP   
817 words
2 May 2014
18:22
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
IT'S FRIDAY so it must be Cambridgeshire! I’ve been on the road for two solid weeks now and in that time I have spoken to something like 10,000 people at public meetings and met hundreds more on walkabouts.
IT'S FRIDAY so it must be Cambridgeshire! I’ve been on the road for two solid weeks now and in that time I have spoken to something like 10,000 people at public meetings and met hundreds more on walkabouts.
My “Join The People’s Army” tour has certainly been my biggest exercise yet in taking Ukip’s message directly to the British public.
And the reception I have received has been fantastic, marred only by a few idiots from the far Left who do not seem to understand the notions of democracy or free speech.
I was forced to cancel a walkabout in Swansea because of advanced reports that rent-a-mob had arrived and were causing trouble in the city. 
Then there came the very unpleasant incident in Nottingham and a totally unnecessary dry-cleaning bill.
Why do these self-styled “protesters” always seems to look like they could do with a good wash and need to put much more effort into their personal appearance if they really wish to make themselves employable?
On the upside, I have been able to visit a number of fabulous real ale pubs on a journey that has taken me from Sheffield to Gateshead, from Manchester to Dudley, from Portsmouth to Slough and onto Bath. 
And then from Swansea, to Nottingham and Derby and now to St Ives in Cambridgeshire.
Frederick Glenister was today charged with common assault in relation to the attack on Mr Farage [PETER CORNS]
The Ukip cavalcade has paid so much into the Treasury coffers in the form of fuel duty that it has probably made a significant dent in the deficit. 
I love doing these public meetings, getting out on the stump, the question-and-answer sessions. 
It is old-fashioned politics and there is a huge appetite for it among the British public.
The other party leaders only seem to venture out of Westminster very occasionally and then are only put in front of hand-picked and carefully choreographed audiences. 
We do things a bit differently in Ukip. 
CHILLING: Nigel Farage says his tour of Britain has seen him visit many fine real ale pubs [GETTY]
And I tell you what, we often get supporters or even members of other parties at our public meetings and though they may not agree with all that we say, they do appreciate that we made the effort to pitch up and argue through the big issues affecting people’s lives.
In the final two and a bit weeks of the European election campaign I suspect that TV and radio studios rather than country pubs and civic halls will be where I am mainly to be found. 
It is time to cross swords with the professional political and media class – take on the arguments, win the big debates. 
We have a second wave of campaign billboard posters to unveil. 
No doubt they are going to provoke more accusations of “racism” or “bigotry” from the political establishment. 
If there is one lie that I intend to firmly nail into the ground before this campaign is done it is the idea of Ukip being remotely a racist party.
The immigration policy we propose is entirely non-racist; to treat potential incomers from every country in the world on an equal basis by ensuring they have skills and attributes in short supply that can positively benefit Britain before we let them in. 
Yes, we want a much more stringent immigration policy that involves volume control and quality control. 
But the madness of giving unskilled people from all over Europe unlimited rights to come here while making it pretty tricky to get an Indian engineer or a New Zealand brain surgeon into the country has got to stop.
That’s not racism, it’s just common sense. 
I can feel the fear coming from the establishment political parties. I know why they are playing the race card. 
It is disreputable and it is low, but I expected nothing more of them.
But by attacking Ukip they are attacking the British people. 
The People’s Army is growing, Ukip morale remains high and the political earthquake is on its way. We are not going to be deflected by flying insults or flying eggs. 
We are going to keep our eyes on the prize.
My message to the Ukip troops is to stay focused, stay dignified and keep the faith with the good old-fashioned common sense of the British public. 
Together we are on the verge of achieving something pretty extraordinary.
Document EXCO000020140502ea52002e5
