{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2183"}
____
Lib Dems advocate return to open-door immigration
428 words
8 March 2014
01:20
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
IT REALLY does appear that the Liberal Democrats have a death wish. That is the only conclusion that can be drawn from their recently revealed plans for immigration.
Yesterday it came out that Nick Clegg’s party is in favour of a “super grandparents visa" that would make it easier for immigrants to bring their elderly relatives with them. That would open the door to an influx of older immigrants who would be desperate to claim NHS treatment and assorted benefits.
The Lib Dems also suggested removing foreign students from the Government’s official migration statistics. This would allow immigrants to flood into Britain using university studies as a flimsy pretext.
Furthermore they also said they would even allow the students to stay in Britain after completing their studies despite graduate employment remaining a problem for many young people who would face an even tougher fight to get their first full-time job.
Clegg and his party already have absolutely no understanding of the problems being caused for British people by the lax immigration policy forced upon us by EU membership.
Now they want to make the situation even worse.
New focus on Alzheimer’s
With 800,000 people in the UK estimated to be suffering from dementia it is high time for a revolution in the way the disease is treated.
Angela Rippon’s bid to make Alzheimer’s a “long-term treatable illness" is a noble cause.
The outpouring of sadness and support for Timothy West following his searingly honest account of the dementia suffered by his wife Prunella Scales showed last week how important it is to be honest and open about Alzheimer’s.
Author Sir Terry Pratchett has waged his battle with dementia in the public eye raising awareness of the disease and proving that a diagnosis does not mean that all is lost either for the sufferer or their family.
Angela’s own mother died from Alzheimer’s and she has been a selfless ambassador for the Alzheimer’s Society since 2009. She and other campaigners around the country can and will make a real difference for dementia sufferers.
For all their hard work we are truly grateful.
And finally it is spring
At times it seemed as if the awful weather would never end. That makes the warm-weather forecast for the next month all the more exciting with temperatures expected to hit 19C tomorrow.
We wish all our readers a very pleasant weekend in the sunshine. It’s been a long time coming.
Document EXCO000020140308ea380018i
