{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"814"}
____
Tory fears over David Cameron's vow to ditch the coalition
By Macer Hall   
401 words
26 February 2014
02:34
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
TORY backbenchers reacted warily yesterday to suggestions that David Cameron will fight the next election on a clear pledge not to form a second coalition.
A source close to the Prime Minister claimed the next Conservative manifesto would include a commitment not to sign a power-sharing deal with another party in the event of a hung parliament after next year’s General Election.
Mr Cameron would instead seek to lead a minority Tory government and could face a second election within months under the plan.
The move followed growing frustration among Tory MPs with the current coalition deal with Nick Clegg and the Liberal Democrats.
However, backbenchers were sceptical about the idea yesterday, suspecting the plan was being floated to try to improve Mr Cameron’s standing among Tory MPs and activists.
One MP said: “We know from experience that manifesto commitments are not always worth the paper they are ­written on."
Conservative backbencher Mark Pritchard urged Mr Cameron to do more to defy Lib Dem attempts to block Tory policies in the current coalition.
He said: “The Prime Minister can afford to be far more robust with the Lib Dems today, not just in the future."
Tory MPs are exasperated that the Lib Dems have stood in the way of a string of flagship policies – including tougher immigration controls, an overhaul of human rights laws and membership of the EU.
Mr Cameron’s allies were reported as wanting the voters to be offered a straight choice between a Tory-only government and a Labour-run administration –­ possibly in coalition with the Lib Dems.
A source said: “He’s very clear, he doesn’t want another coalition. A promise in the manifesto not to do any deals after the election would make that very clear to voters."
But the Prime Minister’s aides dismissed the remark. One said: “We will be fighting for a full Tory majority." Downing Street insiders expressed irritation that any senior figures were indulging in “hypothetical speculation" about the outcome of the next election.
Sources close to Mr Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister, rubbished the Tory briefing about a future hung parliament. One source said: “If there is no clear mandate for any party then, of course, the Liberal Democrats would seek to do our duty to provide a strong, stable ­government."
Document EXCO000020140226ea2q001up
