{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"2506"}
____
EXCLUSIVE: Ukip fury after leaked Lib Dem dossier labels supporters 'racist'
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
691 words
5 March 2014
18:21
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
A POLITICAL row has broken out after an official Lib Dem leaflet labelled some Ukip voters as “racist."
Lib Dem activists were given a briefing note saying they must remember “not to panic" when they come across a Ukip voter even though many will “simply be repulsed by their anti-Europeanism and racism."
The leaked document was given to members in the run up to May’s council and European elections and explains how to spot a Ukip voter when out canvassing.
It also warns there is no “silver-bullet" to stop Lib Dem voters from switching to Nigel Farage’s party.
The document, produced by the Association of Liberal Democrat Councillors and the party's head office, instructs activists to talk up the value of the UK being part of the EU and tell voters that “leaving would put three million jobs at risk."
The document was intended for Lib Dem election campaigns staff, and not for the public domain.
The Lib Dems are facing the possibility of losing all 12 of their MEPs in the Euro elections on May 22, and will be defending more than 700 council seats on the same day.
A ComRes opinion poll published yesterday put the Lib Dems in fourth place - one point behind third placed Ukip.
A Ukip spokeswoman said: "Only an ignorant person would accuse Ukip of bring racist.
"To say that people would be repulsed by the views of Ukip supporters - i.e wanting to run our own country and decides who lives, settles and works here, shows just why that party are languishing in the polls.
"They make much of being caring but anyone involved in developing countries knows how international aid and EU policy keeps those in abject poverty in places such as Africa stuck in a rut."
The five-page campaigning leaflet is intended to give "advice and background" on how activists should approach Ukip supporters in the run up to the May 22 local elections.
It urges Lib Dem activists to stay true to their "core values", as "not only are we unable to give most Ukip supporters what they want, but to stay true to our own strategy, we shouldn't seek to give them what they want either."
The leaflet claims "Ukip voters are quite evangelical and are not open to much persuasion on nation issues" and Lib Dem activists will "simply be repulsed by their anti-Europeanism and racism."
A section from the Lib Dem Campaign Briefing [EXPRESS]
The section on how to spot a Ukip supporter [EXPRESS]
But the document does concede that "what makes the Ukip challenge particularly difficult for us is that centre ground voters, and indeed Lib Dem supporters themselves, are concerned about the same issue that most animates Ukip voter - immigration."
"Immigration is the top issue for Ukip voters, but also is a big issue for over one in four Lib Dem voters."
It continues: "Our potential supporters, however, do no respond to their concerns about immigration in the same way Ukip's potential supporters do.
"We must therefore not feel pressure to try to outbid Ukip on immigration, because we cannot do so and stay true to our core values."
It outlines the best way to identify potential Ukip voters as "those who spontaneously mention immigration" and those who "often dismiss all parties of government."
 The leaflet paints an optimistic view of the Lib Dem's future, claiming "we can relatively quickly grow our party to over 100 seats in the House of Commons".
A Liberal Democrat spokesperson said this afternoon: “The Liberal Democrats are the only party taking the fight to UKIP. Their plan to pull Britain out of Europe puts millions of jobs at risk."
 
Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg and Ukip leader Nigel Farage are set to go head to head in two debates prior to the European elections.
The first will be on LBC Radio from 7pm on Wednesday March 26, and the second debate will be televised on BBC 2 from 7pm a week later, April 2.
Document EXCO000020140305ea3500462
