{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"58"}
____
Germany plans to curb EU migrants' benefits to stop 'welfare tourism'
By Owen Bennett - Political Reporter   
660 words
25 March 2014
16:57
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
GERMANY is set to introduce strict new laws to tackle "welfare tourism", including giving migrants just three months to find a job before being kicked out.
A special panel was set up earlier this year to investigate welfare abuse in the country, and tomorrow its report is due to be published.
Among its recommendations are proposals to expel those who commit benefit fraud and limiting child allowance to EU citizens who are registered taxpayers in Germany.
But concerns have already been raised that the proposals would be against EU law, and could not therefore be implemented.
Concerns over immigration and benefit tourism are likely to dominate the two EU debates between Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg and Ukip's Nigel Farage - with the first clash taking place tomorrow.
UKIP's Head of Policy Unit Tim Aker: "We've seen from the EU's opposition to previous right to reside rules that the EU opposes any measures to restrict access to welfare benefits.
"The only way we can properly decide who should be allowed in this country and who shouldn't and who is eligible for welfare benefits and who isn't, is by leaving the EU."
The EUobserver reported today that late last year the mayors of 16 German cities made a public plea for help in coping with migrants from Eastern Europe, notably Roma from Romania and Bulgaria, who are accused of putting a strain on local welfare schemes.
Interior minister Thomas de Maiziere said the focus should be on those who exploit unskilled migrants.
"We have to look at the people and structures who bring migrants and exploit them for their own petty interests," he told the Rheinischer Post.
He said it cannot be that people who speak no word of German show up to the local benefits offices with perfectly filled-in forms and demand child support or a permit to set up a business.
David Cameron with Angela Merkel outside 10 Downing Street last month [PA]
Earlier this month the British Government introduced a rule that meant EU migrants coming to the UK will have to show they are earning at least £149 a week for three months before they can access a range of benefits, including jobseeker's allowance, child tax credits and child benefits.
Prime Minister David Cameron sparked a minor row with Poland foreign minister earlier this year when he spoke out against child benefit being paid to Poles in the UK being sent to children back in the eastern European country.
But Radoslaw Sikorski argued withdrawing the benefits would mean Poles working in the UK would effectively be subsidising British children.
The politician tweeted: "If Britain gets our taxpayers, shouldn't it also pay their benefits? Why should Polish taxpayers subsidize British taxpayers' children?
"UK social security rules apply to all resident EU citizens. No need to stigmatize Poles. What about British children abroad?"
In a visit to the UK last month, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said no country in Europe can withstand an "onslaught" of benefit tourism.
She said: "We can only have the same level of social security if we try to generate growth and jobs, but not by having immigration into social systems.
"That is just as much of a headache for us in Germany as it is for the British people. We have to look at it. Can we change our German laws or do we need more of a specification as to what we mean by freedom of movement?
"If we say we want freedom of movement for jobs but no immigration into social security systems in Europe, then I think we need to come to a definition."
Mr Cameron is under pressure from some Tory backbenchers to make benefit payments to migrants one of the centrepieces of his planned renegotiation with the EU ahead of a 2017 in/out referendum.
Document EXCO000020140325ea3p002pa
