{"newspaper":"express.co.uk","id:"1379"}
____
Government urged to drop immigration "nonsense"
By Jane Wharton   
901 words
2 March 2014
15:39
express.co.uk
EXCO
English
Copyright 2014   
THE TORIES have again today pledged to get annual immigration down to the "tens of thousands" despite calls for the party to drop the "statistical nonsense."
Former defence secretary Liam Fox told David Cameron that he must ditch the pledge and instead focus efforts on curbing low-skilled workers heading to Britain. 
He said a radical change of direction was needed to stave off a threat from Ukip but warned the Conservatives must not lurch to the Right in a knee-jerk reaction. 
In a newspaper column, Dr Fox wrote that if the Tories want to win back Ukip voters, "there needs to be a clearer narrative on immigration, stressing not only the need to restrict numbers, but also to determine which individuals, with what skills enter our country."
He continued: "While Conservative policy has concentrated on getting down the net migration numbers, it is actual numbers that affect school places, housing and health. The Conservatives must ditch this statistical nonsense. 
"Likewise, even if numbers came down and all were economic refugees from Somalia, what has been gained? We need to control how many and who comes into Britain. That will ensure that we get the right kind of migration for our needs."
His intervention in the Sunday Telegraph comes as migration experts and rival politicians accused the Government of losing its grip on immigration policy. 
Official figures last week showed the net flow of migrants into the UK surged year-on-year by more than a third to 212,000 in the 12 months to September 2013. 
Today Conservative Party Chairman Grant Shapps told the Andrew Marr Show the pledge on reducing net migration was "for the end of the parliament."
Asked by the BBC presenter if he thought there was any chance the party would meet it, he replied: "Yes, we do."
Mr Shapps said it was still a Tory goal "to bring it down" to under 100,000 by 2015. And when quizzed if that would really happen, he responded: "I very much hope so."
Liam Fox has called on the Coalition to "ditch the statistics" on net migration [AP]
Dr Fox also cautioned the Prime Minister that he would be guilty of "dangerous complacency" if he failed to address the damage Ukip voters could do at the ballot box. 
He said supporters of the two parties shared many concerns, particularly immigration, and it was wrong to demonise those voting for the anti-Europe party. 
The MP for North Somerset added that support for Ukip could inadvertently secure a Labour government at the next general election.
Dr Fox wrote: "Name-calling - the accusations that Ukip activists or representatives are "cranks" or "crackpots" - is ill-advised and counter productive. Many decent and patriotic people have been willing to consider flirting with Ukip. We should not insult their motivations by denigrating their voting choice. Rather we should point out the unavoidable consequences of voting for Ukip.
"Only a Conservative majority has any intention of forging a renegotiation of Britain's fundamental relationship with the EU. Either David Cameron will continue as Prime Minister in 2015 or Ed Miliband will replace him. That will be the choice. 
"I do not believe for a moment that those considering voting Ukip really want to see a Left-leaning Socialist government led by Mr Miliband and Mr Balls."
He added the Conservatives should not try to outflank Ukip from the right, but "set out a positive vision, clear philosophy and definable objectives."
Dr Fox's comments were today rubbished as "baloney" from Ukip leader Nigel Farage. 
Appearing alongside Mr Shapps on the Andrew Marr show, he said: "What Liam Fox and others are saying to you today is baloney. Only a third of our vote comes from the Conservatives and when you poll Ukip voters and say, 'if there was no Ukip candidate, how would you vote? Less than one in five of them would even consider voting for the Conservatives. 
"The reasons the Tories won't win a majority at the next general election is not because of Europe, it's because their own voters don't see David Cameron as a Conservative."
Theresa May has admitted that there is an "overwhelming incentive" for people to come to the UK [GETTY]
Liberal Democrat Business Secretary Vince Cable said last week that the rise in immigration from the EU to the UK was "good news."
Today Cabinet colleague Theresa May hit back, saying she did not agree and rising migration must end. 
In an article in the Mail on Sunday, the Conservative Home Secretary said that migration from outside the EU was down to its lowest level since 1998 and the open-borders policy was the reason behind the growth figures. 
She wrote that "uncontrolled immigration makes it difficult to maintain social cohesion, puts pressure on public services and can drive down wages for people on low incomes."
Mrs May said the Coalition was attempting to tackle the treaties which allowed unchecked EU migration by changing rules on access to benefits and social housing. 
But she conceded: "In all honesty, whatever the Government does to reduce the pull factors that draw people to Britain, as long as there is such an enormous disparity in terms of income per head, there will be an overwhelming incentive for people to move from poorer nations to richer states."
Document EXCO000020140302ea32003ml
