{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1152"}
____
  
G4S guards charged with manslaughter
By Gill Plimmer   
413 words
20 March 2014
18:50
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
G4S has escaped prosecution over the death of a man at Heathrow airport in 2010 as he was being deported from the UK, but three guards employed by the company will be charged, prosecutors said on Thursday.
Jimmy Mubenga, 46, died after being restrained by the three G4S guards on board an aircraft at Heathrow airport in October 2010. The Crown Prosecution Service said on Thursday there was now enough evidence to bring a case against Colin Kaler, Terrence Hughes and Stuart Tribelnig for manslaughter. The three men will appear at a London court on April 7.
The prosecutors said that G4S Care and Justice Services, a division of the company, would not face corporate manslaughter charges because it "would require evidence capable of establishing beyond reasonable doubt that a 'controlling mind' in the corporation was personally guilty of manslaughter by gross negligence".
The three guards were arrested following Mr Mubenga's death, but in 2012 the CPS decided not to bring any charges against them. That decision was reviewed following an inquest into Mr Mubenga's death last year in which a jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing following an eight-week hearing.
G4S said in a statement that Mr Mubenga's death was a tragic event. "The welfare of those in our care is always our top priority and we took great care to ensure that our employees on this contract, which has been carried out by another provider since November 2011, were made aware of their responsibilities in this respect," G4S said. "These employees were also trained, screened and vetted to the standards defined by strict Home Office guidelines."
G4S is still recovering from the damage inflicted when it failed to provide enough security guards at the 2012 London Olympics, forcing the army to help with the job at the last minute. It is also under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office - along with rival Serco - for overcharging Britain's Ministry of Justice on electronic tagging contracts for offenders.
It is involved in a further investigation for its role in providing security at an immigration detention centre in Papua New Guinea, where deadly clashes broke out last month. G4S recently lost a tender to continue servicing the facility and has said that it supports the investigation.
The three men will appear at Westminster Magistrates' Court in London on April 7. Prosecutors said they believed there was a realistic prospect of conviction.
Document FTCMA00020140320ea3k0048u
