{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1879"}
____
  
Downing St set to publish report scotching migrant job fears
By Elizabeth Rigby and Helen Warrell   
577 words
6 March 2014
00:03
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Downing Street is expected to say immigration does not rob British-born people of jobs but can push down pay, after being criticised for burying information that challenges the Conservatives' anti-immigration rhetoric.
Officials said on Tuesday that Number 10 was poised to publish a report showing that the effect of immigration on the UK labour market - the so-called displacement effect - is "negligible" after coming under fire for suppressing the "tome-like" study put together by officials.
Theresa May, the home secretary, has frequently quoted figures published in 2012 by the government's immigration advisers, which indicated that for every 100 non-European working-age immigrants employed in Britain, 23 UK-born people are displaced.
A government figure told the Financial Times that the fresh analysis debunked this assertion, although officials did say migration flows had a greater impact, particularly on low-skilled workers, in a downturn.
The findings are politically awkward for the Tories but will be seized on by Vince Cable, the pro-immigration business secretary, who will on Thursday night urge political colleagues to "stop treating people coming to work here as if they are a problem".
The business secretary will use a Mansion House speech to make the case for immigration, arguing that the free movement of people enables businesses to plug skills gaps, while also bringing money into the economy.
One official said that Downing Street had withheld the report for fears of stoking further controversy around immigration following news last week that net migration to the UK soared by more than a third to 212,000 in the year to September.
Migration has become a "politically toxic" flashpoint in British politics, particularly since work restrictions on Romanians and Bulgarians were lifted on January 1.
But Mr Cable will use his speech to try to allay some of the public's fears on migration. "I am intensely relaxed about people coming to work and study here and bringing the necessary skills to Britain - provided that they pay their taxes and pay their way," Mr Cable will say, pointing out that less than 3 per cent of migrants to the UK claim jobseeker's allowance.
"A marked reduction in immigration from the EU would mean, as the Office of Budget Responsibility have confirmed, an increase in the budget deficit and a much slower reduction in public debt," he will add.
This is not the first time Downing Street has been accused of blocking the publication of immigration research that undermines the Conservatives' policy of reducing net immigration to the "tens of thousands" by 2015.
The Financial Times revealed in January that David Cameron shelved a report on EU migration after the Home Office failed to provide evidence to support Ms May's case for imposing tighter restrictions on immigrants. An official said on Tuesday that the report may never be released.
The latest report's findings on the "negligible" displacement effect of immigrants tallies with the broad position of labour market economists who have always maintained that the impact is minimal.
This is largely because migrants at the lower-skilled end tend to fill jobs that the native workforce is unwilling to do, such as fruit-picking, working in factory production and also in care homes.
In fact, recent attempts by agriculture companies to encourage more British workers into seasonal harvesting jobs have been strikingly unsuccessful.
Document FTCOM00020140306ea3600008
