{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1153"}
____
  
Swedbank: Safe as houses?
318 words
20 March 2014
16:44
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Swedbank's management prefers having a solid roof overhead. The bank holds a high capital ratio - under Basel III rules - at 18 per cent. Good thing, too. Swedish regulators want banks there to hold even more capital these days, especially for residential mortgages, consistently testing the foundations of investors' attraction to Swedbank. Even the Swedish Banking Association thinks more mortgage holders should pay down the principal on their loans with greater regularity.
The Swedish regulator has already told banks to triple their risk weighting for mortgages - nearly half of Swedbank's loan book - to 15 per cent. Analysts at Deutsche Bank expect this to go even higher to 25 per cent. The regulator wishes to give homeowners a clear signal that house prices have risen too far for too long - up 67 per cent nationally over the past decade with hardly a pause. In the UK, the Nationwide's house price index has gained less than a quarter over the same period. Swedbank's management, among others, believes the problem stems from a housing shortage, made worse by recent immigration and urban growth. Withdrawal of credit will not solve anything soon.
Despite this cloud over Sweden's banking market, investors have sought out Swedbank's shares, up 15 per cent in the past year. No wonder. Not only does the bank have a healthy capital cushion, it has delivered a high return on these reserves (nearly 20 per cent). These numbers mean that the bank can still pay out three quarters of earnings as dividend, providing a yield of 6 per cent.
Even as Swedbank investors peek out through the curtains for signs of trouble, they contentedly collect their dividends. Meanwhile, the Swedish government would like the residential mortgage market to slow. When it does, investors may not feel at home, just exposed.
Email the Lex team in confidence at lex@ft.com
Document FTCMA00020140320ea3k003bi
