{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1555"}
____
Tories eye visa sleight of hand to flatter immigration figures
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
449 words
26 March 2014
22:17
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Theresa May is proposing to cut net migration by more than 19,000 ahead of the next general election in a statistical sleight of hand that would shorten visas for foreign employees by as little as one day in a bid to avoid designating them as migrants.
The Home Secretary is considering the measure amid concern over immigration, which is rising despite the Conservative pledge to drive down the number of net incomers to less than 100,000 by 2015. Recent data shows net migration climbing by a third to 212,000 .
Whitehall officials said one solution under consideration was to exclude some business immigrants from the statistics by reclassifying the 12 month intra-company transfer visa as an 11-month permit, or even a permit valid for 11 months and 29 days. Incoming employees would therefore no longer qualify under the UN definition of net migration, which only counts those in a country for a year or more.
The Home Office argues that imposing new curbs on ICT visas - typically used by foreign carmakers such as Honda and Toyota bringing in experts to train UK staff - is a response to fears that these short-term visas are being abused by companies. A report in 2012 by the government's independent immigration advisers warned that the number of ICT visas granted per million of the population was "substantially higher for the UK" than for competitors such as the US, Canada, Australia and Germany.
Neil Carberry, director for employment and skills at the CBI, was more scathing about the proposed change. "We are in a pretty dangerous place if we are redesigning the tiers of the immigration system in order to meet a political target," he said. "This would once again undermine the image of the UK as a place where we welcome highly skilled people."
Julia Onslow-Cole, head of global immigration at PwC Legal, said that business had actually requested that the Home Office should extend the 12-month visa for two weeks to allow extra flexibility.
She also warned against imposing further restrictions. "Many of the [immigration] changes that have been made over the past few years are only now beginning to impact business as the economy improves and employers are looking at resource planning," Ms Onslow-Cole said.
The Home Office rebutted as "wrong" any suggestion that the changes were aimed at excluding migrants from the statistics. A spokesman said that the department was seeking to ensure the ICT visa was being used as "a temporary route for businesses, not to fill roles that could be performed by resident workers".
Document FTCMA00020140326ea3q0050m
