{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"723"}
____
  
The challenge set by Nigel Farage
652 words
4 April 2014
18:14
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
David Cameron once famously described the UK Independence party as a movement full of "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists". And listening to the views of some Ukip members, the party still has plenty in its ranks.
But at the same time it is getting ever harder to ignore the political talents of Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader. In an age of identikit, photo-shopped politicians, he may cut an apparently eccentric figure with his penchant for pinstripe suits, golf-club wisdom and downing pints in the pub. But he is an increasingly effective operator whom the mainstream party leaders dismiss at their peril.
In the past fortnight Mr Farage has held two debates with Nick Clegg, the pro-European Liberal Democrat leader, on Britain's future in the EU. These encounters may ultimately be of limited political significance. Neither of the two main party leaders - Mr Cameron of the Conservatives and Labour's Ed Miliband - participated. But in the short term they have provided an important boost for Mr Farage.
The Ukip leader emerged from both as the clear winner, with a poll showing he triumphed in the second debate by 69 per cent to 31 per cent. More importantly, Mr Farage showed resilience under fire. Many had expected that in two hours of intense debate he would lose his cool or crumple intellectually. He did neither.
We should not overestimate Mr Farage. His party remains undisciplined and fragmented. Although Ukip has doubled its membership in the past three years, it remains largely a one-man-band. Its 2010 election manifesto made no sense economically. The plan to take the UK out of the EU is a disaster.
Nor is electoral success by any means guaranteed. Ukip will probably do well in May's European elections and could top the poll. But Europe is well down the list of concerns of many voters. At the general election, Ukip may not gain a single seat under Britain's first-past-the-post parliamentary system. If there is a referendum on the EU in 2017, Mr Farage may be the figurehead of the "out" campaign. But he will be up against much of the Tory party, Labour, the Lib Dems and business.
Mr Farage's tactical successes should be recognised. One of the biggest is to have transformed Ukip from a party with a myopic focus on the EU to one with broader messages. In the past two years he has successfully connected euroscepticism with public hostility to immigration. In this week's debate with Mr Clegg, he further identified Ukip with the strongly anti-establishment mood in parts of Britain, especially among the white working class.
Mr Farage is not an easy opponent for Britain's big parties. Public respect for mainstream politicians is at an all-time low. Mr Farage's cynical anti-establishment pose, meanwhile, is popular. Sticking to Mr Cameron's tactic of ridiculing silly Ukip pamphlets or candidates of questionable sanity is not enough. The Westminster parties need to expose the shortcomings in Ukip's economic prospectus. They must also map out a positive case for UK membership of the EU.
British politics is going through a turbulent phase, with an imminent referendum on Scotland's membership of the UK and the chance of a plebiscite on Europe in 2017. It is a moment for campaigning politicians; and the two most able practitioners of this art are Mr Farage and Alex Salmond, the Scottish National party leader.
Both have found fertile ground for their messages and are giving the Westminster establishment a tough time. It will take more than scorn to stop them in their tracks. The mainstream parties will need to show creativity and imagination. But the Tories, Labour and Lib Dems are focused on bashing each other ahead of next year's general election - and are showing precious little of either.
Document FTCMA00020140404ea440035x
