{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3756"}
____
  
Boris Johnson attacks 'deceit' on Europe
By George Parker, Political Editor   
567 words
28 April 2014
20:36
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Boris Johnson has made a veiled attack on David Cameron's plan to cut net migration to the "tens of thousands", claiming voters were the victims of a "continual deceit" that politicians can control immigration while Britain remains a member of the EU.
The London mayor's comments will heighten speculation that he is building a platform for a future Tory leadership bid and preparing for a return to national politics at the 2015 election.
By combining an attack on the EU with a promise to control European migration, Mr Johnson's position may appeal to Tory supporters who are deserting to the UK Independence party, which hopes to win next month's European elections.
Referring to public anger over immigration, he said: "It's not so much the numbers or the impact - though they are angry about that - it's about the continual deceit that we can solve this problem whilst remaining members of the EU with free movement."
David Cameron stood at the last election promising to cut net immigration to the "tens of thousands" but that target now looks certain to be missed because of a surge of arrivals from other European countries.
Mr Johnson told Total Politics magazine that he would have longer transition periods for migrants from new EU member states, sharing Mr Cameron's plan to extend the current seven-year work exemption when new countries join the EU.
But he also said there should be a "much more serious points system" to make sure people who come to Britain have work and can show they are contributing to society: such a move would almost certainly be contrary to EU law.
Mr Cameron expects Mr Johnson to stand for parliament at the 2015 election and has said he would welcome the prospect of having one of the party's biggest hitters campaigning alongside him.
The mayor says he has not made up his mind, but his return to Westminster would be seen by Tory MPs as the mayor preparing to stand for the Tory leadership if Mr Cameron steps down, possibly after a defeat in 2015.
Many Tory MPs believe Mr Cameron's apparent enthusiasm for Mr Johnson's return is largely an attempt to appear relaxed at the idea of the mayor sitting on the green benches again.
However, Mr Cameron says he wants to serve a full second term as prime minister and believes Mr Johnson could play a key role in a Tory government; some have argued the mayor could take on a role promoting infrastructure projects.
Such a scenario would mean that Mr Johnson would return as an MP at the same time as continuing to serve out his term as London mayor until 2016, although Mr Cameron would not put him into the cabinet until after he left City Hall.
"My job is to help the Tory cause in any way that I can, by running London to the best of my ability," Mr Johnson said. "I've got more than two years to go. Big mandate - a lot to fulfil."
Mr Johnson adds that the women in his office like the idea - sometimes rumoured - that he might fight the Richmond Park seat of the handsome millionaire Tory MP Zac Goldsmith, in a job swap that might see Mr Goldsmith contest the mayoralty in 2016.
Document FTCMA00020140428ea4s004s9
