{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2227"}
____
  
Nick Clegg warns 'extremism on the rise' across Europe
By Kiran Stacey, Political Correspondent   
436 words
9 March 2014
12:55
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nick Clegg has warned against a tide of extremism spreading "anger" and "bile" across Europe as he makes an unashamedly pro-immigration pitch to his party's spring conference in York.
Delivering his keynote speech, the Liberal Democrat leader told his party "a number of extremist parties are on the rise" across the continent, while warning that the UK Independence party also needed to be tackled head on.
Mr Clegg said: "The forces of chauvinism, protectionism and xenophobia have been emboldened. And there is no doubt about it. The fight is now on for the future of our continent."
He referred to the electoral successes of France's Front National, the Netherlands' PVV party and Greece's Golden Dawn as examples of this.
And though he did not include Ukip in this definition, he said: "An ungenerous, backwards looking politics has emerged in Britain." Referring to Ukip's leader Nigel Farage, he added: "The politics of blame has found an acceptable face: it wears a big smile and looks like someone you could have a pint with down the pub."
Mr Clegg and his Lib Dem colleagues have sought to turn May's European elections into a straight fight between them and Ukip, arguing they are the only two parties with a clear strategy on Europe. Mr Clegg and Mr Farage will hold a live debate on Britain's membership of the EU just weeks before the ballot.
The Lib Dem leader argued that his pro-European stance was more democratic than that of more eurosceptic parties, saying: "I love Britain... I love that, while we may be an island, we have always looked beyond our shores." He called his party "the guardians of a modern, open and tolerant Britain".
Lib Dem ministers have been pushing an openly pro-EU, pro-immigration platform. They include Ed Davey, the energy secretary, who told the BBC's Andrew Marr Show his party wanted to increase immigration by relaxing visa restrictions on immigrants' extended families.
Mr Davey said: "Where family life is involved, where it is someone's family life, where it is someone's husband or wife, I do think we should be more welcoming."
MPs and advisers admit the strategy is risky, but say that with the party at risk of losing all its MEPs in May, it has to try a change of tack. "These positions might often be thought unpopular," said one official. "But there is nothing to lose now. We might as well make a virtue of who we are."
Document FTCMA00020140309ea39000p2
