{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1234"}
____
  
UK's health service needs an extra £2bn, says chief
By Sarah Neville, Public Policy Editor   
692 words
23 March 2014
21:13
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The NHS needs an extra £2bn, the departing chief executive has said, with "very tight" finances threatening to push the service into the red before the next general election.
The comments by Sir David Nicholson, as he prepares to step down this week as head of the NHS in England, underline the pressures on public finances just days after George Osborne warned in his Budget that there must be no let up in expenditure controls.
Sir David predicted that overall the service would be running a £600m to £800m surplus by the end of the 2014 financial year.
But he raised the possibility that it could tip into the red as early as 2014/15, saying it was only "possible" the service would remain in overall surplus in that year.
Such a shortfall would be the first since 2006, underlining the pressures on a service that has seen scant funding growth since 2010 even as demand has risen by 4 per cent a year.
Without additional funding of about £2bn, problems would become acute in 2015, he indicated in an interview with the Financial Times: "That is just a bridge too far in terms of where we are at the moment."
Ministers will be reluctant to stir further controversy around the state of the NHS in the run-up to an election in which Labour will seek to target the coalition's management of the service.
But Sir David said the health service could not afford "a dead year . . . You can't wait until after the election. In the middle and autumn of this year it is an issue that people will have to confront".
He added: "If political parties are going to say 'we can muddle through over the next two or three years' - we can't. [We will have] managed decline and more risk for patients".
His concerns centre on the creation of a £3.8bn pot of money, dubbed the Better Care Fund, which is intended for initiatives that will ease the pressure on hospitals by treating more people in the community.
The NHS is expected to contribute £2bn to the fund, which begins in 2015 and is being enthusiastically supported by the Treasury.
However, Sir David said this was not "new money" and would have to be removed from the hospitals budget. He said: "The question is in time will we be able to create a service that can afford to take £2bn out of the acute sector? Have I got a list of things that I think we could do that will deliver [it], yes I have. My judgment is I don't think we can do it at the moment."
The additional money he is seeking should, he said, be used to implement changes elsewhere in the NHS, such as concentrating specialist services and full-scale accident and emergency departments in a smaller number of hospitals, enabling investment in community services.
In the last year, health has consistently featured among the four issues of greatest importance for voters, according to Ipsos-MORI although it still ranks behind the economy, immigration and unemployment.
Sir David also suggested that Britons would be prepared to pay higher taxes to maintain a universal free health service. However, sustaining public support for the level of spending the service required might mean "hypothecating" the additional levies.
As part of keeping the national consensus behind a universal free service, he argued that everyone should be sent an annual "read-out" which "shows what you paid in and what you got out of it. Now that sort of transparent way of doing things, I think, will create the kind of buy-in that you need", added Sir David.
The health department said: "With an ageing population there's more pressure on the NHS, which is why we need to focus far more on health prevention out of hospitals. That's why we are bringing £3.8bn of health and social care funding together into a single seamless service to keep our elderly and most vulnerable well for longer."
Document FTCMA00020140323ea3n003bk
