{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"399"}
____
  
Farage admits 'bottling' chance to stand for parliament
By Jim Pickard, Chief Political Correspondent   
478 words
30 April 2014
18:48
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nigel Farage has dashed expectations that he could use the imminent by-election in Newark to stand for Parliament in what would have been a gamble for the Ukip leader.
The poll in the East Midlands seat was prompted by the resignation of Patrick Mercer, a former Tory MP who stepped down over a cash-for-questions scandal.
Mr Farage had prompted speculation that he would stand, saying on Tuesday night that he would give it "very serious consideration" because he wanted to become an MP.
By the following morning, however, he ruled out the move, saying it would be a "massive distraction" from the upcoming European elections in which Ukip is expected to perform strongly.
Ben Wallace, a parliamentary aide to Ken Clarke, the minister without portfolio, said: "That faint clucking you can hear in the distance is Nigel Farage."
Mr Farage insisted that he had not been frightened of losing in the seat, which Mr Mercer had held with a majority of 16,152.
But during a Sky News interview he was asked if he had "bottled it" and replied: "Yes."
The contest could have had echoes of 2010, when Mr Farage took on John Bercow, the Speaker, whose majority of 18,129 in Buckingham proved unassailable.
The maverick MEP has told friends that he wants to run in a more marginal seat, probably in the east or south-east where immigration is a major concern. Thanet South, where incumbent Tory MP Laura Sandys is stepping down, is one option.
"There is a much bigger prize than the Newark by-election and that is the general election," Mr Farage said.
"We are just over three weeks away from a European election at which I think Ukip can cause an earthquake in British politics, from which we can go on and not just win one parliamentary seat but win quite a lot of parliamentary seats."
He said he would have looked like an "opportunist", given that he did not have any links with the East Midlands. If he had lost in the by-election then the Ukip "bubble would have burst", damaging his prospects in the general election.
Mr Mercer stepped down as an MP on Tuesday, days before he faced a six-month suspension from the Commons. He had been caught tabling parliamentary questions after accepting a bribe from undercover reporters.
Ukip would have faced a struggle in Newark even with the popular Mr Farage as its candidate: in 2010 the Tories won 27,590 votes while the anti-Brussels party picked up just 1,954.
Yet British by-elections are known for being unpredictable and Ukip is more popular than it has ever been with polls suggesting it could pick up a third of the voters in May's European elections.
Document FTCOM00020140430ea4u0056a
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:25
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
