{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"606"}
____
  
Clegg goes on attack against Ukip and warns of Labour vulnerability
By Kiran Stacey, Political Correspondent   
752 words
9 March 2014
20:03
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nick Clegg has accused the UK Independence party of spreading "anger" and "bile" with its anti-immigration stance, as a new study shows the eurosceptic party has the potential to win the votes of as many as one in three British voters.
The Liberal Democrat leader attacked Ukip for its opposition to both EU membership and immigration, telling his party's conference in York: "An ungenerous, backwards looking politics has emerged in Britain."
He linked Ukip's success to the rise of more extreme rightwing parties across Europe, telling delegates: "The forces of chauvinism, protectionism and xenophobia have been emboldened. And there is no doubt about it. The fight is now on for the future of our continent."
In an unashamedly pro-European pitch to voters ahead of May's European elections, Mr Clegg said "Europe is our biggest export market and vital to British jobs. Pulling up the drawbridge is the surest way to wreck our economic recovery." And he made a direct attack on Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, saying: "The politics of blame has found an acceptable face: it wears a big smile and looks like someone you could have a pint with down the pub."
Mr Clegg's words came after a weekend of speeches and rallies at which Lib Dem MPs and supporters repeatedly attacked Ukip. The party has abandoned its usual reluctance to talk about its pro-EU and pro-immigration policies, which have limited public appeal, but have decided to make a virtue of them instead as they seek to avoid being completely wiped out in May.
One party official said: "There is nothing to lose now. We might as well make a virtue of who we are. At least we're making ourselves relevant."
But Ukip is unlikely to fade away quietly, according to a new book from two academics who have studied decades' worth of polling data and found that 30 per cent of UK voters could be persuaded to back the insurgent party.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>Revolt on the Right, a new book examining the success of the anti-EU party , found the bulk of future support for Ukip coming from disenchanted former Labour supporters. One of its main findings will shock those who have branded Ukip "the Conservatives in exile", showing that eight of the 10 seats where Ukip has the most chance of winning in 2015 are currently held by Labour. The book has been written by Matthew Goodwin, a politics professor at Nottingham university, and Robert Ford, a lecturer at Manchester university.
Mr Goodwin said: "In terms of the 2015 election, Ukip is not as much of a threat to Labour as it is to the Conservatives. But beyond that, we see a significant amount of potential in very working class areas, including in Labour seats."
While the Lib Dems have been happy to attack Ukip directly, the Conservatives have been more reticent to do so for fear of alienating their own supporters, who they fear are the most likely to defect to the rightwing party. But the analysis of decades' worth of polling data shows the seats most receptive to Ukip's message are not in the east or southwest, where the party has traditionally focused, but in poorer northern areas, most of which are Labour-held.
The findings will boost those in Ukip who have argued the party should shift its focus away from attracting Conservative voters disenchanted with David Cameron's leadership, and instead target a larger group of voters who feel left behind by all major parties.
Mr Ford and Mr Goodwin found that the number of voters who have concerns typical to Ukip voters - a blend of euroscepticism, opposition to immigration and a populist dislike of mainstream parties - could be as high as 30 per cent, suggesting the party could have a long-term future at the heart of UK politics.
The conclusion will dismay supporters of the three mainstream parties who believe the recent surge in Ukip's support - which has seen them overtake the Lib Dems in the national polls - is likely to fade after May's European elections.
Ukip's support has come largely from white, working-class, older men, often with few qualifications, whose alienation from mainstream politics has been increasingly steadily since the 1990s, the data show.
Document FTCMA00020140309ea390035x
