{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3121"}
____
  
Nick Clegg kicks off European election drive with EU reform vow
By Jim Pickard, Chief Political Correspondent   
616 words
24 April 2014
17:59
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nick Clegg vowed to fight for reform of the EU as he launched the Liberal Democrats' European election campaign on Thursday, insisting he was not "wrapping himself up in the European flag" for the sake of it.
The Lib Dem leader said he was the only head of a main party not "scared to speak up" in favour of Britain's membership of Europe and that it was "pro-British" to argue for the country to remain in the EU.
With only a month to go before the local and European elections, the deputy prime minister has stepped up his argument that leaving the EU would threaten millions of British jobs.
But he fought back against the "cardboard cut-out caricature" that anyone who spoke up for Brussels thought it was perfect.
"There is a need for reform; when I worked there 15 years ago the EU took 15 years to conclude a chocolate directive," he said, speaking at a public question and answer session at Colchester United football ground in Essex.
Mr Clegg said he wanted to see more reform of Europe's single market, for example in respect of energy. He wanted more exemptions for small companies from minor regulations, as well as an end to the European parliament's move to Strasbourg for a week each month.
But he added: "You can't reform anything if you have one foot in it and one foot out the exit door."
Mr Clegg is widely judged to have lost the recent television debates on Europe against Nigel Farage, leader of the anti-Brussels Ukip party. His gamble is that with his party running at about 10 per cent in the opinion polls, the Lib Dems have little to lose. Unless the party increases its popularity in the next four weeks, it is on track to lose most of its 11 MEPs.
David Burch, director of policy at Essex chambers of commerce, who was in the audience, said he agreed with Mr Clegg's policy of "standing up for what he believes in".
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>"At the end of the day we probably need to remain in Europe but the relationship does need to be revisited," he said. "In my job I do get complaints all the time about European legislation and the impact it has on members' day-to-day activities."
Roger Tull, an independent financial adviser, said before the event that Ukip's stance had great "resonance" because of the impact of immigration on other people's jobs.
Many questions from the floor were about tuition fees, demonstrating how that issue still haunts the Lib Dems four years after the last general election. Asked by one student why he had "lied to the electorate" when he promised no rise in tuition fees, Mr Clegg was forced on to the defensive, saying it was impossible for his party to implement all of its manifesto with only 8 per cent of MPs.
The biggest challenge for Mr Clegg is how to win back voters who disappeared after the coalition was formed - most of whom now support Labour. Jean Smith, a retired local, said the Lib Dems were still "very popular" in the area and said she agreed with their stance on Europe.
But she said the party should not have gone into coalition. "I didn't vote for Bob Russell [local Lib Dem MP] to get David Cameron into power," she said, adding that she would vote for another party in future.
Document FTCOM00020140424ea4o0040h
