{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3179"}
____
  
Ministers accused of giving foreign students 'cold shoulder'
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
555 words
11 April 2014
00:03
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Peers have accused government ministers of giving the "cold shoulder" to international students, as they revealed a 10 per cent fall in the number of overseas entrants to study science, technology and maths at UK colleges since the coalition came to power.
A report to be published on Friday by the cross-party Lords science and technology committee says the UK is "missing out on highly skilled workers", because of a drop in foreign students enrolling for degrees in so-called Stem subjects, which provide a vital research base for British industry.
The peers suggest that "overblown rhetoric'' from ministers about the need to bring down net migration, combined with constantly changing immigration rules, has deterred foreign students who are now choosing to go instead to the US, Canada and Australia.
In particular, the committee highlights the contradiction between David Cameron's target of reducing net migration to the "tens of thousands'' by 2015 and efforts by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to increase the number of international students by 15-20 per cent over the next five years.
The issue has come under scrutiny after it emerged last week that the overall number of international students coming to UK universities had dropped for the first time in almost three decades.
Lord Krebs, the committee's chairman, said that as a result of the immigration rules, the UK was missing out on the talent and economic contribution brought by international students - leaving Britain's competitors in higher education "reaping the rewards".
"When we really need to send the message that international Stem students will get a warm welcome in the UK, they're getting the cold shoulder and heading elsewhere," said Lord Krebs.
"The overwhelming evidence that we received led us to conclude that changes to the immigration rules in this country have played a direct part in putting overseas students off from choosing the UK."
The peers also pointed out that some Stem courses were under threat because they relied on the financial contribution made by overseas students to remain viable.
According to the report, the number of students studying science, technology, engineering and maths - including courses in medicine, architecture and computer science - fell from 58,815 in 2010-11 to 52,905 in 2012-13.
The Home Office did not accept that UK immigration rules were deterring international students, saying there was "no clear evidence in the report to support that argument".
"The student visa system we inherited was weak and open to widespread abuse," it said. "We are controlling immigration while still attracting the brightest and the best - as the published figures show."
Commenting on the findings, Wendy Piatt, director-general of the Russell Group of research-intensive universities, said she agreed with the committee that students should be exempted from the net migration figures.
She said: "Whilst the prime minister and home secretary have both stated that there is no cap on legitimate international students, the fact that they are still included in the net migration target leads to the perception in some quarters that the UK is unwelcoming.
"Therefore, it is encouraging that with this report, produced by a cross-party committee . . . there is growing support for this change among politicians of all parties."
Document FTCOM00020140410ea4a005bu
