{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3493"}
____
  
Scotland's uncomfortable parallel with Quebec
423 words
21 April 2014
23:53
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
From Prof Colin Mason.
Sir, Philip Stephens observes that the Scottish independence campaign is throwing up parallels with the Quebec independence vote in 1995 ("Salmond has put Britain on the low road to break-up", April 11). However, the more important point to make is that the rise of the Parti Québécois from the mid-1970s and independence referendums in 1980 and 1995 were associated with the decline of Montreal as a corporate hub. Between 1978 and 1981, 30 companies (including the Bank of Montreal) moved their headquarters from Montreal to Toronto. Between 1990 and 2011 the number of Canada's top 500 companies by revenue with their head office in Montreal dropped from 96 to 75, and some of those that remain are simply the legal rather than the operational headquarters. This has had knock-on effects on the city and provincial economies, notably a decline in demand for business services. So, from vying with Toronto as Canada's leading corporate centre in the 1970s Montreal is now a distinctly second- tier city and the Quebec economy is one of the weakest in the country. Of course, other factors have also contributed but it is not credible to argue that the independence movement has not been a key factor in these trends.
The parallel with Scotland is uncomfortable. Already some companies have announced that they will relocate their head offices from Scotland. Others will do so by stealth. This, in turn, will accelerate the longstanding haemorrhage of talent from Scotland on account of its paucity of senior jobs.
It should also be noted that support for Quebec independence has waned. Only recently the minority Parti Québécois government, which called an early election to get a stronger mandate, was trounced, recording its lowest share of the provincial vote since 1970. This is attributed to a recognition that Quebec has more power as part of Canada where it has been able to achieve greater influence in many legislative areas (for example immigration policy, provincial equalisation payments) than its economic or demographic size would warrant. An independent Quebec, in contrast, like any small state, would have very little leverage with multinational enterprises, global interest groups and financial institutions or be able to counter the mobility of capital.
Given that the Scottish independence debate has been dominated by opinion rather than fact, Scottish voters should take note of this evidence as they consider how to cast their vote in September.
Colin Mason, Adam Smith Business School, University of Glasgow, UK
Document FTCOM00020140421ea4l003jx
