{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2666"}
____
  
UK pupils score highly in problem solving
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
518 words
1 April 2014
13:35
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
UK teenagers perform significantly better than most of their international peers in problem-solving activities, according to OECD analysis which highlights the importance of creative logic skills in the global jobs market.
The research, published on Tuesday, was carried out alongside the 2012 Pisa test rankings released in December. These initial results showed 15-year-olds in the UK lagging far behind their Asian competitors in Shanghai, Singapore and Hong Kong, which led the table across the core test areas of maths, science and reading.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>However, the latest analysis, based on a comparison of 85,000 pupils in 44 countries, indicates that UK pupils are unexpectedly strong in problem solving, compared with students in other countries with similar academic abilities. England ranks 11th in the overall table, above France, Germany, the Netherlands and the US but below top problem solvers in Singapore, Korea and Japan.
During the course of the tests, students were confronted with "real-life problems", such as buying tickets at an unfamiliar vending machine while abiding by constraints set by examiners.
The report authors noted that UK pupils, and particularly those performing well in maths, had "access to learning opportunities that prepare them well for handling complex, real-life problems". In particular, they outperform their competitors in activities where they must "select, organise and integrate information" in order to understand the problem.
The OECD authors emphasise the growing importance of these skills and discuss the "marked increase in recent decades" in the share of jobs that require creative problem-solving skills.
"Fifteen-year-olds who today lack these skills thus face a high risk of economic disadvantage as adults," the report reads. "They will compete for jobs that are becoming rare and, if they are unable to adapt to new circumstances and learn in unfamiliar contexts, they may find it particularly difficult to move to better jobs as economic and technological conditions evolve."
But while the study showed UK girls and boys to have similar levels of problem-solving ability, immigrant students were shown to be performing significantly worse than non-immigrants. Researchers said that this gap - a mean score of 490 in the immigrant group compared with 523 in the non-immigrant group - was far larger than inequalities between the two in maths or reading.
Responding to these findings, the Department for Education drew attention to the link between performing well in maths, reading and science and high aptitude in problem solving.
"This connection between the core subjects and problem solving underlines why we are focusing on the basics in the rigorous new primary curriculum, and why reformed GCSEs and A levels will have open-ended questions which encourage lateral thinking," a spokesman said.
"We are determined to eradicate poor literacy and numeracy so our young people have a solid grounding in the basics they need to secure a good job, an apprenticeship or a place at university," the DfE spokesman added.
Document FTCMA00020140401ea410018j
