{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3120"}
____
  
Star of Ukip TV advert suspended
By Elizabeth Rigby, Deputy Political Editor   
563 words
24 April 2014
09:59
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Ukip suspended the posterboy of its TV adverts on Thursday night after it emerged that the builder handpicked to appear in its party political broadcast had said Ed Miliband was not British, Islam was "evil" and Africans should "kill themselves".
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
< > Nigel Farage's party was left scrambling to distance itself from Andre Lampitt after the builder allegedly made a series of racist remarks on Twitter.
Mr Farage told the BBC on Friday morning that the comments were probably racist. "Repellent was the word we used and I will stick with that. We have got the European elections happening, we have also got local elections and we have got 2,234 candidates standing for Ukip.
`"It's our biggest ever push in local elections. We have put in place a vetting procedure and something has gone wrong.''
Ukip said on Thursday night after the revelations: "We are deeply shocked that Mr Lampitt has expressed such repellent views. His membership of the party has been suspended immediately pending a full disciplinary process."
Mr Lampitt, whose Twitter account was suspended on Thursday night, had posted a series of offensive remarks in recent months. The builder said Islam "is not a religion it's an evil organisation" and tweeted that "all Muslims need to leave Europe . . . or denounce their pathetic satanic religion".
The Zimbabwe-born Briton also said "most Nigerians are generally bad people". He also said the Labour leader "is not a real Brit" and tweeted: "Please leave Africa for the Africans let them kill themselves off."
The revelations are deeply embarrassing for Mr Farage, who earlier this year said he had got rid of the "Walter Mitty" characters who have damaged the party's reputation. Last year, he withdrew the whip from Godfrey Bloom after the Ukip MEP described a roomful of women as "sluts" at the party's annual conference in London.
He has also been trying to rid the party of the "racist" label, insisting that Ukip is a "nonsectarian, non-racist political party".
Mr Farage's party has been gaining momentum in the run-up to next month's European elections and is widely expected to come first or second in the poll. The party launched its election campaign in Sheffield on Tuesday amid a media frenzy as the party unveiled posters warning that immigrants were coming to take British jobs.
The billboards were criticised as "racist" by Mike Gapes, a Labour MP, although Mr Farage shrugged off the criticism, saying a large proportion of the public agreed with the sentiments.
Ukip said on Thursday night it had re-edited the party political broadcast with Mr Lampitt heading for the cutting room floor. The builder is filmed bemoaning the arrival of EU migrants. "Since the lads from eastern Europe are prepared to work for a lot less than anybody else, I've found it a real struggle."
Mr Lampitt is thought to have been approached to appear in the campaign at very short notice after the party ripped up its original adverts in favour of the version that aired on television this week. "He slipped through the net," said one person familiar with the situation. Mr Lampitt did not return calls.
Document FTCOM00020140424ea4o004v1
