{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"473"}
____
  
Google grants UK 'super' security powers on access to YouTube content
By Sam Jones, Defence and Security Editor   
463 words
12 March 2014
21:08
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Google has given British security officials special access to its YouTube video site, allowing them to get have content instantly screened if they think it threatens national security.
The new "super flagger" powers underline growing concern among governments that are scrambling to contain the proliferation of jihadist material prompted by the war in Syria, but they are likely to stir concern among civil liberties campaigners.
Western spymasters now cite the radicalisation of their own citizens who go to fight against Bashar al-Assad's regime as their leading terrorism concern. An estimated 2,000 fighters, including 400 from Britain, have gone from European countries to Syria.
The YouTube permissions that Google has given the Home Office in recent weeks include the power to flag swaths of content "at scale", instead of only picking out individual videos.
They are in part a response to a blitz from UK security authorities to persuade internet service providers, search engines and social media sites to censor more of their own content for extremist material, even if it does not always break existing laws.
UK prosecutors already have the power to request removal of illegal content.
The UK's security and immigration minister, James Brokenshire, told the Financial Times the government has to do more to deal with material "that may not be illegal but certainly is unsavoury and may not be the sort of material that people would want to see or receive."
Mr Brokenshire said that among the issues being considered by the government was a "code of conduct" for internet service providers and internet companies.
The government, he added, is also keen to explore options whereby search engines and social media sites change their algorithms so that unsavoury content is less likely to appear or is served up with more balanced material - a highly controversial suggestion that is likely to be met with resistance.
A spokesperson for Google confirmed that the Home Office had been given powerful flagging permissions on YouTube but stressed that Google itself still retained the ultimate decision on whether to remove content for breaching its community guidelines.
"We have a zero-tolerance policy on YouTube towards content that incites violence," YouTube said. "Our Community Guidelines prohibit such content and our review teams respond to flagged videos around the clock, routinely removing videos that contain hate speech or incitement to commit violent acts.
"To increase the efficiency of this process, we have developed an invite-only program that gives users who flag videos regularly tools to flag content at scale."
Google has also offered free targeted advertising to anti-extremism charities to promote their content alongside searches used by those looking for unsavoury material.
Document FTCMA00020140312ea3c005bp
