{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"275"}
____
  
David Cameron's European Parliament group fights for survival
By Alex Barker in Brussels   
786 words
11 May 2014
17:44
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The British-dominated alliance of MEPs that David Cameron created in the European Parliament is fighting for survival, as polls show that it faces being wiped out in elections this month.
Mr Cameron, the UK prime minister, established the group five years ago when he withdrew his Conservative party MEPs from the parliament's biggest political group - the centre-right European People's Party - to assuage party members opposed to further EU integration.
That move has contributed to an erosion of British influence in Brussels, according to many analysts, diplomats and EU lobbyists - although London denies this.
Forecasts from Pollwatch2014 show the Cameron group - the European Conservatives and Reformists - falling from 59 to 39 members in the May 22-25 elections and securing seats in only six member states. That would be one short of the minimum required to form a group, under the parliament's rules.
The ECR is competing with two political groups on the eurosceptic right - the Europe of Freedom and Democracy (EFD) group, led by the UK Independence party, and the hard-right European Alliance for Freedom (EAF), backed by France's Marine Le Pen - in a contest that will decide parliament posts and millions of euros in EU funding.
The squeeze is forcing the ECR and Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, to consider allying with controversial rightwing parties. In a move that could sour relations with Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, Mr Cameron is also weighing pleas to unite with the eurosceptic Alternative for Germany party.
Even if the ECR does survive, the Tories may lose pole position in a group that they founded.
Poland's Law & Justice (PiS) party, which veers from its British partners with its support for the free movement of migrants and greater EU spending, is predicted to return as the biggest ECR party, overtaking the Tories by one seat. Martin Callanan, the Tory leader of the group, also faces a stiff challenge to retain a seat in northeast England.
Mats Persson, head of the Open Europe think-tank, said: "Though no one's fault in particular, [the] Conservatives may be slapped by the double whammy of a weakened ECR group in the parliament, and a weakened Tory party within the ECR. As MEPs will have a decisive say over several items in Cameron's EU renegotiation package, this is worrying."
He added that the need to secure the cash and influential parliamentary positions garnered by solid political groups may force Mr Cameron and Mr Farage "to reach out to political parties to their right that wouldn't normally be their preferred bedfellows, to put it mildly."
The annihilation threat is already stirring discontent. Some senior PiS member are floating the idea of breaking with the ECR to form a separate group - a nightmare for the Tories in Brussels.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>Zbigniew Girzynski, a senior PiS lawmaker, said the ECR concept had potentially "exhausted itself", noting: "Belonging to a political faction isn't something life-long. Political parties carry out analysis of the given situation and react flexibly."
The British Conservatives are confident that new recruits will join what insiders have dubbed "the minibus", potentially including Flemish nationalists and the eurosceptic Finns party. Some MEPs are pushing for the Tories to embrace the rightwing, anti-immigration Danish People's Party.
Another politically explosive option is allying with the AfD, regardless of its impact on relations with Ms Merkel. Bernd Lucke, AfD co-founder, has said he is talking to the ECR's Czechs and Poles about joining but acknowledges British concerns.
Timo Soini, the leader of the Finns, is keeping an open mind on ECR attempts to poach him from Mr Farage's bloc. He told the Financial Times that he would "negotiate the group thing after the elections.
"No hands are tied," he added. "I have good personal relations to all parties and persons both in the EFD and ECR."
Mr Farage has rejected joining forces with Ms Le Pen's National Front on grounds of its "anti-Semitism and general prejudice".
But Geert Wilders, whose Dutch Freedom party is part of the hard-right EAF, has expressed confidence that Mr Farage and Ms Le Pen will be able to "work together".
Losing group status would deal a heavy financial blow. Open Europe estimates that the EAF would receive up to €4m in annual funding, which would rise to €7m with Ukip aboard. If the ECR takes a "big tent" approach to the right wing and AfD, it could receive some €6m a year.
Document FTCMA00020140511ea5b0025u
