{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1490"}
____
  
MI5 probes dominated by Britons returning from Syria
By Sam Jones, Defence and Security Editor   
582 words
14 March 2014
15:17
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
More than half of MI5's anti-terror investigations involve Britons who have travelled to fight in Syria, highlighting the growing security threat posed by homegrown jihadists.
The dramatic shift in the focus of the Security Service, as MI5 is officially known, shows how much the terrorist landscape has changed since the September 11 attacks in New York, according to senior Whitehall officials.
Arrests of British jihadists and those connected to them have increased in recent weeks in an attempt to prevent attacks against the UK. At least one such plot is understood to have been foiled.
So far, an estimated 400 Britons have gone to fight in Syria, and more than half of them have returned. Some have been radicalised by the experience.
The brutal conflict in Syria - three years old this week - has become a magnet for radical Islamists around the world. Many of them see the war as the defining sectarian battle of the century and a first step towards creating an Islamic caliphate stretching across the Middle East.
Experts conservatively estimate that over 2,000 fighters have travelled to Syria from Europe, with many thousands more joining them from the Gulf states and north Africa. This makes the Syrian civil war the largest draw for Mujahideen since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979.
Investigations into British jihadists represented a "growing proportion" of MI5 casework, the agency's chief, Andrew Parker, said in a speech last October.
Speaking to the Financial Times this week, James Brokenshire, the UK security and immigration minister, said that the problem posed by fighters returning from Syria would persist for as long as the Syrian civil war continued.
"The security services and the police will be dealing with issues relating to Syria for the foreseeable future," he said, adding that it was "very difficult" to know whether the number of Britons heading to Syria to fight was slowing down.
"[The risk is that] people who have travelled out come into contact with extremists or al-Qaeda linked organisations . . . [and] that they then return home and pose a risk".
"Our key message is that people should not travel. We understand the desire that people may want to help in Syria [but] the Syrian people have said very clearly that they want humanitarian aid, they do not want foreign fighters," said Mr Brokenshire.
UK police have made a spate of Syria-related arrests in recent weeks. Four people were taken into custody on Tuesday. At the end of February, Moazzam Begg, a former Guantánamo detainee, was arrested in Birmingham on suspicion of attending a terrorist training camp in Syria.
His arrest has sparked a backlash from many in the Muslim community who say they are being unfairly targeted.
Government officials say they are aware of the thin line they must tread in dealing with the problem. At the forefront of efforts to stop Britons travelling to Syria to fight has been a blitz from the Home Office to counter online extremist content.
The government's counter-terrorism internet referral unit has authorised 8,000 "takedowns" of content in the past eight weeks alone, according to people familiar with the matter, compared with 21,000 similar legal removals over the past four years.
In addition, the government is lobbying internet companies to better moderate content online. Security officials were recently granted special permissions by Google to screen rapidly YouTube video content.
Document FTCMA00020140314ea3e003bj
