{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2248"}
____
  
Predictions of populist takeover in Europe are far fetched
By Tony Barber in London   
746 words
21 May 2014
15:00
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Few politicians are less prone to alarmism than Herman Van Rompuy, the soft-spoken president of the European Council, which groups the EU's 28 national government leaders. Yet when the German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung asked him, in an April 2010 interview, what were the biggest risks facing Europe, he replied: "The great danger is populism."
Four years later, on the eve of the May 22-25 elections to the European Parliament, it is tempting to see Mr Van Rompuy's warning as extraordinarily prophetic. From France and the UK to Greece, Hungary and the Netherlands, Europe's populist movements seem to be riding the crest of a wave whipped up by the post-2008 financial crisis, economic recession, large-scale immigration and disgust with incompetence and corruption in national politics.
But apocalyptic forecasts of European democracy sinking under an unstoppable populist tide are far-fetched. Latest opinion polls suggest that Europe's three leading mainstream political groups - the centre-right European People's party, the centre-left Socialists and Democrats and the liberal ALDE movement - will win just under two-thirds of the total vote and pick up more than 480 of the assembly's 751 seats. The far right, far left and other anti-EU forces will have their work cut out to stop the parliament from functioning as usual.
What is more, a nation-by-nation look at the EU's electoral scene demonstrates that populism, at least of the far-right variety, is not on a roll everywhere. Most obviously, the far right is a speck on the landscape in countries such as Germany, the EU's most populous state, and Spain. True, Germany's eurosceptic Alternative für Deutschland party may win up to six seats in the EU legislature, and even the authentically far-right National Democrats may win one, but overall the radical right is as irrelevant in Germany as neo-Francoism is in Spain.
Nevertheless, a minority of European voters casts ballots regularly for the radical right. According to a 2012 study by the London-based Counterpoint think-tank, these voters tend to be older, less educated and hostile to immigration. Blue-collar workers are more likely to vote for such parties in Denmark, France, Norway and Sweden.
In France, women are more likely than men to support the radical right, the study found. In the Netherlands, a voter who favours the far-right, anti-Islamic Freedom Party of Geert Wilders is likely to oppose Muslim immigration, distrust the Dutch political elite and feel nostalgic for the highly regulated, consensus-driven political order that characterised the nation for much of the 20th century.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>According to Cas Mudde, a Dutch political scientist at the University of Georgia, the far right has made electoral advances in 10 of the EU's 28 countries since the onset of the financial crisis, registering its biggest successes - gains of more than 5 percentage points - in Austria, France, Hungary and Latvia. But in nine countries the far right has been on the back foot, suffering losses of more than 5 percentage points in Belgium, Italy and Slovakia.
Duncan McDonnell, an expert on political extremism at the European University Institute in Florence, says predictions that the far right will win up to a third of the EU assembly's seats are wide of the mark. He points out that it is important to distinguish between unashamedly far-right parties, such as Golden Dawn in Greece and Jobbik in Hungary, and unconventional, anti-establishment movements that do not belong to that end of the political spectrum, such as Italy's Five-Star Movement or AfD in Germany.
According to a poll published on May 7 by VoteWatch Europe, a research group, the next legislature will probably contain three political groups to the right of the EPP, with approximately 40 seats each. That amounts to less than 16 per cent of all seats. However, some parties expected to enter these cross-national groups, such as the British Conservatives, are not far-right at all.
Arguably, the real question is therefore not whether the far right will ever have a sniff of power. It is the extent to which mainstream parties incorporate the far right's views on Europe and immigration into their own policies.
Document FTCMA00020140521ea5l002xl
