{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3394"}
____
  
Scotland symbolises an unbalanced kingdom
365 words
16 May 2014
23:45
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
From Mr James Hanshaw.
Sir, Simon Schama makes an eloquent and emotive case for Scotland to remain part of the UK ("A splendid mess of a union should not be torn asunder", Comment, May 10) but regrettably the successors to the Scots he mentions, who were so important to the founding of that union - and, indeed, to the founding of the modern world as we know it, including the US - are not to be found today and, if they exist, they are conspicuously silent on the matter.
In my view a much deeper question remains unanswered, by Prof Schama and other pro-unionists, involving one of the fundamental causes underlying the desire for many Scots to seek independence and that is the unchecked, seemingly uncontrollable, shift of wealth, power and influence to London.
While this is not new and affects other parts of the UK too - the 1930s marches from the northeast of England were one symptom of this - the trend has accelerated rapidly in recent years.
During the Thatcher era in the 1980s more and more responsibilities were sucked away from regional and local councils to be handled by elites in London and this was not reversed significantly even by subsequent Scottish prime ministers based in London, despite attempts at devolution.
In recent years a disproportionate amount of Britain's population growth of 400,000 a year - home grown and immigrant - has taken place in the south, centred on London. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, a great deal of bank loans to business in the UK has been to the construction sector in London.
Scotland may or may not leave the Union as a result of its forthcoming referendum but it is not the only part of the kingdom to want more control of its own destiny; much of England's north and west wants that too.
A successful union presupposes fairness and balance and the UK has become totally out of balance and is in danger of becoming little more than a city state called London.
If that situation is not dramatically reversed the United Kingdom will become more and more disunited.
James Hanshaw, Zürich, Switzerland
Document FTCMA00020140516ea5g005sf
