{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2469"}
____
  
EU uncertainty weighs on UK manufacturers
By Brian Groom, Business and Employment Editor   
682 words
4 March 2014
15:19
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Uncertainty over the UK's position in the European Union is being used against British companies by their competitors, a leading manufacturer warned on Tuesday.
Nigel Stein, chief executive of engineering component maker GKN, told the national conference of the EEF manufacturers' organisation: "The prospect of the UK talking itself into an exit would be deeply harmful to our industry."
His warning came as manufacturers said the government needed to do more to support the sector's recovery, particularly on skills and energy costs.
Mr Stein's concern reflects nervousness in industry about David Cameron's strategy of renegotiating Britain's role in the EU ahead of a potential referendum on UK membership by 2017.
"Much of the output from our car plants goes to the EU. Competition for investment is intense," he said. "Uncertainty over the UK's position in Europe is being used against us by our competitors."
He added: "If we don't like some aspects of the EU, let us try to change them from within. Make Europe work for us, don't walk away from it."
Terry Scuoler, the EEF's chief executive, said 85 per cent of members strongly supported continued membership of the EU. "There is a compelling need for reform, but it must be done from within the EU,'' he added.
Mr Scuoler said he hoped there would be a more "intelligent and informed'' debate in the run-up to May's European elections.
He said the EEF predicted 3 per cent growth this year, but urged George Osborne to use his Budget "to reduce the unacceptable costs faced by business as a result of green levies''.
In an electronic poll, 73 per cent of the 700 EEF members at the conference said the government was not doing enough to create the right conditions for manufacturing, even though hopes of a rebound have been buoyed by a run of positive survey data.
Thirty-eight per cent wanted more action to widen the pool of skilled workers, 22 per cent wanted the cost of energy cut, 20 per cent wanted less regulation and 14 per cent wanted easier access to credit.
Vince Cable, business secretary, was due to tell the conference he could see "a number of encouraging signs of production returning to the UK". He was announcing the latest £53m allocation from a fund to help companies strengthen UK supply chains.
Chuka Umunna, shadow business secretary, was due to tell EEF members at dinner that Labour would expand the role of the government's "Catapult" innovation centres to include apprentices and develop a wider range of skills.
Mr Stein urged the chancellor to use any spare cash to invest in schools and skills because the UK was still not training enough people in Stem subjects - science, technology, engineering and maths.
He cited a report by the Institute of Physics that at least 500 state schools in England lacked any science teachers with a qualification in physics and half of all new physics teachers were leaving the profession within four-and-a-half years.
"Although it may be unpopular and may mean we have to spend less elsewhere, the system has to be adjusted to provide more Stem teachers and more Stem pupils from an early age," he said.
Tony Caldeira, chief executive of Caldeira Group, a Merseyside-based cushion maker, is returning some production from China to the UK, but he said there was a problem in getting young people interested in textile manufacture.
"Young people don't want to roll their sleeves up and start making things," he said, pointing out that college students wanted to be designers and buyers rather than work in a sewing factory. His youngest sewing staff were aged 40.
Angus Thirlwell, chief executive of Hotel Chocolat, the luxury chocolate maker, said the trend towards "reshoring" of production was encouraging but needed to be carefully nurtured.
He said he would not want to see any further restrictions on the number of skilled immigrants working in manufacturing.
Document FTCOM00020140304ea340030h
