{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1991"}
____
  
Farage will not stand for Newark after Mercer quits
By John Aglionby and Elizabeth Rigby, Deputy Political Editor   
560 words
29 April 2014
10:06
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nigel Farage announced on Wednesday he would not run as the UK Independence party candidate in the Newark by-election, saying it would be a distraction from the local and European parliamentary elections at the end of May.
Former Conservative Patrick Mercer triggered the by-election by announcing he was quitting parliament after it emerged he was facing a six-month ban from the House of Commons because he had been filmed by undercover reporters agreeing to take money in exchange for lobbying.
The unexpected resignation shocked Westminster on Tuesday night as it opened the way for Mr Farage to stand.
But the Ukip leader said on Wednesday that he did not want "to do anything that deflects from the European election". "I don't have links to the East Midlands and so I would just look like an opportunist and I don't think that would work," he told the BBC. "It's about choosing the right battles, it's about prioritising.
"If I had stood in Newark we'd have kissed goodbye to our European election campaign."
The by-election will be held shortly after the May local and European elections where Ukip is widely expected to either top the polls or come in second behind Labour.
Mr Farage said that if he had run, much of the media attention over the next four weeks would be about his candidacy in Newark and not the European election. "We would not be talking about the issues like open door immigration, EU membership, most of our laws being made somewhere else," he said. "This party is not about one man or a by-election. It's about a national movement."
Labour and Tory MPs immediately took to Twitter to accuse Mr Farage of ducking a political challenge. Mark Garnier, Conservative MP for Wyre Forest, wrote: "Nigel Farage and the Newark by-election: Man or mouse . . .? Pass the cheese!!! Squeek squeek . . ."
Mr Farage has confirmed he is planning to stand as an MP at the next general election, in 2015. He said on Wednesday that Ukip would be targeting about "two or three dozen seats" in 2015 and that the party recognised its chances were best in marginal constituencies.
"You've got to plan ahead," he said. "A wise general doesn't fight every battle."
Ukip was 2/1 against to win the Newark by-election with Ladbrokes on Tuesday evening but the odds lengthened to 5/2 after MR Farage's announcement.
The Conservatives are favourites to hold the seat, given their 16,000 majority, at 8/11. It is the party's 44th safest seat.
Labour said it would fight the seat but stressed there had been big boundary changes since it last won there in 1997, with the Tories moving 30 percentage points ahead in 2010.
Mr Mercer said on Tuesday night: "I will not argue with the findings of the committee and I can only humbly apologise." He told the Sun newspaper: "My military background has taught me that you must never let down the people who depend on you, and those people are my constituents in Newark."
He had already lost the Conservative party whip and said he would not fight his seat in the 2015 general election.
Document FTCOM00020140430ea4t0012x
