{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3454"}
____
  
Ukip donor Paul Sykes appears alongside Nigel Farage in Sheffield
By Jim Pickard in Sheffield   
799 words
22 April 2014
18:25
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The reclusive multimillionaire behind the anti-Brussels UK Independence party has vowed there will be "no limit" to his spending in the run-up to next year's general election.
Paul Sykes, a self-made businessman worth an estimated £400m, said he wanted to counter the tens of millions spent every year by Brussels on promoting the EU. "The British people need the facts," he said.
Mr Sykes appeared alongside Nigel Farage, the party leader, in Sheffield for the launch of the party's campaign for May's European elections. It is widely expected to come first or second.
Having quit the Conservatives in the 1990s over Europe, Mr Sykes said he had so far spent about "£1.2m or £1.4m" on a media blitz that includes hundreds of controversial posters attacking the EU. "We haven't stopped spending yet," he told the FT. "I'll spend whatever it takes for the British people to make them aware that power has been transferred from Britain without permission."
The billboards have been criticised as "racist" by one Labour MP, Mike Gapes. One poster claimed: "26m people are looking for work, and whose job are they after?"
In the year to last September net migration of EU citizens doubled to 131,000, up from 65,000 the previous year.
Mr Farage shrugged off the criticism, saying that a large proportion of the public agreed with the sentiments. "There are 26m unemployed people across the EU, all of which can come to this country," he said. "We are not totally against immigration - we are for the right immigration."
Mr Sykes asked: "Do I look like a racist? We have Pakistanis standing in the election, and Indians."
The businessman, who built the nearby Meadowhall shopping centre, described himself as a "tyre fitter" by trade, who was not from the so-called chattering classes.
The poster and digital campaign were put together by Family, a small media company from Edinburgh. "You'll see this campaign from the moon before long," said Mr Sykes.
He predicted the European elections would be all about Britain's borders and the failure of the Westminster establishment to control them. "We'll end up with the same levels of unemployment that they have in Greece."
Sheffield was chosen for the launch not only because it is home to the constituency of the Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg, the pro-European deputy prime minister. It also demonstrates how Ukip is seeking to shift from its historic roots in the Tory south to reach out to northern voters who used to support Labour.
Mike Hookem, a Yorkshire Ukip candidate, said he had previously voted Labour for most of his adult life. "The reaction we are getting is absolutely fantastic," he said, "even in Labour strongholds such as Hull.
"Lots of people are supportive - pubs are taking our leaflets and beer mats. We are seeing a real sea change."
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>The insurgency into Labour areas is starting to alarm the leadership of the opposition party. Jon Ashworth, shadow Cabinet Office minister, said: "Ukip would have us believe they stand for working people but the truth is very different - they are even more rightwing than the Tories."
Mr Farage told the FT he wanted to "hit Labour hard" next month. "It's no longer like the 80s where you had just two parties, left and right, competing," he said.
He has been criticised in recent weeks for his expenses claims, for extolling e-cigarettes after taking donations from a manufacturer, and for his hypocrisy in attacking the "establishment" despite being a privately educated former stockbroker.
Yet this does not yet seem to be denting Ukip's surge in popularity.
"Farage has been honest," said Steve Milner, a 55-year-old from Sheffield. "It's the other parties that haven't been honest. He's a decent bloke. I used to vote Labour and am going to vote Ukip." His wife Margaret agreed: "I think he stands for the everyday person. I'm not opposed to immigration but it should be properly controlled."
For many in Sheffield it is Mr Clegg who proved to be dishonest by raising university tuition fees, despite having promised not to. "There is no love lost for Clegg in this city, not now. He is weak," said Lindsay Brown, a 34-year-old mother.
Mr Farage clambered aloft a van in his trademark overcoat to launch a giant poster, before carrying out a series of interviews. His only clanger: telling the BBC that he employed a German secretary because "nobody else could do the job".
Document FTCMA00020140422ea4m003ml
