{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3660"}
____
  
The debate about immigration to Britain is over
By David Goodhart   
783 words
22 May 2014
20:31
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The quarterly immigration figures released yesterday remain stuck at double the Conservative target of about 100,000 net arrivals a year. But it could have been worse. Ministers were braced for a historic switch, with the net inflow from the EU outnumbering the net inflow from the rest of the world for the first time. It did not quite happen, but it is only a matter of time.
It is already widely believed that most of those who arrive in the UK for stays of a year or longer come from eastern Europe. Yet in fact, over the past 15 years of sustained high immigration, the net inflow of immigrants from outside Europe has accounted for about two-thirds of the total.
So why the imminent switch? First, the government has succeeded in reducing the flow of immigrants from outside the EU, the only one it can control. Such arrivals fall into three main categories: students, families of UK residents and skilled workers. Each had been growing; now all are falling or holding steady.
Second, within the EU, young people from Spain, Portugal and Italy afflicted by the eurozone crisis are attracted by a recovering UK economy. There has been a surge of immigration from these countries, along with continuing moderate net inflows from eastern Europe.
In February, net migration had shot up from about 150,000 the previous year to 212,000 a year, where it remains. Combine the latest figures with the probable electoral success of the anti-mass immigration UK Independence party, and you can expect many commentators to declare Britain's immigration debate to be "toxic".
Actually, the debate is over. About 75 per cent of the public think immigration is too high and should be reduced. All three main parties agree, albeit reluctantly in the case of Labour and the Liberal Democrats. The argument is about technicalities and how to explain convincingly that 70 per cent of immigration is short-term.
So what is "toxic" about the debate, such as it is? Arguments about immigration have been decoupled from race: the idea of race equality is embedded in British common sense. It is true the word "racism" is frequently and loosely employed as a political weapon. But this merely reveals the lack of a more nuanced vocabulary to describe many people's mixed feelings about rapid demographic changes. Few seriously believe Britain is a more racist country than 10 years ago.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>
University vice-chancellors are convinced the debate is damaging their interests. Indeed, for the first time in 15 years the number of students arriving for undergraduate and postgraduate courses has levelled off. Numbers continue to rise from most countries, including China, but the big fall has been in students from India - where all the experts say most abuse of the system was happening. Some students are now interviewed to make sure they are genuine, and graduates can stay on for two years only if they secure a graduate-level job. However, this is unlikely to have had a big effect on bona fide students.
The government has also reduced the other main non-EU migration flows: family reunion and skilled workers. In the first case, numbers have fallen by about a third despite legal challenges to new restrictions. In the second, business has adapted to the restrictions without too much protest (though bureaucracy remains a problem). The 20,700 annual skilled- worker quota remains only half filled, despite the economic upturn.
It is possible the doubling of the net EU inflow in the past 18 months, to about 130,000, is a blip. If the numbers settle down again, the target of 100,000 may yet be achievable, but not
In any case, David Cameron cannot wait and see, and so faces the tricky task of persuading his EU partners that the automatic right of any EU citizen to work in the UK should be qualified. The prime minister now has a double incentive: to reach his immigration target; and to clinch his EU renegotiation in the event of a 2017 in-out referendum. However, he seems to have backed away from challenging free movement head-on and is more likely to focus on longer qualifying periods for social benefits.
Any reform will depend on the government's ability to persuade potentially sympathetic countries such as the Netherlands, Sweden, Denmark, Austria and, above all, Germany - something at which it has not excelled in the past.
The writer is chair of Demos and author of 'The British Dream'
Document FTCMA00020140522ea5m0040h
