{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3396"}
____
  
Nigel Farage LBC interview brought to abrupt close
By Jim Pickard, Chief Political Correspondent   
497 words
16 May 2014
19:13
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The UK Independence party's head of communications tried to rescue Nigel Farage from a gruelling radio interview on Friday, when he was attacked about expenses, immigration and Ukip's partners in the European Parliament.
The party leader was being interviewed on LBC, a London radio station, when Patrick O'Flynn stepped in to try to end the session after 20 minutes.
The interview came to an abrupt close after Mr Farage, an MEP for southeast England, was accused of rowing back on a promise to have his expenses audited independently, in the wake of stories about his use of Brussels' allowances.
Mr Farage says he is the victim of a hostile establishment and that the media have not subjected candidates from other parties to such forensic scrutiny.
David Cameron, UK prime minister, said on Friday that Mr Farage had said "some pretty unpleasant things" in the interview.
"I think what we've seen from Ukip has just been a lot of simplistic slogans that can sometimes sound appealing but . . . there's nothing behind it," he said.
One difficult media interview is unlikely to take the shine off Ukip's performance in the local and European elections next week.
The anti-EU party is currently in the lead for the Brussels voting, which could see it double its number of MEPs to more than 20.
Yet Mr Farage has been forced to firefight numerous negative stories about his party and - in some cases - the racist or homophobic views expressed by its candidates.
One council candidate, John Lyndon Sullivan, wrote online: "I rather wonder if we shot one 'poofter' (GBLT whatevers), whether the next 99 would decide on balance, that they weren't after all? We might then conclude that it's not a matter of genetics, but rather more a matter of education."
It has also emerged that the party's small-business spokesman owned a restaurant that employed seven illegal immigrants last year.
In Friday's interview Mr Farage suggested Romanians were more likely to be criminals, saying there were high poverty levels in the east European country that had forced many into a life of crime.
James O'Brien, the LBC interviewer, questioned Mr Farage over his claim in March that he felt uncomfortable travelling on London trains when he could not hear English being spoken.
He also challenged Mr Farage's claim that a majority of pupils in some London schools did not speak English. Mr O'Brien pointed out Mr Farage's bilingual children - their mother is German - would qualify as non-English speakers.
He then asked the Ukip leader, who has said that people did not want to live next to Romanian men, whether he would feel the same about German children.
"I think you know the difference," Mr Farage replied. "We want an immigration policy that is not just based on controlling not just quantity but quality."
Document FTCMA00020140516ea5g00497
