{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1418"}
____
  
Resentment of migrants is about feelings not facts
By Janan Ganesh   
870 words
3 March 2014
18:30
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The recently published diaries of George Kennan, perhaps the greatest American diplomat of the past century, reveal an intellectual, an aesthete and - there really is no other word for it - a reactionary. He was suspicious about democracy and technology, appalled by big cities and keen to preserve his country's Anglo-Protestant culture not only from immigration but "economic and financial involvements with other peoples".
Whatever its follies, ultra-traditional conservatism can be held by the most exquisitely intelligent people. It is a legitimate take on the world, backed by a rich history of thought. Yet in Britain of all places, the land of Edmund Burke and Michael Oakeshott, the only reactionary politician of any note exists outside the establishment.
When Nigel Farage claims to be more honest than the mainstream politicians his UK Independence party is trying to displace, he should be taken seriously. Instead of trying and failing to show that migrants bring down native incomes with charts and figures, he admits hostility to their arrival whatever the economic implications. A slightly poorer Britain is better than an ever-changing one, he says. And while others track the annual inflows and outflows across British borders, he confesses his indifference to precise numbers. It is something ineffable, the perceived dilution of a national way of life, that moves him and his supporters.
Last week, his honesty tested the limits of good taste as he confessed to finding much of his country "unrecognisable", offering the usual pub-bore anecdotes about London train passengers jabbering away in every language but English. But provocative candour is still candour, and most Conservatives would rather pretend that their views on immigration come from a sudden sympathy for low-end British wage-earners than a legitimate gut preference for a less diverse society.
This is the bind in which David Cameron, the prime minister, finds himself. Mr Farage, a protest politician who does not aspire to high office, can offer voters a rhetorical release valve for their frustration. Whereas the government, forced to address the essentially visceral issue of immigration in a technocratic way, has to summon an actual policy. Its best effort, a target of keeping the net annual inflow to the tens of thousands, is being flunked. The number actually rose to over 200,000 in 2012-13.
But even if the target were being met handily, it is far from obvious that Ukip would be receding. Some issues are beyond numbers. Crime has been falling in Britain since the mid-1990s but perception of it has not. When asked to estimate what proportion of the population are from ethnic minorities, people's guesses are exorbitantly wide of the mark.
On matters to do with identity and basic values, facts are not the point. Run the thought experiment: if net migration drops to 99,999 before next year's general election, or even much less than that, how impressed will the electorate be?
The most arresting piece of public polling on immigration shows that the percentage of voters who support the government's cap - immense, at around 80 per cent, as Downing Street is entitled to boast - is identical to the percentage who believe it is unlikely to work. If anything intelligible can be gleaned from this, it is that voters do not expect the concrete "achievement" of less immigration. They want that but are sceptical of politicians' ability to bring it about. What they crave is sympathy from their rulers for their view that Britain was better at some indistinct time in the past and is now a place of unsettling cultural upheaval, and also somehow unfair.
No mainstream politician can give this to them. This is partly because they were reared on technocracy - Mr Cameron, like many of his peers, is a former special adviser - and have little feel for culture and identity. And it is partly because they know sentimental nationalism is not a good look on a serious politician, even if they were inclined that way. During his time as Tory leader, William Hague, now the foreign secretary, spoke of Britain slowly becoming a "foreign land". An already failing leadership died on the spot. Mr Farage, by contrast, has the freedom and inclination to do all this. He has the market for emotive nostalgia to himself.
Opponents of immigration like to say they are cowed from discussing it by liberals' impulsive accusations of bigotry. Leaving aside the fact that they actually rarely talk about anything else, they have half a point. Most critics of immigration are not bigots. After all, the multitudes who arrived over the past decade to the dismay of many natives were mainly fellow white Christian Europeans.
As Mr Farage understands, anti-immigrationism is not a technical or economic creed. It is about wariness of change and a need to belong. It is, to put it kindly, romantic and, to put it harshly, reactionary. Judging by the generational polling data, it will fade as a political force in the coming decades. But it is here now, and the government cannot beat it with anything as rational as facts and policies.
janan.ganesh@ft.com
Document FTCMA00020140303ea33004ed
