{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3664"}
____
  
UAE stops using former British officers as military trainers
By Simeon Kerr in Dubai   
958 words
22 May 2014
19:28
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The United Arab Emirates has stopped using dozens of British nationals serving as trainers in its armed forces as the Gulf state increases pressure on London over its response to the Arab uprisings.
The clearout of around 80 British officers working under a longstanding programme in which former British officers train UAE forces, is prompting some British officials to push for stronger military ties to reassure the UAE and other Gulf allies about the UK's commitment to regional security.
"We are political scapegoats," said one officer who, like others, did not have his contract renewed.
UAE and British officials deny political tensions are behind the officers' departure, saying the UAE's training needs have evolved. A small number of trainers' contracts have been renewed.
But the military contracts are the latest in a series of issues that appear to signal Gulf states' displeasure at what they believe is London's support for pro-democracy movements and Islamist groups in the region. The UAE has also decided not to purchase Typhoon fighters, despite lobbying by David Cameron, the UK prime minister, and a UK nuclear submarine scheduled to visit Dubai in March was at the last minute refused permission to dock.
The UAE and other Gulf states charge that London has emerged as a base for the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood Group since the Egyptian military, backed by the UAE and Saudi Arabia, last year ousted President Mohamed Morsi - a member of the group. Mr Cameron has recently launched an investigation into the Brotherhood.
Dissidents seeking asylum in the UK have become another thorn in relations with Gulf states as the UAE and Saudi Arabia team up to limit the rise of political Islam across the region.
Abu Dhabi has privately complained to the UK for granting asylum to Emirati activists who have fled the country since a crackdown on Islamists ended in the jailing of around 70 people last year for an alleged plot to bring down the government.
According to Home Office statistics, three Emiratis were granted asylum in the first quarter of 2014. Another three have asylum applications pending.
As western powers negotiate with Shia Iran over its nuclear programme, Sunni Gulf officials also fear that Tehran will expand its regional power if sanctions are eased. As well as joining forces against the Brotherhood, Saudi Arabia and the UAE have been the leading backers of the government in the Sunni-led Gulf state of Bahrain, where they claim that near-continuous unrest is inspired by Iran.
About 185 Bahrainis have applied for UK asylum since widespread pro-democracy protests led by the majority Shia broke out in February 2011. Home Office data show that 102 applications have since been granted and 18 are pending.
The UK has nonetheless strengthened its military presence in Bahrain with the construction of new naval premises in the capital, Manama.
A continuing UK review of Gulf strategy is set to come up with conclusions on a broad set of policies, including military deployments.
"We need a sustained and enduring commitment," said one western official. "Security is the prism through which the Gulf states view things."
US and British officials are touring the region to persuade Gulf officials that the west will help counter any Iranian "interference" in countries such as Syria, Bahrain, Yemen and Iraq.
The UAE balances military ties between its allies, which include the US and France, both of which retain significant bases in the Gulf state. Abu Dhabi has also been asking the UK to boost its armed presence.
Dubai's al-Minhad air base was central to logistics support for the war in Afghanistan. The UK has also based an expeditionary wing at the airport, where up to eight ageing Tornado fighter jets are deployed.
The official says the "persistent" British military presence at al-Minhad could evolve into a permanent base that could be quickly scaled up in a crisis in the Middle East or Asia to house a battle group of around 1,000 servicemen.
But other London-based officials say any decision on scaling up the UK's Gulf military presence is likely to be pushed back until the British general election next year.
Bahraini asylum seeker wins UK stay
A last-minute judicial intervention in the UK has temporarily prevented the deportation of a Bahraini asylum-seeker as violence in the strife-torn Gulf monarchy continues, writes Simeon Kerr.
Isa al-Awali, who has been sentenced in absentia to five years in a Bahrain prison for taking part in an illegal gathering, had been scheduled to fly to Manama on Thursday morning after the government in London rejected his asylum claim.
Activists and lawyers said a judge on Wednesday rejected calls for a review, but an out-of-hours judge later accepted a second application and granted a temporary stay.
Mr Awali, who says he was beaten when arrested in Bahrain last year, has a week to provide new evidence to back up his claim that a return to his homeland would put him at risk of torture. He has been held at an immigration detention centre since he arrived in the UK.
The Home Office said it did not comment on individual cases.
The courtroom developments came on the same day as activists said a 14-year-old protester, Sayed Mohsin, was killed by police firing birdshot pellets to disburse unrest in the town of Sitra.
Bahraini police said they had launched an investigation into the death, which they said occurred when rioters attacked the security forces, who "restored order".
Bahrain remains racked by political unrest as the majority Shia lead protests against the minority Sunni-led government.
Document FTCMA00020140522ea5m005k2
