{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2762"}
____
  
Migration to UK soars by over a third
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
550 words
27 February 2014
10:59
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Net migration to the UK has soared by over a third to 212,000 in the year to September, dealing a blow to David Cameron's hopes of reaching his "tens of thousands" target by the May 2015 deadline.
New figures published by the Office of National Statistics showed that the 58,000 rise in immigrants was largely due to a surge in arrivals from within the European Union, with 60,000 more arriving from countries such as Spain, Portugal, Italy and Poland than in the previous 12 months. By contrast, the number of non-EU arrivals has dropped by 25,000 in the same period.
These latest figures give credence to fears that the UK's education exports are suffering as a result of the government's stringent immigration controls, since statisticians attributed the 25,000 fall to a drop in migrants from New Commonwealth countries coming to the UK to study.
But while potential students from India and Pakistan are being deterred from applying to study in the UK, there has been a significant increase in arrivals from Romania and Bulgaria.
In total 24,000 migrants arrived from these countries in the year to September 2013, nearly three times the 9,000 who arrived the previous year. Around 70 per cent came to work, and 30 per cent came to pursue education.
The Conservatives promised before the last election to bring net migration down to fewer than 100,000 by 2015, but despite early reductions, the overall figure is now creeping towards the highs of 250,000 seen just after the coalition took over.
Responding to the latest data James Brokenshire, immigration minister, said he and his team were building an immigration system that was "fair to British citizens and legitimate migrants", while being "tough on those who abuse the system or flout the law".
"The government is ensuring that our controls on accessing benefits and services, including the NHS and social housing, are among the tightest in Europe," Mr Brokenshire said.
"We cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants, so we are focusing on cutting out the abuse of free movement between EU member states and seeking to address the factors that drive European immigration to Britain," he added/
But analysts at Oxford university's Migration Observatory said the ONS figures meant it was now "extremely unlikely" that ministers would meet their target.
Dr Scott Blinder, director of the Observatory, described the release as "challenging news" for the government.
"The key changes in this report are to EU migration - an area over which immigration policy has less direct influence," Mr Blinder said. "This highlights the fact that the net migration target is not something that can be delivered purely through policy, but relies on other trends as well."
Mark Hilton, head of immigration policy at business lobby London First, added his concerns that the government would try to control future figures by further limiting the only number it has power over - non-EU migrants.
"In the past this has hit both highly-skilled immigrants that we need, as well as foreign students, who are a huge economic asset: higher education is our eighth biggest export industry, valued at £8bn," Mr Hilton said.
Document FTCMA00020140227ea2r001xh
