{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1933"}
____
  
When a migration report goes migrating
John McDermott   
729 words
7 March 2014
17:49
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
'Downing Street has withheld publication of a cross-governmental report that suggests one potential impact of immigration is smaller than claimed.'BBC News, March 4
Cover-up! I knew it. The government does not want us to know that migrants are taking British jobs.
One could argue that the government does not want us to know that migrants are not taking British jobs.
Sorry, what?
Have you heard of a synecdoche?
Sounds like the name of a Bulgarian bus company.
It is a literary device whereby a whole something is used to describe part of something (or vice versa). Lend me your ears.
Why?
It's an example. Anyway, when you say "the government", you mean Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, which is run by someone who wants more immigration.
Vince Cable?
Right. But when I say "the government", I mean the Home Office, which is run by someone who wants less immigration.
Ah, yes. Theresa May is a good Conservative home secretary. She says that for every 100 non-European immigrants that come to Britain there are 23 fewer British-born people in work.
Ms May is referring to the January 2012 report from the Migration Advisory Committee, an independent analytical body. It also said that "it would not be appropriate to assume the same impact in a time of strong economic growth".
You sound like Mr Cable. Apparently he is 'intensely relaxed' about migration.
The business secretary has an "intensely relaxed" attitude towards much of his brief. But the senior Liberal Democrat has many reasons to be chilled out.
Such as . . . ?
The same MAC report says that "most studies estimat[e] little or no association between migrant inflows and changes to employment or unemployment".
But what about this new study, the one that was suppressed?
A Downing Street spokesperson said it wasn't ready. So, it wasn't suppressed - it was just "delayed".
When did he say that?
Wednesday.
When did the government publish the report?
Thursday.
Blimey! To think that employers complain about the British work ethic.
It is a joint report between the business department and the Home Office.
That couldn't have been easy. What did they agree?
To disagree.
I thought the report is supposed to be a single view.
Yes: it reveals many single views. After all, it is a literature review. But the majority of studies suggest that immigration before the financial crisis did not reduce employment for native workers and had a negligible affect on wages.
But Ms May says that this is no longer the case.
The new report reviews the MAC study and it runs new tests on the data.
Wow. It must have found something controversial for Downing Street to have resisted publication.
Be careful when using a synecdoche.
Sorry, but it sounded as if they had all hands on deck.
Never mind. The new report's authors write that the MAC findings were accurate. Over the period 1995 to 2010, there is an association - but no proven link - between non-EU migration and a decline in employment among UK-born workers.
So why are people saying the effect is smaller than previously claimed?
I think they mean claimed by Ms May rather than the MAC. But when you remove data from the years 2009 and 2010 from the analysis, the non-EU migrant effect disappears.
I don't understand why anyone would care about a study that told us more of what we already know.
Remember the context. Last week official statistics showed that net migration was 212,000 in the year to September.
What should it be?
I don't know but Ms May has promised to reduce net migration to the UK to the "tens of thousands".
I can see that you would not want to draw any more attention to that miss. Is it a government target?
No, the Lib Dems think that it is a silly idea, hence the intense relaxation.
The Lib Dems are silly. I like the idea of a target.
Do you think it will be met?
No.
You are like 80 per cent of Britons: the share of the population who say they support the target yet have no confidence in it.
I blame the government. Or am I being synecdochic?
john.mcdermott@ft.com
Twitter: @johnpmcdermott
Document FTCMA00020140307ea37003ee
