{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"756"}
____
  
G4S loses Australia contract after asylum seeker riot
By Jamie Smyth in Sydney   
547 words
24 February 2014
08:25
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Australia has axed G4S, the British outsourcing and security company, as the lead contractor running its Manus Island detention centre for asylum seekers on Papua New Guinea, a week after an Iranian inmate was killed during a riot.
Canberra said on Monday it has agreed a A$1.22bn contract with Transfield Services, an Australian-based outsourcer that runs a similar detention centre on the south Pacific island of Nauru.
Transfield will in the coming days take over the management of the PNG centre, where 1,300 asylum seekers are being held awaiting a decision on claims for refugee status.
"The government is in the process now of G4S transitioning out along with the Salvation Army. Transfield is transitioning in to ensure there is one system that operates across both of these centres," said the department of immigration.
Canberra insisted that the change of operator on Manus Island was already in train and was not related to last week's riot at the processing centre, during which a 23-year old asylum seeker Reza Berati died and more than 70 people were injured.
However, the death of Mr Berati has provoked a public outcry across Australia with thousands of people holding candlelit vigils in several cities over the weekend. The opposition is calling for the resignation of Scott Morrison, Australia's immigration minister, who bungled the release of information immediately after the riot.
There are conflicting reports over what happened during the riot with some detainees and an interpreter employed by immigration authorities at the Manus Island centre alleging asylum seekers were attacked by some local people and local employees of G4S.
Mr Morrison has ordered an independent review into the incident, which will look into the conduct of the "service providers" and "other persons" present in the compound on the night of the riot.
Tony Abbott, Australia's prime minister, defended Mr Morrison, saying: "You don't want a wimp running border protection."
G4S said would co-operate with the review.
Australian government policy on asylum seekers and "boat people" - a term coined in the 1970s - has long been contentious. The previous Labor government said in 2013 that any boat people without a visa would be sent to PNG to have their asylum claim assessed.
Even if they were found to be refugees, they would be settled in PNG under an agreement brokered between the two governments. Between September 2008 and November 2013, more than 51,000 people arrived illegally by boat in Australia.  
Mr Abbott, elected in September, has stepped up the rhetoric against "boat people" by launching "Operation Sovereign Borders" - a policy that involves turning back any boats carrying asylum seekers that attempt to enter Australian waters.
The crackdown on asylum seekers in Australia and the creation of offshore processing centres and detention facilities is proving to be a bonanza for big business.
Transfield's contract to provide garrison and welfare services at Nauru and Manus island detention centres is worth A$1.22bn over 20 months. The company's shares rose 25 pe cent 99 cents on Monday following its contract win.
British company Serco has been paid almost A$2bn to run onshore detention centres in Australia since 2009.
Document FTCOM00020140224ea2o000xd
