{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1491"}
____
  
At last Miliband impresses with leadership, not swagger
By Janan Ganesh   
1,075 words
14 March 2014
17:35
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Pundits have him down as a wonk - the CV, all advisory roles and academic sojourns, does not help - but Ed Miliband's proudest moments are moral showdowns with "vested interests". Rightwing newspapers and oligopolistic companies star in the Labour leader's demonology. His confrontations with them electrify the left as much as any of his spending pledges or his threats to tax the rich.
This tastes of vainglory, of hammed-up crusades against predictable enemies, such as those Conservatives who take on the "metropolitan elite" and expect to be medalled for their valour and originality. When Mr Miliband is asked to offer examples of his leadership in the run-up to next year's general election, he should cite instead his reluctance to hold a referendum on Britain's membership of the EU, which he expressed in these pages last week. It is the most impressive act of his career to date.
Count the risks, first of all. He is withholding a referendum that voters want. He is disappointing a small but respected group within his party. And David Cameron, the prime minister, can now tell a eurosceptic nation that only his Tories will allow them their first say on the matter since 1975. A vote for the UK Independence party, by eroding Tory support from the right and allowing Labour to slide into power, can be painted as vote for Brussels.
It took judgment and courage for Mr Miliband to recognise that all of this is worth it, that a short spell as a perceived elitist and anti-democrat will eventually pay off for the country, business and himself.
Mr Miliband's policy - which talks down a referendum and talks up, vaguely, reform of the EU - would return Britain's posture towards Europe to "wait and see", a feeble-sounding maxim that actually carries more wisdom than any number of injunctions to "settle the matter" and "decide our destiny once and for all". The EU is mutating in ways its own leaders can only sketchily imagine: an in-out referendum would be unintelligible until we know what we are staying in or getting out of. This ambiguity is unlikely to be resolved by 2017, when Mr Cameron intends to hold the vote.
Mr Miliband has also steered clear of Mr Cameron's pretence that the status quo is intolerable. It is awkward and burdensome, of course, but a situation which allows Britain membership of the world's largest economic bloc without having to adopt its misconceived single currency is very tolerable indeed. The calculation will change if the eurozone comes to assert itself as the decision-making chamber of the whole EU, leaving the other countries to rubber-stamp its ideas and regulations. But this is exactly what Britain can avert through tenacious diplomacy in the coming years. Berlin does not want a splintered Europe any more than London. By disavowing the status quo, Mr Cameron has in effect obliged himself to recommend leaving the EU in the event that he fails to revise Britain's terms of membership.
Labour's line on Europe is, more than anything, a sedative for anxious businessmen. The prospect of a Miliband premiership radiates menace to corporate Britain, which resents Labour's tax plans, restless interventionism and apparent incomprehension of anybody who works outside the public or charity sectors. But if you are only going to have one pro-business policy, then ensuring that Britain will retain access to a single market of 500m relatively prosperous people is not a bad one to offer.
The Tories' insouciance about the uncertainty fostered by their referendum pledge, like their almost bottomless antipathy to immigration, illuminates the tension between their conservative cultural instincts and their other identity as the voice of enterprise. Business will still favour Mr Cameron at the next election, not least because voters are far from certain to plump for exit even if a referendum does take place. But they now have one compelling reason to hold fire on Mr Miliband. In an election as close as this one will be, it is a meaningful change in his favour.
For all its sober regard for business and the national interest, Mr Miliband's intervention really comes into its own as a cynical political act. By shelving a referendum, he avoids becoming prime minister only to spend years bogged down in European summitry before holding a plebiscite as an unpopular midterm incumbent that, if lost, would instantly do for his premiership.
He also puts the Tories in an exquisitely tortuous position. They must bludgeon voters with the message that a vote for Ukip makes a referendum less, not more, likely. At the same time, they must somehow prevent Europe becoming a prominent part of their election campaign, for it only serves to bore most people while reminding them of the Tories' creepy monomania and obscuring the one subject on which the party has an increasingly attractive story to tell: the economy. To judge by their reaction to Mr Miliband's announcement, this balancing trick is beyond their wits. The Tory election campaign could be as Europe-heavy as their failed efforts in 2001 and 2005.
On top of all this, Mr Miliband has observed the most basic rule of politics: he has kept his options open. He can still call a referendum if there is a "transfer of powers from the UK to the EU", which can mean whatever he wants it to mean. He is not bound by any date and, however good a game he talks about reforming the EU, he is under no real pressure from his party to itemise what he means by this - unlike Mr Cameron. Forswearing a referendum absolutely would have been wrong and impolitic. Britons are entitled to a say when there is something to have a say on. They may not have forgiven a politician who pronounced the issue of Europe to be eternally above them.
What Mr Miliband has done is the opposite of one of his theatrical showdowns. It is an avoidance of confrontation, a work of hedging and nuance. It blends high principle, reptilian self-interest and some national statecraft. It invites short-term vulnerability for the sake of a better strategic position - for himself and the country - in the long term. It is truer leadership than anything else he has done.
janan.ganesh@ft.com
Document FTCMA00020140314ea3e00491
