{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2247"}
﻿Nigel Farage lacks answers on Europe, says Rachida Dati
By George Parker, Political Editor   
537 words
21 May 2014
15:47
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nigel Farage is "intelligent and charismatic" and is not a racist, according to Rachida Dati, a European MP and former French justice minister who is campaigning for votes among London's French community.
But Ms Dati said Mr Farage and his UK Independence party had no solutions to the problems facing Europe, ahead of European elections that are expected to show a surge of support for populist parties.
The French MEP was speaking in London, where the capital's estimated 300,000 French residents - many of whom work in the City - are seen as a fruitful source of votes for Ms Dati's centre-right UMP party.
London's French voters can choose whether they wish to cast their votes for British candidates in the UK capital or for French candidates, including Ms Dati, in the Ile de France region around Paris.
"There is a caricature that [these voters] all left France for financial reasons," she said. "No. They might come here for work but also for many other things. I think one of the things that draws people here is that London is a very cosmopolitan city."
Ms Dati draws a distinction between the politics of Mr Farage and those of Marine Le Pen's National Front in France, whose rise is threatening an upset to the political establishment in Paris.
She said France would send out a depressing message to the world if "the country of light, the country of human rights" elected large numbers of MEPs to the European parliament from "the extreme right".
But she said Mr Farage was in a different category: "He's someone who poses important questions but doesn't have the solutions. His politics are all about charisma but his solutions are not in the interests of Britain or Europe.
"He is defending nationalistic populist interests and that is why he's high in the polls - that's why he's popular. But is he racist? No, I don't believe so."
Ms Dati said Europe needed to have a smaller voice in certain areas but be more active on big questions such as foreign policy. "Have you heard Europe's voice on Ukraine, Syria, Iraq, Egypt, what's been happening in north Africa?" she asked. "No."
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>Ms Dati sprang to international fame as a glamorous young minister in Nicolas Sarkozy's government, the daughter of North African immigrants who rose from an impoverished background.
Asked whether she would support Mr Sarkozy in another run for the Elysée in 2017, she said: "He's my candidate. If he wins, it's my country that wins."
Would she like another ministerial job? "I'm not intoxicated by that sort of thing." She added: "With my life and my temperament, I could do lots of different things."
Ms Dati said France should try to help the "intelligent" David Cameron win his proposed in-out referendum in 2017. "It's the responsibility of Europe. I support the British and David Cameron. It's our responsibility and in our interest."
Document FTCMA00020140521ea5l0038q
