{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2474"}
____
  
No 10 accused of holding back migration findings
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
366 words
5 March 2014
00:12
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Downing Street has suppressed the publication of research showing that the effect of immigration on the UK labour market is much smaller than initially thought, according to the BBC's Newsnight programme.
Theresa May, home secretary, has frequently quoted figures published in 2012 by the government's independent immigration advisers which indicated that for every 100 non-European working-age immigrants employed in Britain, 23 UK-born people were displaced.
However, according to emails seen by Newsnight, some government departments - including the Treasury and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills - were sceptical of the independent research and commissioned fresh analysis by civil servants. This new document is said to show that the so-called "displacement effect" of immigrants is not as significant as first thought.
This is not the first time that Downing Street has been accused of blocking the publication of immigration research that undermines the Conservatives' policy of reducing net immigration to the "tens of thousands" by 2015. The Financial Times reported in January that David Cameron shelved a report on EU migration after the Home Office failed to provide evidence to support her case for imposing tighter restrictions on immigrants.
Despite political pressure to prove that limiting EU migration would be good for Britain, Ms May has not so far found data to shore up this argument, and the report has still not been published.
When asked about the latest controversy over labour market displacement, a government spokeswoman said she would not comment on internal government documents.
"Reducing immigration so our economy delivers for people who want to work hard and play by the rules is part of our long-term economic plan to build a stronger, more competitive economy and secure a better future for Britain," the spokeswoman said.
But David Hanson, Labour's shadow immigration minister, urged ministers to publish their findings.
"The British people should have information made available to them so they can make a judgment about the impact of immigration on jobs," Mr Hanson said. "This should be done on the basis of fact not more empty rhetoric or spin from the government."
Document FTCMA00020140305ea350002t
