{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2161"}
____
  
UK should scrap its migrant targets
618 words
7 March 2014
18:48
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Britain is heading for a bitterly contested general election next year. One issue certain to create immense heat in the campaign is immigration. Opinion polls show British voters place the issue among their top three concerns, a reflection perhaps of the way migrant numbers have soared to record levels in the past decade. Public anxiety has boosted the UK Independence party, which garners votes with relentless attacks on migrants, especially from the EU.
To try to head off UKIP's challenge, David Cameron, prime minister, has adopted tough-sounding policies. His flagship pledge is to bring net migration - that is the difference between the number of people going into and out of the UK at any one time - down to the "tens of thousands" by next year's election. Conservative Home Office ministers have followed through, suggesting that migration damages the UK economy by taking jobs from British workers. Yet in the past few days, this entire Tory strategy has been undermined by two developments.
First, Mr Cameron's pledge on migrant numbers now looks impossible to achieve. Far from coming down to the tens of thousands, the latest data for 2012-13 show the net migrant figure rising to more than 200,000. This figure is actually shooting up for what might seem positive reasons. The UK economy is growing faster than European counterparts, so Britain is seeing a sudden surge in migrants from Italy, Spain and Portugal. But this merely highlights the fundamental flaw with Mr Cameron's pledge. So long as the UK remains part of the EU and has an open border policy, there is little he can do to reduce the net migration figure.
Then there is the allegation that migration displaces jobs. Back in 2012, Theresa May, home secretary, suggested that for every 100 migrants that came to the UK, there were 23 fewer jobs for British workers. This week, a hitherto suppressed government report stated that, in reality, there was "relatively little evidence that migration has caused significant displacement of UK natives . . . when the economy is strong". Besides, many economists are firmly of the view that the UK economy needs highly skilled migrants to boost growth.
It is time for Mr Cameron and the Conservatives to rethink their crude immigration strategy. They should replace the failing target on net migration with a system focused on attracting the skilled immigrants that the UK urgently needs. Flows of migration that are obviously beneficial to the UK - such as investors, skilled professionals and students wanting to study in British universities - should be maximised. An Australia-style immigration points system should be put in place.
At the same time, as the Institute for Public Policy Research argued this week, the UK needs to close the door to migrants that the economy cannot accommodate. Britain should block the entry of low-skilled migrants from outside the EU, whose jobs can be done by EU nationals. The UK also needs an immigration policy that is manifestly fair, slowing access to benefit entitlements and social housing for all new entrants.
Nobody should underestimate the fears that Britons have over immigration. Young migrant families make it harder to find school places in communities. There are legitimate cultural concerns that need to be addressed by ensuring that migrants speak English and are properly integrated into local communities.
However, at some point in the future the UK will have to abandon its myopic policy for one that maximises the contribution that skilled foreign workers can make to the UK economy. For Mr Cameron to shift now would require political courage in the face of UKIP's ranting populism. But it is in Britain's interest.
Document FTCOM00020140307ea37003vd
