{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"26"}
____
  
Labour MPs urge Ed Miliband to change tune after Budget
By George Parker and Jim Pickard   
1,242 words
24 March 2014
22:58
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The change of mood effected at Westminster by George Osborne's 2014 Budget was palpable; Tory MPs returned to work yesterday talking of election victory while Labour MPs sensed the political ground might be starting to shift beneath them.
"I've been speaking to colleagues who were convinced we were going to lose," said one Conservative MP. "Now they think we might just win."
It may be a passing phase, but momentum counts in politics and on the Labour side there is a sense of urgency as senior party figures - including some in Ed Miliband's shadow cabinet - try to work out how the party can regain traction.
"It was a disappointing week," admitted one aide to the Labour leader, referring to Mr Miliband's inability to deconstruct a Budget delivered by a confident chancellor presiding over a fast-growing economy and falling unemployment.
The anxiety was crystallised in a letter to the Guardian from 19 Labour policy experts and strategists urging Mr Miliband to come up with a list of policies that excited voters and paved the way for a "transformative change" in direction.
"If Labour plays the next election safe, hoping to win on the basis of Tory unpopularity, it will not have earned a mandate for such change," they wrote.
Mr Miliband's team argues that the party has plenty of policies. Last night, the Labour leader told ITV's The Agenda he wanted to extend paternity leave and to reform student loan repayments to help those on lower incomes. But critics say that the Labour leader has failed to pull those policies together into a coherent narrative.
"I want us to stand for something when we get in," said Graham Allen, MP for Nottingham North. "Just being in isn't the objective, being in to do stuff is what matters, and we need to define with a broader public consent what that is."
Nowhere is the lack of definition more apparent than in the area of the economy, where Mr Miliband's focus on the "cost of living crisis" - a successful theme over the past six months - often drowns out other parts of the party's message.
"We need to broaden it out beyond the cost of living," admitted one senior shadow cabinet member, arguing that voters needed a clearer vision of where Labour saw the economy going in future and how to promote long-term growth.
Another Labour frontbencher asked: "When is he going to switch the argument away from cost of living to the future, to where future prosperity will come from? A lot of party members want to see a bigger ambition about where we are going in bigger letters."
Mr Miliband is expected to respond by trying to link his "cost of living" strategy with other parts of Labour's agenda, including a housebuilding drive and his plan to tame the excesses of capitalism by taking on predatory companies.
Mr Miliband's attack on energy companies last autumn and his promise of a price freeze pushed the Tories on to the back foot; this year he followed that up with a promise to break up big banks. Labour insiders predict that rail companies will be the next in his sights.
Meanwhile Ed Balls, shadow chancellor, believes the party's most urgent economic priority is not taking on big business but reassuring voters that Labour will be good stewards of the public finances, hence his promise to run a current budget surplus by 2020.
That also lies behind Labour's decision to back Mr Osborne's proposed £119bn welfare cap in a Commons vote on Wednesday, a move intended to prove fiscal prudence which has antagonised some Labour MPs.
"There could be a couple of dozen leftwingers who rebel," said one Labour official. For Mr Balls - attempting to dispel the voters' suspicions that Labour will not take difficult decisions - that rebellion might actually turn out to be helpful.
Others want Mr Miliband to start talking less about the "cost of living" and more about the party's plans to promote growth into the future. "We are in danger of looking negative while jobs figures improve and we have no sunny uplands," says another MP.
Rick Nye of Populus argues that even next year the public will vote not on whether the economy is improving but whether the recovery is "working for them"; the fear among many Labour MPs is that the recovery could indeed feel "real" by May 2015 for some voters.
Labour party's policies so far
WELFARE
Where the party stands
Labour polls badly on welfare because of a perception that social security spending ballooned in the 2000s. Miliband has proposed a new "contributory" element to Jobseekers Allowance and has vowed to means test the winter fuel allowance.
Challenges ahead
The coalition will hold a vote this week on a new cap for overall welfare spending. Ed Balls has vowed to support the cap but many Labour MPs will vote against it, an embarrassing rebellion which will reinforce the party's image as soft on welfare.
IMMIGRATION
Where the party stands
Yvette Cooper, shadow home secretary, wants to control immigration by reforming the labour market. Her ideas include limiting the number of non-EU staff companies can employ, and boosting fines for gangmasters abusing cheap immigrant labour.
Challenges ahead
Given Labour's failure to control migration from the eastern European countries which joined the EU in 2004, it is difficult for the party to convince voters it would do a better job in this area than the Conservatives.
ECONOMY
Where the party stands:
Labour wants to run a current budget surplus by 2020, but leave room to borrow to invest. Labour would increase taxes on the wealthy to help fill the fiscal hole.
Challenges ahead:
Still very little detail on how Labour would balance the books. Taxes on banks and the rich only deal with part of the problem: what about welfare and other areas of public spending?
PENSIONS
Where the party stands:
Labour led the way with criticism of the annuities market and high opaque fees on pensions, long before the coalition took action.
Challenges ahead:
George Osborne's popular move to let people cash in their pension savings without buying an annuity has sowed chaos in the Labour ranks with the party unsure how to respond. Some MPs are concerned that it could prompt reckless behaviour.
EDUCATION
Where the party stands
Tristram Hunt, shadow education secretary, announced in January that a Labour government would "re-license" teachers every few years to ensure consistent quality and bring the status of teachers closer to that of lawyers and doctors.
Challenges ahead
Teachers derided the teaching "MOT" as pointless and bureaucratic, pointing out that a similar system was mooted by former Labour education secretary Ed Balls but ended up being scrapped after pressure from unions.
HEALTH
Where the party stands
Andy Burnham, shadow health secretary, plans to merge the budgets for health and social care and hand the money to local authorities in a big shake-up designed to provide seamless treatment, especially for people with long-term conditions.
Challenges ahead
Labour faces an uphill struggle because the health budget provides a universal free service while social care is means-tested. International experience suggests merging the budgets does not always create a more integrated approach to treating patients.
Document FTCMA00020140324ea3o005pm
