{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1554"}
____
Clegg and Farage clash in euro match
By Kiran Stacey and George Parker   
1,064 words
26 March 2014
22:32
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nigel Farage emerged from the first of two debates with Nick Clegg over Britain's membership of the EU on Wednesday night with a clear victory, according to a snap poll.
The UK Independence party leader was judged by 57 per cent of viewers to have won the confrontation, compared with just 36 per cent who thought the head of the Liberal Democrats had emerged victorious - although a majority thought Britain should remain within the EU.
The two leaders clashed on a range of subjects, including immigration, crime and employment.
Speaking first in the clash, Mr Clegg framed the European debate in terms of employment, stating: "It's about you, it's about your job."
"If we were simply to pull up our drawbridge, that would destroy jobs for people in this country," he said. "I want this country to be Great Britain, not Little England. . . If you believe we are better off in, then on May 22 at the European elections I hope you will give us your support."
The Lib Dem leader claimed that 3m jobs were linked to Britain's membership of the EU, saying he did not want to put any of those at risk by leaving, adding that to do so would be unpatriotic.
Mr Farage replied: "We have a total open door, and that is the issue I think that has woken many people up. . . We must get our country back."
Focusing primarily on the impact of EU membership on immigration, the Ukip leader claimed that "opening our borders to 485m people from all across Europe" would see British workers losing out on jobs and push down wages. He told the audience in London that an "oversupply" of cheap labour meant "you've seen your wages go down as the cost of living as gone up".
But he was unable to explain key parts of his argument, such as his claim that 75 per cent of British laws are made in Brussels: "That is our calculation," he explained.
Both sides tried to claim victory in the immediate aftermath. Lib Dem advisers insisted that with the more difficult case to make, Mr Clegg's rating of 36 per cent marked success.
Danny Alexander, the Lib Dem Treasury chief secretary, said: "The latest polls have us at 10 per cent, but tonight 36 per cent said they thought Nick won the debate. That's not a bad starting point for us."
But Ukip were also delighted at their leader's performance. One adviser to Mr Farage said: "What we achieved was for Ukip to take the leadership of the great eurosceptic majority. We are the ones that turned up and fought your corner."
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>Both sides had reason to claim success: the exercise was designed more as a way of generating enthusiasm among core supporters and activists than winning over floating voters. It was also designed to buy the two minor parties valuable publicity in the run up to May's European elections, and shut out Labour and the Conservatives.
One Ukip adviser said: "The real loser here is David Cameron. Any claim that he had to be the main voice of British euroscepticism is going to be undermined by these events."
Those in Mr Clegg's camp make a similar point about Ed Miliband. They say that while the Labour leader may have all but ruled out a European referendum, he has not yet argued passionately and consistently for Britain's membership of the EU.
Senior Lib Dems say they are aiming to capture as much of the pro-European vote as possible, pointing out that on current polling, that could represent as much as 40 per cent of the electorate.
A more realistic aim is simply to pick up enough support to make sure they don't lose every single European seat in May, something even Tim Farron, the party president, has admitted is possible.
<>While both leaders did enough to persuade their supporters they had been successful, they also gave enough ammunition to their opponents to use in the run up to the European elections.
Defending his previous promise to give voters a referendum on UK membership of the EU, Mr Clegg began by saying: "If you read the small print …" But while the Lib Dem leader was accused of being two-faced in his response, Mr Farage's straightforward passion also threatened to get the better of him. Responding to a question about Russia's invasion of Crimea, the Ukip leader said the EU had "blood on its hands" for having offered Ukraine a trade deal that forced Vladimir Putin to take military action.
Meanwhile, both Labour and the Conservatives insisted they were sanguine about the prospect of Ukip and the Lib Dems getting so much primetime exposure. One adviser to the prime minister said: "It's time to let the minor parties have their go."
Mr Relaxed parries Ukip pugilist
It's about time," said Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, as he went head to head with Nick Clegg in the first of two live television debates, writes Kiran Stacey.
Mr Farage started strongly, mixing his natural passion and soapbox debating style with an unexpectedly assured handling of facts. But as the debate went on, the Liberal Democrat leader's calm focus on statistics lasted better.
Holding up a Ukip campaign leaflet claiming that 29m Romanians and Bulgarians were heading for Britain, Mr Clegg said: "There aren't even 29m living in Romania and Bulgaria - it's simply not true."
Mr Farage hit back: "That's because 2m have left already and gone to Italy and Spain."
Mr Clegg's defence of his policy on an EU referendum was weak. He began: "If you read the small print . . ." But showing the poise he first exhibited in live debates before the 2010 election, he maintained a relaxed demeanour against Mr Farage's garrulous sparring and finger jabbing.
Predictably, the Ukip leader tried to dilute his stormy performance with a few jokes, and was unable to resist saying: "I don't agree with Nick."
"There are some things we're learning from Europe," Mr Farage conceded. "The food's getting better here, and that's great."
Document FTCMA00020140326ea3q004mq
