{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1460"}
____
  
France: Hollande's appeal
By Hugh Carnegy   
2,275 words
13 March 2014
17:43
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Silver-haired François Watrin and his burly son Henri-Pierre, owners of a sawmill in northern France, are far removed from the grand patrons in Paris pressing President François Hollande to reform a struggling economy whose lacklustre performance has so worried the country's European partners.
But the story of their fifth-generation family business in Lorraine carries much the same message as Mr Hollande works to dispel a deep French malaise - and rescue his presidency from the lowest approval ratings since the second world war.
By mid-afternoon on a Friday, the tidy Watrin sawmill in the village of Beauclair lies silent. Henri-Pierre explains with a shrug that France's statutory 35-hour working week means they send the 14-strong workforce home early for the weekend.
The business, which sells beechwood to furniture makers, has recovered from a 20 per cent slump in sales when exports to crisis-hit Spain dried up in 2009. But annual turnover of €1.8m has barely grown, in part because of competition from Germany, where wage costs are lower.
China is still more of a threat. "A lot of French timber goes straight to China as ballast in empty returning container ships and comes back to France as furniture that costs less than it can be made for here," says Watrin père. The company has invested almost €3m since 2006 in new equipment. But it is not increasing employment. "Our profit margins are very slim," says Henri-Pierre. "We have invested mainly in productivity and energy efficiency. It's partly to avoid replacing our next two retirees and to reduce our salary costs."
It is the experience of businesses such as Watrin, multiplied across the country, that pushed Mr Hollande to take action in January. Chastened by his failure to fulfil a pledge to reverse a relentless rise in unemployment by the end of last year, he launched a policy initiative that embraced a pro-business agenda.
Acknowledging there was "no time to lose" in boosting a sluggish recovery, he promised to cut high social charges imposed on employers, reduce the country's huge public spending bill to permit tax cuts, and tackle the forest of rules and regulations that tie down companies.
This "responsibility pact" with business has probably come too late to lessen an expected heavy reversal in support for Mr Hollande's ruling socialist party in local elections at the end of the month.
With his approval ratings languishing around 20 per cent, Mr Hollande's credibility as a reformer is damaged. He spent his first year in office raising taxes by €30bn, exasperating business while fiscal targets slipped. Reforms to the labour market and pension system were modest and he has admitted the government underestimated the scale of the crisis facing the country.
This week a new scandal, over the government's handling of revelations that former president Nicolas Sarkozy has been under phone surveillance by police, has added another distraction from Mr Hollande's attempt to focus on the economy.
France has a long history of governments promising reforms but failing to deliver. The question now is whether Mr Hollande will after all prove capable of rebooting the country's fortunes and restoring his popularity in the three years he still has in office.
There have been numerous alarm calls about the state of the French economy in recent weeks. "France is in crisis and on the edge of the precipice," said Pierre Gattaz, head of Medef, the employers' federation, in an interview in Le Figaro this month. "Our economy is not restarting and there is no sign of an improvement. I sense a very great anxiety among all entrepreneurs."
The European Commission, the executive arm of the EU, placed France under "specific monitoring", citing a long-term deterioration in its competitiveness and its high level of public debt. "The need for decisive action . . . . is particularly important given the size of the French economy and potential spillovers on to the functioning of the euro area," it said.
One potent symbol is the fear that the country is suffering a "brain drain" of young entrepreneurs and skilled workers leaving France to seek their fortunes abroad because of the lack of opportunities at home.
A study by the Paris region chamber of commerce published this week showed the proportion of graduates seeking employment outside France had doubled to 27 per cent in the psat two years. "They come to London in droves, like refugees," said one French businessman based in the British capital.
As recovery takes off in neighbouring countries such as the UK and Spain, France remains dogged by a number of issues that have worried economists and policy makers. Both Brussels and the Cour des Comptes, the national auditor, have warned that Paris will be hard-pressed to meet the already-delayed EU target of reducing the budget deficit to 3 per cent of gross domestic product by 2015. That will leave public debt above 97 per cent of GDP next year, according to the commission - approaching the levels that caused such alarm during the eurozone sovereign debt crisis.
To stabilise the debt and make room for tax cuts, Mr Hollande has promised more than €50bn - about 2.5 per cent of GDP - in public spending savings over the next three years, on top of €15bn this year. That is unprecedented for a country that has not balanced its budget since the 1970s, although in real terms it represents a slowdown in spending, not a cut. Growth is forecast at about 1 per cent this year, well short of the level needed to make inroads into unemployment, which exceeds 10 per cent.
Afew kilometres from Beauclair, in the town of Stenay, François Richter has kept Stefil, his steel wire fabrication company, on the rails by shifting from supplying the automotive industry to making presentation stands for advertisers and retailers. He sees little sign of recovery and has no plans to add to the four people he employs. "I would employ more if my clients didn't make last-minute decisions. My order book used to be six weeks. Now it is 10 days." He is not persuaded by Mr Hollande's promise of a cut in labour costs. "My priority is to keep the people we have today, not to employ more."
Some of the warnings about the French economy may be too shrill, however. France has returned to its pre-crisis level of output ahead of the UK. The commission has acknowledged what it called "the unexpected resilience" of French growth in 2013, when expansion of 0.3 per cent in the final quarter was just a notch behind the economic powerhouse of Germany.
Unemployment, which is decelerating, remains below the eurozone average. The budget deficit, estimated at 4.2 per cent last year, is comfortably below that of the UK and Spain.
Latest indicators from Insee, the national statistics institute, suggest investment and manufacturing are recovering. Private consumption, traditionally the main driver of the economy, has held up and France's high savings rate means it does not have a problem of private indebtedness.
"France, with its big state spending, resists well in times of crisis," says Denis Ferrand, director of the think-tank Coe-Rexecode. "The other side of the equation is that it rebounds more weakly than other economies."
For years, this lumbering resistance to the kind of boom and bust experienced by other European countries - coupled with deeply embedded domestic political resistance to change - undermined repeated warnings that the country must face up to an underlying loss of competitiveness that bodes ill for the longer term.
The question is whether that is now changing. One indication is the upsurge of public hostility to high taxes. "Tax is the top issue on the doorstep in this election campaign," says Gilbert Prot, candidate for mayor for the far-right National Front in the Lorraine town of Verdun, down the Meuse valley from Stenay. The populist party more usually focuses on crime and immigration but he says: "There is a real frustration about taxes that has reached a peak."
Mr Hollande, who won power promising to raise taxes, is now fiercely criticised for adding billions in taxes on both business and households, following previous increases under Mr Sarkozy. Thomas Philippon, a professor at New York's Stern Business School and a former adviser to Pierre Moscovici, the finance minister, says Mr Hollande's unpopularity is more a function of a general disaffection that has emerged post-crisis than his own policies. "Where Hollande is now says more about the country than about him. All the issues that were not properly dealt with in the past have crystallised now. It happened to occur under his presidency."
Mr Ferrand argues that there is now a broad realisation that with public spending and taxes at the limit, the country can no longer rely on state consumption to mask its competitive weakness, which has seen France's share of eurozone exports tumble more than four points to less than 13 per cent since the late 1990s. "There has been a real awakening. The question is what action follows," he says.
Joseph Oughourlian, managing partner at Amber Capital, an equity investor, is wryly positive about Mr Hollande's policy shift. "I think things are going to stabilise. Hollande has got the message. At least he'll stop doing damaging things, which is huge. As an investor, that's the best you can expect from a government."
But the president will have to do more to convince the business community that real structural change is now on the way, which can restore confidence to the economy.
Much attention is focused on his promise to lift €30bn in employment charges from businesses by 2017. To date, €20bn is channelled though a tax credit targeted at the lower paid.
Mr Ferrand says it is vital not to focus further cuts in labour charges on the low paid because France's critical need is to boost the competitiveness of its exporters, who mostly pay high wages. "We must not sacrifice tomorrow's high-value employment for low-skilled jobs today. The risk is we'll get neither."
Medef, meanwhile, says a €50bn cut in social charges and a further €50bn in tax cuts is needed to fully close the competitive gap with Germany.
Businesses are also crying out for deeper reforms of the highly restrictive 3,000-page labour code that deters them from hiring. Brussels advocates the need to open up restricted markets, in transport, energy and other services. But Mr Hollande treads cautiously in these areas, afraid of provoking protests. And there appears to be no talk of changing the 35-hour week.
Mr Philippon says the crucial test will be on public spending, which has risen steadily over decades to 56 per cent of GDP. "If it becomes clear that there is a clear break in the trend and the share of public spending in the economy goes down, that will send a very strong signal."
At the sawmill in Beauclair, François Watrin is not holding his breath. "I don't have any confidence in this responsibility pact," he says. "We can work in France but businesses are being killed by salary charges and they invent new taxes all the time."
Rural divide: A town with nothing left to lose
Stenay, a small and pleasant town on the river Meuse not far from the Belgian border, has the dour distinction of having been, 100 years ago, the German headquarters for the brutal first world war battle of Verdun, which was fought downriver to the southeast.
Today it is an example of those many parts of France relatively isolated from the more prosperous big cities that are struggling to generate growth.
"The [2008-2009] crisis did not hit us that hard," says Stéphane Perrin, Stenay's personable mayor in the town's handsome Hotel de Ville. "We already had nothing much left to lose."
Pierre Vermeren, a history professor at the Sorbonne university, recently singled out Stenay as illustrating the divide between France's hard-pressed, but still relatively highly populated, periphery and its "globalised" cities, such as Paris, Marseille and Lyon, which have resisted the worst of the recession.
It is a division exploited by the far-right National Front, which hopes to make significant advances in such places in this month's municipal elections, as voters feel forgotten by the mainstream parties.
The FN has not mustered candidates in Stenay, where the canny Mr Perrin, who is not party-affiliated, is heading an unopposed list of local councillors. But he readily acknowledges the difficulty facing a local economy without the motorways or high-speed rail and air links that serve the large centres.
"It is hard to attract businesses. When people look at the map of the big markets, we don't appear," says the mayor.
Once nourished by jobs in the steel industry, an army garrison and a vibrant construction sector, the canton's population has fallen from 8,000 in the late 1960s to 6,000 today as those employers disappeared. The local paper plant, now owned by Swedish group Munksjö, survives but with a much-reduced workforce.
"Places like Stenay went from prosperity to profound crisis" as industry retreated, Mr Perrin says.
He is battling to help local entrepreneurs set up and sustain their businesses.
"We live in a very open and competitive economy. We need a skilled workforce and those with skills don't stay. People leave for Paris. That's the reality."
Document FTCMA00020140313ea3d0048v
