{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2197"}
____
  
Nick Clegg attacks Conservatives over immigration
By Kiran Stacey, Political Correspondent   
452 words
8 March 2014
20:00
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nick Clegg has launched an attack on the Conservative immigration minister over his recent warnings about the dangers of mass immigration, as the Liberal Democrat leader looked to rally his party's supporters with an unashamedly pro-European pitch.
Speaking at the Liberal Democrat spring conference in York, the Lib Dem leader told party members he believed James Brokenshire's speech accusing the middle classes of exploiting cheap foreign labour, was "irresponsible".
Mr Clegg added: "Over the last 24 to 48 hours we have seen, in many respects, some of the most ugly sides of the immigration debate. It is truly dispiriting to see the Conservative and Labour parties, the two largest parties in British politics, driven, as far as I can see, entirely by panic on this issue."
Mr Brokenshire gave a widely-criticised speech last week, in which he said: "For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services - but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country."
Mr Clegg's attack on Mr Brokenshire echoed comments made earlier by Vince Cable, the Lib Dem business secretary, who accused the Tories of tending to "the flames of prejudice" over immigration.
The remarks form part of an attempt by the Lib Dems to make a virtue of their pro-EU and pro-immigration stance, billing themselves the "party of in". With some polls suggesting the party may lose all of its MEPs at May's European elections, Lib Dem strategists have decided to take the risky tactic of advocating policies usually thought to be widely unpopular among British voters.
During a question-and-answer session with delegates in York, Mr Clegg was confronted with criticism from his own campaigners for the strategy. One local Lib Dem activist told the party leader that "on the doorstep, no one cares about this".
Meanwhile Mr Clegg also defended his party's policy of raising the salary at which people start having to pay income tax to £12,500, something Danny Alexander, the Lib Dem Treasury chief secretary, earlier hinted could be a red line in any 2015 coalition negotiations.
The Institute of Fiscal Studies recently warned the policy was expensive and ineffective at targeting the poor, but Mr Clegg branded their criticisms "ludicrous".
He added: "To suggest to someone who earns £12,500 that they don't deserve that tax break is a ludicrous thing to say. £12,000 isn't rich . . . It's big it's bold, it's progressive, it's popular, and we should stick with it."
Document FTCMA00020140308ea38000rt
