{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1866"}
____
  
UK immigration minister scores 'own goal' with speech
By Helen Warrell and Elizabeth Rigby   
810 words
6 March 2014
23:33
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
James Brokenshire, the new immigration minister, caused a storm with his first speech by criticising the "wealthy metropolitan elite" for relying on cheap overseas labour.
His comments came after it emerged that David Cameron has hired two nannies from outside the EU.
Mr Brokenshire said: "For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour - or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesman and services - but not or the ordinary, hard working people of this country."
However, the Conservative minister's salvo backfired after it appeared that he was attacking the prime minister's own childcare arrangements.
Downing Street's official spokesman refused to comment on Thursday on whether it was appropriate for Mr Cameron and his wife, Samantha, to employ an Australian nanny. The couple have previously used a Nepalese nanny, who was recruited from Kalayaan, a charity that helps immigrants to escape abusive bosses.
Number 10 also refused to answer questions on whether other cabinet ministers employed foreign childcare staff, builders or home helps. "I don't think this is relevant to the speech", a spokesman said.
When asked whether the prime minister's office had cleared the speech, the spokesman added: "There are not any concerns about clearance of it."
One senior Tory figure was privately exasperated about the speech, describing it as "an own goal" that "makes a mockery of our own people".
"The characteristic that most defines Cameron in the minds of Ukip [UK Independence party] people is that he is the personification of the metropolitan elite: that is precisely why they don't like him," the Conservative figure said. "So this seems very hollow to voters when Tories pretend they are not like that when they are, It's very self defeating."
Mark Field, the MP for the Cities of London and Westminster, said: "At a time when the economic recovery is still fragile, the message should be we are open for business and that is what our immigration policy should be about."
Efforts to reassure the public that action would be taken on rising UK immigration levels were not welcomed by business. Simon Walker, director-general of the Institute of Directors, derided Mr Brokenshire's speech as "feeble and pathetic", criticising his "divisive language".
"The UK is an open, trading country that benefits from the skills and ideas of migrants," Mr Walker said. "We will not become more prosperous by closing our borders to talented individuals and entrepreneurs from across the world. This speech seems to be more about political positioning and less about what is good for the country."
Mr Brokenshire has come under pressure to find ways of cutting net migration following an unexpected surge in the figure last week to 212,000. This is now more than double the "tens of thousands" annual target that the Tories had promised to reach before the next election.
In an attempt to win over supporters from Ukip, the new Conservative minister's comments echoed those of party leader Nigel Farage who said late last year that immigration was a "class issue".
"If you're comfortably off then mass immigration is good because it's cheap nannies, cheap chauffeurs, cheap gardeners," Mr Farage said in November. "If you are a member of the working classes in this country and particularly from the settled ethnic minorities, your chance of getting a job has been diminished."
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<> Mr Brokenshire also announced new measures aimed at reducing the net migration figure, including reducing the number of visa refusals allowed to UK universities, schools and colleges before their sponsor licences are suspended.
Educational institutions are punished with suspension if more than 20 per cent of the foreign students they offer places to are turned down by the Home Office. But Mr Brokenshire is expected to bring this figure down to 10 per cent, in the hope that universities are more rigorous in their due diligence to make sure foreign applicants are genuine.
The Home Office said under current refusal rates, this would affect about 6 per cent of the 1,700 educational visa sponsors in the UK.
The Tories' efforts to bring down net migration have also sparked rows within the coalition, with Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat business secretary, describing the new, higher rates of immigration as a "good thing".
But Mr Brokenshire accused Mr Cable of spreading "falsehoods" and misunderstanding the effects of immigration. "The winners [from immigration] are the 'haves' like Vince, but the people who lose out are from working class families, the ethnic minorities and recent immigrants themselves," the immigration minister said. "Try telling them that rising immigration is good news".
Document FTCMA00020140306ea360063i
