{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1780"}
____
  
Labour holds off Ukip in European poll race
By Jim Pickard, Chief Political Correspondent   
379 words
23 April 2014
13:14
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Labour is still on track to win next month's European elections despite a surge of support for Ukip, the maverick anti-Brussels party.
A YouGov survey for The Sun found that Labour was polling at 30 per cent with Ukip at 27 per cent, the Conservatives lagging behind at 22 per cent and the Lib Dems on 10 per cent.
That result would create a headache for David Cameron, the Tory leader, who is likely to face calls from his backbenchers and grassroots members to tack further to the right ahead of next year's general election.
It would also put Ukip - which has no MPs in Westminster - on course for one of the biggest upsets in modern political history.
Yet YouGov found that support for Ukip was still likely to dwindle back to 12 per cent by May 2015 - albeit still ahead of the Lib Dems on 10 per cent. "Many of those [Tory] votes are being lent to Ukip and will return to the traditional parties at the next general election," said Anthony Wells of YouGov.
At the last European elections Ukip won 16.5 per cent of the vote, only for that to drop to 3 per cent in the 2010 general election.
Nigel Farage, the party leader, launched his European campaign in Sheffield on Tuesday amid a media frenzy. "When we launched our campaign in 2009 the only media to show up were the BBC and another reporter," he told the Financial Times.
Mr Farage unveiled posters warning that immigrants were coming to take British jobs in a campaign criticised as "un-British" by Tory MP Nicholas Soames.
YouGov found that 37 per cent of people were planning to vote for Labour at the general election, suggesting that a significant element of Ukip's support in the European elections would come from that party.
Mr Farage has spent recent months trying to gather support in the Midlands and the North in former Labour heartlands, and his party has come second in several by-elections in those regions.
Support for the Tories at the general election would also recover to 34 per cent, not far behind, according to the polling group.
Document FTCOM00020140423ea4n001ur
