{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1928"}
____
  
Boohoo raises a smile for Manchester's Kamani family
By Andrew Bounds   
805 words
7 March 2014
16:37
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Fortunes were once made in Manchester by making clothes - now they come from selling them. The "Cottonopolis" of the 19th century has remained a centre for the rag trade, but the industry has followed the eastward migration of spinning to cheaper countries in Asia.
The old mills of the Northern Quarter, reminiscent of London's Shoreditch, have become giant warehouses where clothes are designed, sourced, shipped in from abroad and then despatched to British high street stores.
Mahmud Kamani, co-founder of Boohoo.com, which lists next week with a £560m valuation, grew up on these streets. His father, Abdullah, arrived in the UK in 1968 from Kenya with a wife, four children and a few hundred pounds.
Asked why he chose Manchester, Mahmud jokes: "That's where the plane landed. London was probably an extra £60."
Abdullah began investing in property as mills and factories closed and used family ties with Asia and Africa to import clothing.
He set up brands Pinstripe Clothing, Starsign and Jogo in the Dale Street warehouse that now houses Boohoo.
It was there that Mahmud met Carol Kane, with whom he founded Boohoo in 2006. He had the money while Ms Kane knew the industry and the tastes of fashionable young women. Together they had supplied the likes of Topshop and Primark through Pinstripe. Now they saw the internet as a way to cut out the retailer, going direct to customers.
Those who know Mahmud say he is a natural salesman with "bags of energy" and a penchant for expensive cars. "We are from a community that works hard," he told the FT. His sons Adam and Umar have caught the family bug, and have their own brasher online clothes retailer called PrettyLittleThing, although they are still only teenagers.
Umar celebrated his 18th birthday in January by turning a former Methodist chapel in central Manchester into a dance hall, with soap stars and footballers in attendance.
However, Boohoo eschews branding. "Brands go in and out of fashion," says Ms Kane. "We want to deliver the latest trend, whether it is maxi dresses or latex. We can move fast."
Part of the fast movement comes from Boohoo's sourcing. It has brought related companies in-house so it can design, commission and market a product from "catwalk to closet" in six weeks.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>Its young workforce keep it in touch with trends. "We employ our customers," says Ms Kane.
In-house sourcing means margins are more than 60 per cent, better than rival Asos at 50 per cent, and its average price was £17.18, compared to £24.69 at Asos. Revenues have grown at 67 per cent annually for two years.
The company will have a market capitalisation of £560m when it lists on March 14.
In the 10 months to December 2013 sales increased by 70 per cent to £91.9m, while adjusted earnings before interest, tax and depreciation were £10.1m.
One local adviser said Boohoo might not be the last online retailer to emerge from the northwest.
"There are a whole load of these businesses set up to import from the Indian subcontinent. Boohoo was an early starter, could see that Asos was trading at a ludicrously high multiple and saw the chance," he said.
"There is a lot of money looking for a home [on the stock market]," he said.
B&M Bargains, valued at more than £1bn, is tipped to float soon. It was founded by the Arora Brothers, Indian immigrants from a trading family who moved to China to source products for supermarkets before buying their own retailer to sell through.
Some investors are drawing parallels between Boohoo and AO World, an online appliance retailer, which raised £60m selling 30 per cent in February. As with AO, the prospectus was published just a week before the float. About 100 institutional investors missed out on buying altogether, as 85 per cent of the new issue was awarded to just 15 investors.
AO's shares have risen by a quarter and it is now worth four times its forward sales.
However, Boohoo's holding is wider, with nearly 100 investors led by Odey Asset Management and Old Mutual, with 7 per cent each. The 50p share price values it at less than half of Asos, according to the FT's Lex column.
Some £240m will go to the board and family shareholders (including Abdullah and Mahmud's brother Jalal), while £50m will buy its Burnley distribution centre and fund new IT systems.
Mahmud, who retains almost 25 per cent, says the money will not distract him. His priority is "Boohoo, Boohoo, Boohoo," he says.
Document FTCMA00020140307ea37002uv
