{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1385"}
____
  
Nigel Farage sets David Cameron on a 'Workers' Party' quest
By George Parker, Political Editor   
336 words
2 March 2014
18:20
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
David Cameron's attempt to rebrand the Conservatives as the "Workers' Party" is partly inspired by evidence that working-class voters have switched to Ukip in their droves.
The Populus poll of 14,203 people scotches the idea that Ukip is primarily a party of disgruntled Tories; rather a typical Ukip voter is a working-class man from the Midlands who ended his education at secondary school.
The Tories need to do well in key marginal regions such as the Midlands and the party last week deployed Brixton-born Sir John Major, the former prime minister, to back the claim that the party stands for the "ordinary" Briton.
The survey identifies the kind of Ukip voter that Mr Cameron needs to attract back if he is to stand any chance of winning the next election.
Despite Ukip leader Nigel Farage's joke last week about a "female takeover" of his party, the anti-Brussels party draws 63 per cent of its support from men and only 37 per cent from women. The party has little support in Scotland, but has a higher proportion of voters in the Midlands than the other parties, and its supporters are more likely to have ended their education at secondary school.
"Ukip voters are not just grumpy shire Tories," said Rick Nye, managing director of Populus. "Ukip draws more of its support from manual workers, the unskilled and the unemployed than do the three main parties and more of its support from the Midlands.
"Winning people like this back is a lot more difficult than David Cameron just presenting them with some red-meat policies on immigration and Europe."
Mr Farage told his party last week it was "the biggest threat to the political establishment that has been seen in modern times" and was picking up support from the other three main parties.
He believes that his party could win the European parliament elections in May.
Document FTCMA00020140303ea3200137
