{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1133"}
____
  
UK non-white minority could double by 2050
By George Parker   
315 words
6 May 2014
10:16
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
People from ethnic minority backgrounds could potentially double in numbers to up to 30 per cent of Britain's population by the middle of the century, according to a new study.
The Policy Exchange study found that Black Africans and Bangladeshis are the fastest growing minority communities, with ethnic minorities representing one-quarter of all people aged under five.
The report is likely to arouse considerable interest at a time when immigration features high on the list of voter concerns and amid signs the government will miss its target of cutting net migration to the "tens of thousands" by 2015.
Ukip is also campaigning against immigration, but its focus is mainly on those arriving from eastern Europe rather than the Black and Ethnic Minority (BME) communities already living in Britain.
The study, suggests that the BME population - Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, Black Africans and Black Caribbeans - could potentially double from 8m, or 14 per cent of the population, to between 20-30 per cent by 2050. Over the past decade, Britain's white population has been stable while the minority population has almost doubled.
The Policy Exchange handbook, A Portrait of Modern Britain, draws on an extensive set of survey, census, academic and polling data. It found that 50 per cent of minority communities live in just three cities: London, Manchester and Birmingham.
All minority groups had higher proportions of students staying on in formal education, especially university, than the white population.
But the study found that almost all minority groups, except the Indian community, have unemployment rates double the national average, while employment tends to be heavily focused in certain jobs.
It found that half of all Bangladeshi men work in restaurants and 24 per cent of Pakistani men are taxi drivers, while 43 per cent of Indians work in the highest skilled professions.
Document FTCMA00020140506ea560015p
