{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1235"}
____
  
David Cameron urged to tone down anti-immigration rhetoric
By Jim Pickard, Chief Political Correspondent   
654 words
23 March 2014
13:49
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
David Cameron has been urged to tone down his anti-immigration rhetoric by some of his own MPs who have launched a new group to make the case for the benefits that migrants bring to the UK.
Mark Field, MP for the Cities of London and Westminster, said his party should end its "near obsession" with the issue and drop its attempts to "outdo" Ukip, the anti-Brussels party.
The group - which represents a minority voice within the party, with barely a dozen politicians in contrast to the scores of vociferously anti-immigration Tory MPs - will warn that the coalition's "arbitrary" net cap on immigration could damage the economy and send out a negative message about the party.
Mr Field told Sky News on Sunday that the target was invented before the last election amid a "frenzy" of debate about immigration across all political parties.
Yet with the British economy now stronger than many of its European rivals, it was not surprising that many Spanish, French and others had come to work in Britain, he said. Meanwhile, others who would have otherwise left are now staying in the UK: "We want a policy that's not about headline figures," he said.
The launch on Tuesday of Conservatives for Managed Migration comes on the eve of Wednesday's long-awaited debate on the EU between Nigel Farage, Ukip leader, and Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem deputy prime minister.
Mr Clegg has taken a strategic decision to campaign openly for Britain to stay in the EU because it will benefit employment and growth - in contrast to previous elections where the Lib Dems hid their pro-Brussels stance under a bushel.
Mr Farage is seeking to hive off millions of former Tory voters to his anti-Brussels party in the May EU elections.
Attempts by the Tories to head off the rise of Ukip have included sending out vans displaying messages encouraging illegal immigrants to "go home" as well as tougher policies around migrants' rights to benefits and the welfare state.
But Britain is now facing legal action by the European Commission over its attempts to limit benefits to migrants with a case expected in the European Court of Justice within the next three months.
The legal action is to be brought by the office of Laszlo Andor, Europe commissioner in charge of employment and centres around the legalities of Britain's "right to reside test". The test is applied to incomers - but not Britons - to ensure they are seeking work before they can claim benefits.
Mr Field said the immigration cap of "tens of thousands a year" pledged by David Cameron was "undeliverable" and kept out talented academics and entrepreneurs from outside the EU.
His new group includes Brooks Newmark, a member of the Treasury select committee, and Nirj Deva, MEP.
"The rumbling threat of Ukip has only stiffened the resolve of mainstream parties to keep tough talk on immigration firmly on the front pages. The tone of debate suggests there is no middle ground between rabid, drawbridge-raising rightwingers and soft liberals bent on scrapping immigration controls," he said.
"In such a febrile atmosphere it has become almost impossible to have the rational debate we need. The relentless focus on immigration by the Conservative party seems to the outsider to border on near-obsession."
Mr Cameron has promised that a Tory-only government would hold a referendum on EU membership in 2017.
Labour and the Lib Dems have both said that they would only agree a referendum if there was a significant transfer of powers from the UK to Brussels that required a new treaty.
Chuka Umunna, shadow business secretary, said on Sunday that Labour's position was endorsed by business groups including the CBI and Engineering Employers Federation. "I think we are the pro-European party," he said.
Document FTCMA00020140323ea3n00106
