{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2543"}
____
  
UK minister echoes Ukip stance on immigration
By Helen Warrell and Elizabeth Rigby   
652 words
6 March 2014
14:33
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
James Brokenshire, UK immigration minister, has caused controversy with his first speech in the job by accusing a "wealthy metropolitan elite" of relying too heavily on cheap overseas labour even as it emerged that David Cameron has hired two nannies from outside the EU.
Mr Brokenshire has come under pressure to find ways of cutting net migration following an unexpected surge in the figure last week to 212,000. This is now more than twice the "tens of thousands" target that the Tories have promised to reach before the next election.
In a clear attempt to appeal to supporters of the UK Independence party, the new minister suggested that wealthy urbanites were supporting mass migration to Britain by hiring foreign staff. This echoes Ukip leader Nigel Farage's comments late last year that immigration was a "class issue".
"If you're comfortably off then mass immigration is good because it's cheap nannies, cheap chauffeurs, cheap gardeners," Mr Farage said in November. "If you are a member of the working classes in this country and particularly from the settled ethnic minorities, your chance of getting a job has been diminished."
However, Mr Brokenshire's salvo appeared to backfire, after suggestions that he was attacking the prime minister's own childcare arrangements.
Downing Street's official spokesman refused on Thursday to comment on whether it was appropriate for Mr Cameron and his wife Samantha to employ an Australian nanny. The couple have also used a Nepalese nanny, who was recruited from Kalayaan, a charity that helps immigrants to escape abusive bosses. "I will talk about the government's policies," the spokesman said.
The Tories' efforts to bring down net migration have also sparked rows within the coalition, with the Liberal Democrat business secretary Vince Cable describing the new, higher rates of immigration as a "good thing".
Mr Brokenshire used his speech to ramp up criticisms of his coalition partners, accusing Mr Cable of spreading "falsehoods" and misunderstanding the effects of immigration. "The winners [from immigration] are the 'haves' like Vince, but the people who lose out are from working class families, they're ethnic minorities and recent immigrants themselves," the immigration minister said. "Try telling them that rising immigration is good news".
In a nod to the rising net migration figure, the minister also promised to "go further and crack down harder on abuse". Applauding the fact that the number of student visas issued has fallen 29 per cent since 2010, Mr Brokenshire said he wanted to clamp down even more by reducing the number of visa refusals UK universities, schools and colleges are allowed before their sponsor licences are suspended.
Currently, education institutions are punished with suspension if more than 20 per cent of the foreign students they offer places to are turned down by the Home Office. "Clearly, the existing rules which allow such a large margin are extremely generous," Mr Brokenshire said. He is expected to bring this figure down to 10 per cent, in the hope that universities are more rigorous in their due diligence to make sure foreign applicants are genuine.
The Home Office said under current refusal rates, this rule change would affect around 105 of the 1,700 educational visa sponsors in the UK.
However, these efforts to reassure the public that action would be taken on rising immigration levels were not welcomed by business.
Simon Walker, director-general of the Institute of Directors, derided Mr Brokenshire's speech as "feeble and pathetic", criticising his "divisive language".
"The UK is an open, trading country that benefits from the skills and ideas of migrants," Mr Walker said. "We will not become more prosperous by closing our borders to talented individuals and entrepreneurs from across the world. This speech seems to be more about political positioning and less about what is good for the country."
Document FTCMA00020140306ea36002pb
