{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1891"}
____
  
Ministers urged to relax visa rules to help plug UK skills gap
By Brian Groom, Business and Employment Editor   
743 words
7 March 2014
00:26
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Britain's skills shortages will grow unless visa restrictions are eased for highly skilled workers, recruiters have warned.
Vacancies were close to a 15-year high in February, but the number of candidates available to fill them continued to fall, according to a monthly survey of 400 job agencies by the Recruitment and Employment Confederation and KPMG professional services.
Demand for permanent staff was strongest in engineering, construction and the medical and care sector.
"Recruiters are struggling to source the managerial and technical skills that employers require, and this will only get worse as the economy strengthens," said Kevin Green, REC chief executive.
He added: "Negative rhetoric on immigration from politicians fails to consider the immediate needs of British businesses. The government must address the restrictions on visas for highly skilled workers. This would allow businesses to access the people they need to grow and create jobs for more British workers."
The UK Commission for Employment and Skills gave warning recently that skills shortages threatened to hold back the pace of recovery in parts of the economy.
Faced with shortages, employers complain of delays and uncertainty in knowing whether they will be allowed to hire staff from outside the EU.
Mr Green said the "tier 1" route under the government's classification had been limited to investors and entrepreneurs, making it hard for companies to bring in engineers and IT staff. Post-study visas, under which students could stay on to work after gaining their qualification, had been removed, while "tier 2" - the work permit route - was long and costly.
He called for the "shortage occupation list", under which work permits can be fast-tracked in areas of skill shortage, to be widened to include more categories in technology and engineering.
The REC-KPMG survey also shows that starting salaries for permanent workers grew at their highest rate last month for more than six years - a potential indication that the near six-year squeeze on real wages may end later this year, as the Treasury and Office for Budget Responsibility have forecast.
Permanent staff appointments grew at their fastest pace for almost four years, with northern England seeing the strongest rise and London the weakest. However, hiring of temporary staff increased at the slowest pace for three months.
Surveys continue to point to strong hiring intentions, though job growth slowed down in the most recent official data from the Office for National Statistics.
Bernard Brown, a KPMG partner, said that while employers were looking to hire permanent staff, candidates were "less certain, preferring to stay put than advance their careers in a new environment".
Individuals' nervousness about job security might be misplaced, he added. "The simple fact is that employers wouldn't be competing to offer candidates ever-increasing salaries if they couldn't afford to sustain them."
Organisers of the government-backed National Apprenticeship Week said that more than 20,000 new apprenticeships had been pledged by employers this week, including 5,000 by Lloyds Banking Group, 2,000 each by Greene King and Whitbread and 1,000 each by EE, Mitchells & Butlers and Starbucks.
Almost half of the new apprenticeships were pledged by small and medium-sized enterprises.
. . .
Alexander calls for looser migrant rules
Britain will need looser immigration rules over the next decade to help plug a yawning employment gap in engineering and other high-skill sectors, according to Danny Alexander, writes George Parker.
The Liberal Democrat Treasury chief secretaryhas written to Theresa May, home secretary, saying that instead of clamping down on immigration, Britain needs to be even more welcoming to engineers, scientists and technology workers.
He cited a Royal Academy of Engineering report, which said Britain would need more than 800,000 such workers between 2012 and 2030, but that UK universities were projected to turn out only 32,000 engineering graduates a year.
The Home Office's cap on highly skilled migrants - so-called "tier 2" - is 20,700 a year, but James Brokenshire, immigration minister, said on Thursday that applications were running at only half that level.
Mr Alexander says the operation of the scheme - which sets a minimum salary threshold - deters PhD students from coming to Britain and others entering the sector.
He told Mrs May: "We should listen to our business leaders when they tell us that this route does not work for all.
Document FTCMA00020140307ea370005n
