{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1557"}
____
Business needs to take on the far right
By Michael Skapinker   
819 words
26 March 2014
16:29
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
An Austrian, a Jew, a writer, a humanist and a pacifist. That was how the author Stefan Zweig described himself. But he was, above all, a European, at ease wherever he travelled on the continent, part of a crowd in which nationalities and languages comfortably mingled.
Zweig wrote his searing memoir, The World of Yesterday, in exile from the Nazis, as Europe tore itself apart for the second time in less than half a century. His book is never more poignant than when he reflects on the gulf between his cosmopolitan life and the narrow national instincts of millions of others.
Zweig's European cultural milieu - he describes his meetings with WB Yeats, Rainer Maria Rilke and James Joyce - no longer has the intellectual weight and influence that it did.
But reading his book reminds me of another comfortable cross-border class - today's business people, who have the same ease with each other as Zweig had with his literary contemporaries. They meet and mix at conferences and meetings, their personal and professional preoccupations perfectly matched.
And just as in Zweig's day, there is a gulf between them and those who feel angry, left out and disconcerted by the ease with which others cross their borders. All over Europe, they are voting for parties that promise to reverse that.
France's National Front did well in Sunday's first round of municipal elections, and other anti-immigration, anti-EU parties are expected to outscore their traditional rivals in May's European polls.
Last week, the Financial Times invited one of those who is likely to up-end the old political order, Nigel Farage, UK Independence party leader, to address our Boldness in Business Awards dinner.
Some criticised the invitation. I welcomed the chance to see and hear, up close, someone with a growing role in political life.
Mr Farage ripped into the business class, although he did it carefully. He did not attack ordinary business people; he claims many are on his side. His target was "the voice of business", the high-ups who presume to speak on everyone else's behalf.
His message was: they have got everything wrong so far. They said the UK had to join the exchange rate mechanism. They said it had to join the euro. Why listen to them when they now say it will be a disaster for Britain to leave the EU?
He wasn't opposed to free trade. He wanted the UK to be able to conclude bilateral agreements. Nor was he anti-Europe. "My wife is a girl from Hamburg. Nobody needs to tell me about the danger of living in a German-dominated household," he joked, playing up to his image of the bloke down the pub.
The more Mr Farage talked, however, the less impressive he seemed. He did not mention immigration - the issue the polls say worries his supporters more than the EU. Perhaps he realised that his multinational, multiracial audience was in no mood to hear about it.
Some of his speech was ill-judged. When people asked him, he said, "wouldn't it be dreadful to be like Norway and Switzerland?", his answer was he would like the UK to be as rich as they were - a facile view to people who know there is more to Switzerland's and Norway's wealth than not being EU members.
Whatever he says, polls indicate UK business people want to stay in the EU. Some argue this does not matter. Mr Farage's voters are not interested in detail. But I think he will find deeper scrutiny hard going. He will be grilled on his views, including his claim to be, unlike, his opponents, an ordinary guy. (He is, in fact, the privately educated son of a stockbroker.) If he ever wins a share of power, at any level, I suspect he will be horribly exposed.
The same is true of far-right parties throughout Europe. Several are far nastier than Ukip, which does not have a fascist tradition, but they all need to be challenged.
Voters need to be asked how dependent their jobs are on cross-border European trade. Do they realise how difficult it would be to keep those jobs if every European country looked out for itself? If they are among the many who don't have work, wouldn't they like to hold on to the opportunity to move elsewhere in the EU? Do Brits want to give up the chance of retiring to Spain?
In 1942, Zweig, having fled to Brazil, killed himself. The Europe he had loved had gone. Europe today has robust democratic institutions and the EU, for all its blunders, has been central to maintaining those. Business needs to take advantage of that - and get out and campaign.
michael.skapinker@ft.comTwitter: @Skapinker
Document FTCMA00020140326ea3q003ea
