{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1556"}
____
Merkel considers restrictions on unemployed EU migrants
By Stefan Wagstyl in Berlin   
558 words
26 March 2014
18:10
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Chancellor Angela Merkel's government is considering limiting the right of unemployed migrants from other EU states to remain in Germany and tightening access to welfare benefits under plans that echo the crackdown proposed last year by British prime minister David Cameron.
Berlin's proposals could give fresh impetus to Mr Cameron's hopes of securing EU-wide support for tougher rules on intra-EU immigration and welfare abuse, with Austria, Belgium and the Netherlands also having expressed concerns.
However, the German plans, set out in an interim government report published on Wednesday, are accompanied by a staunch defence of EU rights to freedom of movement and the economic advantages of immigration, so the scope for a genuine rapprochement between Berlin and London on one of the thorniest issues in EU politics may be limited.
"This [report] should not be understood as an assault on the freedom of movement, which is one of the fundamental EU rights," said Steffen Seibert, Ms Merkel's spokesman.
Thomas de Maizière, the interior minister, said problems of welfare abuse were "manageable at a national level but of concern regionally", referring to the concentrations of poor jobless immigrants in big cities, notably in the depressed Ruhr region.
The report was commissioned by Ms Merkel in January amid mounting public concern about immigration from Romania and Bulgaria, where EU restrictions on migration rights were lifted at the start of 2014. Ms Merkel was responding to a populist campaign from the conservative CSU party, a junior ally of her CDU, calling for action on benefit fraud.
The report, which will be finalised in June, proposes that migrants abusing freedom of movement should not be allowed to return to Germany for a set period, which is yet to be defined. Meanwhile, jobless migrants seeking work should be given a limited period to find a job before being required to leave.
It also proposes tightening job market regulations to make sure that people who claim to be self-employed are actually working and not simply registering in order to access benefits. They also want to crack down on immigrant claims to child benefit, which is freely available to migrants upon arrival in Germany.
The report says no restrictions are placed on an EU citizen's right to look for work in other EU states. But "after a set time the question arises whether the job hunt can have the prospect of success".
The proposed clampdown will be accompanied by a financial boost to cities, with an extra €200m allocated over the next seven years for areas particularly affected by high inflows of poor migrants, including Romanians and Bulgarians.
The Association of Cities, a lobby group, welcomed the news. Its president, Ulrich Maly, said: "It's very welcome that the government is now taking the subject markedly more seriously than a year ago."
Immigration to Germany from the EU's new member states has soared in the past decade from 173,000 in 2004, the year of EU enlargement, to 280,000 in 2012. This contributed to an overall net increase in immigration of 370,000 in 2012, the highest level since 1995, driven largely by the job opportunities created by strong economic growth at a time of stagnation in much of eastern and southern Europe.
Document FTCMA00020140326ea3q003s8
