{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"627"}
____
  
Political risk on agenda in UK boardrooms
By Brian Groom, Business and Employment Editor   
579 words
9 March 2014
14:21
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Political risk is shooting up the agenda in Britain's boardrooms. On issues from energy prices to the immigration debate, to the referendums on Scottish independence and EU membership, business leaders feel under pressure.
"Politicians of all persuasions are swinging about," said a FTSE 100 chief executive. "All they want to do is create something for the moment, but where will that leave us in 10 to 15 years' time?"
In interviews with the Financial Times, big company bosses expressed anxiety that the febrile climate 14 months off a general election could drive investors away.
Much of their concern is focused on Ed Miliband, the Labour party leader, who has set himself up as champion of the "little guy" in pledging to freeze energy bills and criticising banks, housebuilders. insurance companies, betting groups and pension providers.
"I do feel that the prospect of Miliband gaining power on the basis of what he is saying is a dangerous thing, and very negative," said a leading FTSE chairman, though he added: "It is so difficult to know whether the rhetoric is reality."
Many are sore, too, about Labour's plan raise the top income tax rate from 45p to 50p. The party is heading towards the election with little big business support, though it has a better chance with smaller companies.
However, "political risk is not all on the Labour side", said a FTSE 100 chief in the finance sector. He criticised the coalition for a "debacle" over airport development, "terrible" inconsistency on energy subsidies and a "complete failure to deal with planning".
Others fear the Conservatives' immigration controls will hold back recovery by restricting the employment of people from outside the EU to meet skills shortages. Some are nervous about Prime Minister David Cameron's plan for an EU membership referendum by 2017 - "an unnecessary risk", said one foreign investor.
A Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition is seen by some bosses as worse for them than a Labour government. "It could have a compounding effect," reinforcing anti-business tendencies on both sides, said a chief executive.
Another said that even if Nick Clegg, the right-leaning leader, and Treasury chief secretary Danny Alexander remained at the top of the party, "they would not be in the ascendancy in a Lab-Lib coalition. It would be the Vince Cable-Simon Hughes faction."
One chairman worried about a coalition led by Mr Miliband and Mr Cable, saying the Lib Dem business secretary was "much more dangerous [than Mr Miliband]. He would want to do lots of the 'stop the rich' stuff, such as levying a mansion tax."
Many agree business has helped bring the hostile climate on itself. "Business has to think deeply about its role in society," said a FTSE boss in financial services. "A lot of companies have ignored the consumer."
Executives are trying to assess what a Labour victory would mean. Housebuilders say that since Mr Miliband's broadside against them for "hoarding" land, "the tone has been a lot less confrontational", in meetings with Labour's housing policy team.
Some FTSE bosses think, even if Mr Miliband lives up to his rhetoric, the markets will rein him in. "One thing that has changed since the 1970s is the global markets' speed of reaction," said a chairman. "In France, President Hollande has had to change course more rapidly than Mitterrand did."
Additional reporting by Andy Sharman
Document FTCOM00020140309ea39001b9
