{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"65"}
____
  
Tory group attacks immigration cap
By Elizabeth Rigby, Deputy Political Editor   
610 words
25 March 2014
15:46
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The Conservatives' immigration cap and hostile rhetoric towards migrants is threatening Britain's future as a trading nation and alienating minority voters from the party, a leading Tory backbencher has warned.
Mark Field, launching a new moderate Conservative group on immigration, urged the prime minister on Tuesday to stop trying to "out-Ukip Ukip" as he called for a "sensible, rational, planned policy" on immigration.
"We must move on from the Dutch auction that takes place at election time over immigration. It serves none of us well as politicians, and is certainly not in the interests of our nation as a whole," said Mr Field, MP for the Cities of London and Westminster.
Mr Field, launching the moderate Conservatives for Managed Migration group, also urged his party to drop its pledge to limit net migration to the tens of thousands, arguing that the Tory cap was both impractical and undeliverable.
"We should acknowledge that there is a fundamental problem with having a net migration policy that targets headline numbers alone. Few voters believe we can deliver it. Few businesses regard it as practical. It risks sending the wrong signals about our openness to the world," said Mr Field.
The government is set to miss its net migration target by the next election after official figures released at the time of last week's Budget showed the Treasury expected net migration to run at 150,000 next year. Meanwhile, official figures released last month showed a net flow of 212,000 migrants to Britain in the 12 months to the end of September.
Mr Field also warned his leadership that the party's hardline stance on immigration threatened to put more pressure on a Tory weak spot: ethnic minority voters. Seven out of 10 votes from these communities are for Labour regardless of income or class, according to the Runnymede Trust.
"There are many minority and migrant communities who are bursting with the sort of entrepreneurial vision and family commitment that should make them natural Conservatives - but they are hardly going to embrace our party if we rarely seem to embrace them."
His plea to be more welcoming to migrants echoes sentiments voiced by Vince Cable, the pro-immigration business secretary, who earlier this month urged political colleagues to "stop treating people coming to work here as if they are a problem". Mr Cable said the free movement of people enabled businesses to plug skills gaps and brings money into the economy.
Migration has become a politically toxic flashpoint in British politics in recent months, particularly since work restrictions on Romanians and Bulgarians were lifted on January 1.
But Mr Field said the Tories must "avoid hysterical reactions" and resist being dragged on to Ukip turf over immigration. The party is bracing itself for a drubbing in the May local and European elections on the back of a surge in popularity for Nigel Farage's anti-immigration and anti-Europe party.
"We need a more calm debate about this. We are not going to be able to out-Ukip Ukip. I have a lot of respect for Nigel Farage but his view is even if it affects economic growth we should close the drawbridge. I don't think it is sensible to try and pursue that particular line of argument. We are a global trading nation and we need to encourage the fit, the brightest and the best," said Mr Field.
The Conservatives for Managed Migration group represents a minority voice within the party, with barely a dozen politicians in contrast with the scores of vociferously anti-immigration Tory MPs.
Document FTCMA00020140325ea3p00335
