{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2850"}
____
  
To fix Europe, Cameron must do business with his rivals
By Hugo Dixon   
1,099 words
28 March 2014
18:51
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Once the sound and fury of the campaign for the European parliamentary election is behind us, the Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat parties should work together to reform the EU. There will then be a short window before the next general election to set the EU's direction for the following five years. The UK's best chance of securing changes that are in its interest requires the country's three established parties to work together.
The campaign itself is likely to give a shock to the incumbent groups if this week's debate on the "in-out question" between Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence party, and Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem leader, is anything to go by. Mr Farage scored points with his simple anti-immigration message and his call for the British people to be given an immediate say on whether to stay in the EU.
Some Tory backbenchers, as well as Rupert Murdoch, the eurosceptic media mogul, are already calling for the Conservatives to forge an anti-EU pact with Ukip to secure victory in next year's general election. Once this May's European election results are counted - especially if, as seems likely, Ukip does well and the Tories do badly - that pressure will probably mount.
The prime minister himself will prefer to stick with his current plan to renegotiate Britain's relationship with the EU and put the results to a referendum in 2017 - assuming he is re-elected in 2015. The best way for Mr Cameron to advance his agenda is to make common cause with the Lib Dems and Labour.
Of course, Mr Clegg and Ed Miliband, Labour leader, will not agree with Mr Cameron on holding an in-out referendum. They do not want such a vote unless there is a new treaty that involves a transfer of power from Britain to the EU. That is not on the horizon despite a push this week by Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany's finance minister - in concert with UK chancellor George Osborne - for a new treaty to reinforce integration within the eurozone.
But there is substantial agreement between the three British party leaders on how the EU needs to be reformed: principally to make it more competitive and less centralised. This is particularly so now that Mr Cameron is no longer flirting with the idea of securing a series of unilateral opt-outs from chunks of EU law for Britain. Such a goal, much loved by some of his eurosceptic backbenchers, is impractical.
Admittedly, Mr Cameron's reform wishlist is still vague. But the main elements are a drive to complete the single market, more free trade deals, less red tape, less "welfare tourism" and extra powers for national parliaments to block EU laws.
There are three important things about this agenda. First, these are mostly reforms that would benefit the whole EU, not just Britain. As such, they may be politically achievable.
Second, with the exception of welfare tourism (a vanishingly small economic problem) and extra powers to national parliaments, all these changes would make a big impact on the competitiveness of Europe and the UK.
Completing the single market - which is patchy in services where Britain excels - could boost UK national income by 7 per cent, according to the government. Trade deals with the US and Japan could increase the bloc's gross domestic product by 1.3 per cent. There is only one big worthwhile reform missing from the list: the creation of a modern financial system based more on capital markets than banks, needed because the banking system is deleveraging and so will be unable on its own to finance growth.
Third, the prime minister's wishlist is not a million miles from the one outlined this month by Mr Miliband in the Financial Times. He, too, wrote of the need to improve competitiveness and complete the single market. The one thing the Labour leader mentioned that was not on Mr Cameron's agenda was the need to tackle youth unemployment - and it is hard to see the prime minister objecting to that.
Why, though, should Mr Cameron care about what Mr Miliband and Mr Clegg think? Can he not just wait until the general election of May 2015, and then sit down with Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, to redraft the EU's treaties to meet Britain's demands?
There are several things wrong with this line of thinking. For a start, Mr Cameron is unlikely to win an overall majority next year. If he remains prime minister at all, it may be in a coalition. Even then, it is not certain that all the other 27 governments will agree to reopen the EU treaties. In any case, it is wrong to think that reform requires treaty change. A huge amount, including everything on the competitiveness agenda outlined above, can be achieved without a new treaty.
Most important, if Mr Cameron waits until mid-2015, he may miss the boat. This is because his best chance to push reform will come in the second half of this year, in the wake of the European elections. In that six-month period, Europe's leaders will select the new leadership of the European Commission in consultation with the European parliament and agree the EU's priorities for the following five years.
The UK should aim to push competitiveness to the top of the agenda and secure for a dynamic Britain the job of driving the single market and the modernisation of the financial system.
That is why the three main parties should work together. Mr Cameron clearly needs Mr Clegg if he is going to get things moving in the second half of this year because they are in coalition. He also needs Mr Miliband because the Labour leader will probably control one of the biggest blocs in the increasingly powerful European parliament.
By joining forces after the European elections, the three leaders will stand a good chance of pushing a common reform agenda. They can still fight each other in the 2015 general election over the issue of whether to have an in-out referendum in 2017. But they should, at least, be able to agree that the best chance of winning any plebiscite against Mr Farage will be if the EU is really changing for the better - and that means acting fast.The writer is author of 'The In/Out Question: Why Britain Should Stay in the EU and Fight to Make it Better'
Document FTCMA00020140328ea3s004ph
