{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2263"}
____
  
Nigel Farage claims long-term following for Ukip
By Kiran Stacey   
468 words
21 May 2014
09:32
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The UK Independence party will not collapse as it has done after previous European elections, Nigel Farage has claimed, as the party leader head into the last day of campaigning before tomorrow's vote.
Ukip is predicted by most pollsters to come first in the European election, but Mr Farage told the BBC on Wednesday that he would not repeat his failures of 2004 and 2009, when the party followed up success in the vote for MEPs with a slump in the following year's general election.
He Ukip leader told the Today radio programme: "We did have a disappointing general election last time around. But something has changed. The polling over the last week shows that of those who intend to vote for us tomorrow, 60 per cent of those intend to vote for us at the general election too."
Mr Farage insisted his campaign, which descended into farce on Tuesday as a carnival-themed rally in Croydon, south London fell apart amid protests against the party's stance on race and immigration, had not been badly organised. "We were the only party that had actually reached the voters before the postal votes arrived," he said.
The "carnival rally" added to a difficult final week of campaigning for the party leader, who apologised earlier in the week after an awkward interview on LBC radio in which he was accused of being racist towards Romanian immigrants.
Ukip's aggressive stance on race and immigration has won the party new supporters, however, including from those on the left and people who have not voted for years. Mr Farage told the BBC: "The majority of our voters are not Conservative voters. We are picking up big lumps of Labour support. Turnouts tomorrow will be the highest we've ever seen for a European election."
The final European opinion polls by TNS, Opinium and Survation all show Ukip ahead of Labour by between 2 and 5 percentage points. Meanwhile, the Guardian reported on Wednesday that internal polling by Labour and the Conservatives show attacks on Mr Farage for being racist have only helped cement his reputation among voters as the anti-establishment candidate.
Mr Farage will continue to target disaffected Labour voters over the next year, and he told the BBC that his main priority is to force Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, to change his party's opposition to holding a referendum on Britain's membership of the EU.
If that happens, the Ukip leader said, he would be willing to sign a parliamentary pact with Labour following next year's election. "I would do a deal post the next election with anyone," he said. "I would do a deal with the devil if it got us a referendum."
Document FTCMA00020140521ea5l0018h
