{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"556"}
____
  
Net migration cuts would have 'negative effects' on UK economy
By Sarah O'Connor, Economics Correspondent   
523 words
8 April 2014
00:00
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The government's plan to cut net migration will damage Britain's economy, weaken the public finances and reduce people's take-home pay, according to research to be presented on Tuesday.
The paper, which will be presented at the Royal Economic Society's annual conference in Manchester, concludes there would be "strong negative effects on the economy" if the government achieved its target to cut annual net migration to the "tens of thousands".
The research, funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, is likely to fuel the UK's heated political debate about the costs and benefits of immigration.
The Conservative party has taken an increasingly tough stance on the issue, which pollsters see as an attempt to counter the danger posed by Nigel Farage's populist UK Independence party ahead of May's European and local elections.
Researchers modelled two potential scenarios: one where net migration remained at its current level of around 200,000 per year for the next 50 years and one where it fell to about half that level, in line with the Conservative party's target.
By 2060, the level of gross domestic product in the "low migration" scenario was 11 per cent lower than in the "baseline" scenario, the researchers said. GDP per person was 2.7 per cent lower.
The authors said lower net migration would also lead to an older population (since immigrants tend to be younger) which would require higher government spending on pensions and healthcare.
This echoes the position of the Office for Budget Responsibility, the official fiscal watchdog, whose models show lower net migration would weaken the long-term public finances.
The new report said fewer working-age people would mean taxes on labour would have to rise by 2.2 percentage points to balance the budget. The impact of these higher taxes on take-home pay would more than cancel out the slight increase in gross wages that would result from less competition for jobs.
As a result, average net wages would be 3.3 per cent lower in 2060 than in the baseline scenario.
"We conclude that this policy has weak justification on purely economic grounds," the authors wrote. "Given the socioeconomic profile of the immigrants to the UK, it is likely that the native population would be made worse-off in a simple cost-benefit assessment."
Conservative ministers in the Home Office have tightened immigration rules for incoming workers, students and those joining family members in the UK, in a bid to meet their target to cut net migration to less than 100,000 by 2015.
But after some early progress, net migration has risen by a third to 212,000 in the year to September 2013.
While the new restrictions have caused a significant decline in the number of students coming to study in Britain from outside the EU, this has been partly offset in the net figure by a flood of economic migrants from crisis-hit southern European states including Spain, Portugal and Greece.
Additional reporting by Helen Warrell
Document FTCOM00020140407ea470060s
