{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3219"}
____
  
Student visa concerns seem unfounded
372 words
9 April 2014
22:56
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCOM
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
From James Brokenshire MP.
Sir, Your editorial on the "threat" posed to universities by our immigration system (April 8) is well wide of the mark. The visa stats show a 7 per cent increase in applications from university students, with our world-leading Russell Group seeing an 11 per cent rise. This clearly shows that we are continuing to attract the brightest and the best students to the UK.
The student visa system we inherited was shambolic and open to widespread abuse. Many of those coming to the UK on student visas were not coming to study at all, but were, instead, seeking backdoor entry to the UK job market. We have taken steps to end the abuse of the student visa route that led to unskilled migrants coming to the UK to work rather than study, and bogus colleges to sell visas rather than an education.
You highlight falls in student applications from India and Pakistan as evidence that the visa system is working against the interests of the university sector. But you fail to mention the rise in applications from Malaysia and China or to report that US and Australian universities have also seen falls from the subcontinent over the past five years. You also made the sweeping claim that "nearly all such students return home voluntarily", but without any evidence to support it. In fact, Home Office research has found that of all students who arrived in the UK in 2007, 20 per cent had settled in the UK five years later.
You suggest that there is a target for student numbers within our overall aim of reducing net migration to the UK to the tens of thousands. This is untrue. There is no limit to the number of genuine students who can come to the UK.
All we ask of prospective international students is that they have financial support, the ability to speak English and the commitment to attend the course for which they register. The British public would expect no less than these basic requests for the right to study in what you rightly describe as the success story of this country's university system.
James Brokenshire, Minister for Immigration and Security
Document FTCOM00020140409ea49005se
