{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"471"}
____
  
The betrayal theory of immigration
By Robert Shrimsley   
792 words
12 March 2014
19:02
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
"Do you or have you ever employed a foreigner? The witness will answer the question. Where was your nanny born? Does someone from eastern Europe come in to iron your shirts?
"Do not snigger, sir. People like you are the enemy within, and the conspiracy goes right to the top. I have in my hand a list of 57 known foreigners working for members of our own government. I can prove that the deputy prime minister not only married a Spaniard but actually employs a Belgian in his own house. The prime minister had a Nepalese nanny, the home secretary's cleaner was born in Brazil and I have it on good authority - from the man himself - that 'a Portuguese lady' comes in to tidy the home of the chief secretary to the Treasury."
Well, OK. That's not exactly how things started. This is Britain, after all. So it began in a low-key speech to a political think-tank by James Brokenshire, the new immigration minister. But if his location was understated, his rhetoric was not. Where predecessors have simply seen a problem, he saw a conspiracy; a plot by the "wealthy metropolitan elite" to find cheap labour and deny jobs to British tradesmen.
This "stab in the back" theory was a new departure for a government minister; a man from a party with its fair share of the wealthy, the elite and even - horror - the metropolitan.
To be fair to Mr Brokenshire - and that is not a phrase you will hear too often - he did not attack any individuals. But his speech drew a rash of questions for cabinet members about their employment practices and, awkwardly, it turns out rather a lot of his colleagues are in on the conspiracy.
The speech was mainly driven by a desire to blunt the electoral threat from the anti-immigration UK Independence party. But it drew on an increasingly popular and populist strategy of rightwing groups from the US to Europe. This appeals to disgruntled lower-income voters by depicting rivals not merely as opponents but as betrayers - an alien, abroad-loving elite selling out their compatriots. An enemy within.
This sort of thinking leads in only one direction.
Transcript of the parliamentary committee on Un-Anglo-Saxon Activities
Order, this hearing will come to order. Now, then: you are, are you not, a member of the metropolitan elite? Elite - sounds a bit like effete doesn't it? I'll just leave that thought there. You don't know. Well, let me help you. Did you go to university? Do you ski? Have you ever watched a documentary on BBC4, even if it clashed with The Only Way is Essex?
We know where your sympathies lie, sir. We have witnesses who will swear that you patronise an Italian delicatessen in Highbury and that you can tell the difference between Parmesan and Grana Padano cheese.
Do you deny, under oath, that you are partial to panettone? Let the record show the witness's affection for poncey European food. Will you not admit that you sometimes wish your country had more of a Parisien café culture? Have you ever had a drink with the offspring of anyone the Daily Mail says hated Britain?
So when did you first decide to sell out your fellow British worker by hiring foreign labour? The witness will answer the question: do you deny placing an advert on Gumtree in the hope of finding an Australian nanny? Last summer, did you not hire two men to redecorate your bedrooms? Did you ever hear them speaking Czech? You say they worked harder and were more reliable: how is that relevant?
I put it to you that you regularly drop in for a pint at the Old Bull in the high street. Have you ever been served by its Latvian barmaid? Don't dodge the question; we also have information linking you to a branch of Pret A Manger, a known hang-out for Spanish and Italian staff. Would you have us believe you were unaware your rocket and crayfish sandwich was prepared by Catalan hands? It is not too late. Admit your crimes. Name your fellow conspirators; get a British builder - so what if it takes a bit longer? - and start again with a clean slate.
Political migrant
Incidentally, the fabulously named Mr Brokenshire is himself something of an economic migrant. Having lost his constituency in boundary changes, he travelled through several other constituencies, from Essex and Lincolnshire to Cambridgeshire and Kent, in search of employment before finally building a new life for himself on the other side of London.
robert.shrimsley@ft.com
Twitter:@robertshrimsley https://twitter.com/robertshrimsley
Document FTCMA00020140312ea3c004h6
