{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3657"}
____
  
Angry voters turn to anti-politics of Nigel Farage
By Jim Pickard, Chief Political Correspondent   
1,106 words
22 May 2014
23:18
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Nigel Farage has the demeanour and sartorial swagger of an old-fashioned City gent. Pin-striped and expensively educated, he could hardly look more establishment if he tried.
Yet polls suggest it was to the UK Independence party leader that British voters turned in their millions on Thursday in a collective howl of anger against what is increasingly seen as a remote, self-serving political elite.
The extent of that disillusion will be discovered when the results of the European elections are announced on Sunday night.
Mr Farage, like Italian populist leader Beppe Grillo, has caught the imagination of millions of voters who believe mainstream politicians no longer understand, act or talk like "ordinary" people.
One survey by the Hansard Society think-tank found that two-thirds of people believe politicians do not understand "the daily lives of people like me".
That reflects the rise of "professional" politicians who speak in soundbites and who spend most of their adult life working in think-tanks or as special advisers before entering parliament: including David Cameron, George Osborne, Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband.
The Smith Institute think-tank has found that 34 per cent of MPs went to private schools: five times the national average. Only 4 per cent have had manual jobs. The 2009 scandal over MPs' abuses of parliamentary expenses reinforced a widespread impression that many politicians were at Westminster to feather their own nests rather than to represent the people.
"One major reason that Nigel Farage connects with people is that he uses their language, speaks like them about issues they care about despite his background," says Katherine Peacock, managing director of pollsters ComRes.
The rise of Ukip has been mirrored by the breakdown of class-based politics and the decline of Labour and the Conservatives.
In 1951 Labour and the Conservatives together shared 95 per cent of the vote. By 2010 they had just 65 per cent. Younger voters are now much less likely to have an emotional loyalty to any political party. Only 23 per cent of 18 to 24-year-olds are a "fairly strong" supporter of a party.
The Liberal Democrats, who used to benefit from the "anti-establishment vote" and won almost a quarter of all votes in 2010, joined the coalition government and are now seen as part of the establishment: Ukip has filled the void.
Disillusionment with politics has manifested itself through falling party engagement and voting turnouts. Only 41 per cent of the public are "certain" to vote in the next Westminster election, according to a survey by the Hansard Society.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>Few people bother to join a political group. "Party membership in Britain is now about 1 per cent, and half of them are inactive," says Tim Bale, professor of politics at Queen Mary, University of London.
Perhaps ironically, the rise of the "anti-politics" Ukip may have motivated some disgruntled people to vote for the first time in years.
As living standards have fallen since the credit crunch, the anti-Brussels party has linked unemployment and low wages to immigration from eastern Europe.
For many voters that is a more convincing narrative than Labour's "cost of living" argument.
Professor Bale cautions that British voters are not hugely apathetic on an international scale. Voting levels are lower than Scandinavia but higher than the US and Switzerland.
There is still political engagement but it is more likely to be through people signing online petitions or protesting against a local development than, for example, electing police and crime commissioners: an event that saw risibly low turnout in 2012.
Some disillusionment has been triggered by the relative political consensus that characterised the first years of the 2000s under Tony Blair, when all three main parties converged on a centre ground which promoted the benefits of immigration and a multiracial Britain: Mr Farage has shaken that consensus.
Russell Brand, the comedian, has advised people not to vote. "I fervently believe that we deserve more from our democratic system than the few derisory tit-bits tossed from the carousel of the mighty, when they hop a few inches left or right," he said.
. . . or just don't vote
The question for many Britons disenchanted with mainstream politicians was whether to vote for Ukip in Thursday's elections - or simply not turn up at all, write Kiran Stacey and Jim Pickard.
Matthew Price, from south Wales, said: "I'd probably vote for Ukip, because neither Labour nor the Conservatives care about south Wales."
Mr Price represents the Labour party's true fear for these elections: that a surge in support for Ukip has come not just at the expense of the Conservatives but in increasing numbers from Labour too.
Labour won the same number of seats as Ukip in the last European Parliament elections in 2009, though the anti-EU party attracted slightly more votes. The Conservatives came first, though they are expected to fall to third place this time.
Voters in deprived areas who used to be dependable Labour supporters are being attracted by Nigel Farage and his populist message.
<>John Gilbert, an unemployed mechanic in Sunderland, said he was likely to vote Uki. "People around here are just fed up, we've had it up to here with Labour and their failure to deliver," he said.
For other voters, their disgust at the British political classes simply meant they were planning to stay at home.
Turnout in the last European Parliament election was only 34 per cent and rainy weather on Thursday across most of the UK was unlikely to encourage voters.
Angela Smith, a 50-year-old butcher's cashier from Hackney, said she was not voting for any party "because I think they're all rubbish. They're all the same. They're not going to do anything for us".
A former Labour supporter, Ms Smith said had she voted for anyone, it would have been for Ukip because of its immigration policy.
"People coming into the shop are all complaining about the same thing - housing, social security, school places, people losing their jobs . . . But I won't vote for Ukip, because if I start doing that I may as well vote for the BNP and I just can't do that."
Rob Hayward, a local elections expert, said early indications suggested turnout was low but, if true, that might boost Ukip.
He said: "Older people are more likely to vote, and vote Ukip."
Document FTCMA00020140522ea5m005v5
