{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"214"}
____
  
RBS makes preparations for Citizens' exit
By Martin Arnold and Camilla Hall   
1,471 words
13 May 2014
19:04
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Royal Bank of Scotland has spent more than 25 years building Citizens Financial Group into the 13th-largest retail bank holding company in the US by assets through a string of acquisitions.
Now the UK government-controlled lender has two-and-a-half years to decide how to dispose of it. With little sign of serious interest from potential bidders, including the Canadian and Japanese banks that have expressed an interest, RBS late on Monday filed for an initial public offering.
Under the terms of its 2008 government bailout, the European Union has given RBS until the end of 2016 to sell Citizens, with a 12-month extension available if markets are unfavourable. It is expected to float a 20-25 per cent stake in the fourth quarter.
If Citizens' IPO totals at least $2.6bn, it would be the biggest listing of a US bank since before the financial crisis, according to data from Dealogic. Ally Financial, the US auto lender, sold $2.56bn of shares in April.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
< >Most analysts, however, are convinced that RBS would prefer an outright sale of the Providence-based retail and commercial lender it acquired in 1988, which has 1,370 branches and 18,600 staff.
RBS has attracted interest from Japan's Sumitomo Mitsui as well as Canada's TD Bank. While talks continue with Sumitomo, TD Bank's interest is said to have faltered over price.
A quick, clean exit would allow RBS to shed Citizens' $100bn of risk-weighted assets overnight and boost its common equity tier one capital ratio of 9.4 per cent, which trails most rivals. But there are several reasons why a takeover seems unlikely.
< >Its IPO filing did not include a valuation, but analysts reckon Citizens is worth anywhere between its $13bn tangible book value and a 30 per cent premium to book value, or about $17bn. "I'm assuming it gets away at book value, and that is probably being generous," says Ian Gordon, banking analyst at Investec in London.
The regulatory environment for big financial acquisitions has toughened since the financial crisis, with worries over "too big to fail" institutions stymieing deal activity. "It's just a daunting challenge," says one financial institutions banker.
Even at book value, Citizens would be one of the biggest banking takeovers since the financial crisis. Analysts say it is too big for small regional banks to attempt to buy and the biggest US lenders, such as Wells Fargo and JPMorgan Chase, would be prevented from doing so by the 10 per cent cap on national deposits.
Citizens - unlike its UK parent - is very well capitalised with a common equity tier one ratio of 13.5 per cent, well above most US rivals. It aims to return excess cash to its UK parent and started last year with a $1.2bn dividend, of which $1bn was paid in subordinated debt rather than cash.
This capital-reduction plan is a vital part of the US bank's strategy for boosting its return on tangible equity, which lags well behind rivals at less than 5 per cent. However, one problem is that Citizens was one of the banks that failed the US Federal Reserve's stress tests this year on a "qualitative basis".
People close to the bank say the Fed will allow Citizens to repeat last year's dividend plan. But it warns in its IPO filing that because of regulatory scrutiny of its capital, it "may not able to consummate the capital initiatives".
One of the biggest hurdles for the underwriters on its IPO - Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan - is to convince investors that Citizens is a bank worth owning, because of its weak performance. Including a $4.4bn goodwill writedown, Citizens made a $3.4bn net loss last year.
Its cost-income ratio - a measure of its efficiency - was above most rivals at almost 70 per cent. But its net interest margin - the difference between the interest it earns from loans and what it pays on deposits - was below most rivals at 2.85 per cent.
"As the competition for loan growth heats up, the smaller banks are probably at a disadvantage because they don't have the scale and diversity that the larger banks do," says Jennifer Thompson, an analyst at Portales Partners in New York.
Furthermore, banks that fail the Fed's stress tests are likely to face additional costs to meet the demands of the US central bank. The merger of M&T Bank and Hudson City Bancorp, two US regional lenders, has been on hold since 2012 after US regulators objected to M&T's anti-money laundering processes.
One US private equity executive, who has run the ruler over Citizens, says: "It is a roll-up of mediocre banks in a lot of mediocre markets."
An added incentive to seek an outright sale is that Bruce van Saun, who took over as chief executive of Citizens in October 2013, could receive a payout of more than $12m if the business was sold rather than floated.
Additional reporting by Nicole Bullock and Arash Massoudi
Citizens: the history of a New England bank
When Royal Bank of Scotland acquired Citizens Financial in 1988 the Edinburgh-based bank hailed it as "the flagship for the company's expansion in the US". Now RBS's decision to launch an initial public offering of Citizens' shares symbolises the Edinburgh-based bank's need to retrench in a very different economic and political climate, writes Sarah Neville in London.
● The bank began life back in 1828 in Providence, Rhode Island, at the time a pre-eminent industrial centre and seaport, and in 1871 established its own savings bank, Citizens Savings Bank.
● The Great Depression of the 1930s hit New England hard but the bank's losses were relatively modest compared with some rivals.
● By the 1940s, Citizens Savings Bank had gained a controlling interest in its founder, High Street Bank, and in 1948 it changed its name to Citizens Trust Company. It continued to grow in the decades that followed and by 1981 Citizens had 29 branches statewide.
● Seeking an international partner, Citizens became a wholly owned subsidiary of Royal Bank of Scotland group in 1988. It has since undergone a big growth spurt with 30 acquisitions between 1988 and 2007.
● In the 21st century the bank has completed an evolution from the fifth-largest bank in the smallest state in the US to its position today as one of the 15 largest commercial banking companies in the country.
Profile: Fish, the man who built Citizens
He may have retired five years ago, but if a single figure epitomises Citizens Financial's growth into a substantial player on the US banking scene it is Lawrence "Larry" Fish, writes Sarah Neville in London.
In 1988, Mr Fish was its hard-charging chief executive officer when RBS decided to swoop, after identifying Citizens as the bridgehead that would take it into the American market.
Within four years he had become chairman, leading from the front as the bank went on a buying spree, swallowing smaller rivals.
By 2005, Mr Fish had established himself as a key lieutenant of Fred Goodwin, RBS's later-disgraced chief executive, who picked him to help restructure RBS's American businesses into a single unit.
When Mr Fish stepped down in 2009, controversy swirled over the size of his annual pension - at around £1.4m, it was twice that originally accorded to Mr Goodwin.
His annual pay also left the RBS chief executive's in the shade: in 2006, it stood at £6.59m, compared with the £3.99m netted by Mr Goodwin.
Educated at Drake University, from where he graduated in 1966, Mr Fish received an MBA from the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration in 1968. He was awarded Harvard's prestigious Frank Knox Fellowship, which included graduate study at the London School of Economics and travel in India.
In retirement he continues to pursue philanthropic interests in immigration and urban poverty, volunteering at inner-city organisations in Boston and Providence, Rhode Island, where Citizens was founded.
Together with his Japanese-born wife, Atsuko Toko Fish, he established the Fish Family Foundation to support organisations focusing on low-income working families, with a particular focus on immigrants and women.
He has been a prominent backer of US president Barack Obama, and in 2012 spoke out against advertisements - by either side - that employed "character assassination or negative campaigning".
Mr Fish has received honorary doctorate degrees from Providence College, Bryant University, Roger Williams University, Johnson & Wales University and the University of Massachusetts.
Document FTCMA00020140513ea5d004mr
