{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3466"}
____
  
Gordon Brown to warn of Scottish pensions 'time-bomb'
By Mure Dickie in Edinburgh   
576 words
22 April 2014
11:11
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Gordon Brown, the former UK prime minister, is warning that Scotland faces a pensions "time-bomb" if it votes for independence in September, because it will have to shoulder alone the cost of a rapidly rising pension bill that would otherwise be borne by the rest of the UK.
Mr Brown's intervention on pensions comes in his first speech under the umbrella of the cross-party Better Together campaign against independence, which has drawn fire amid a marked narrowing of its opinion poll lead.
Better Together strategists say worries over pensions are a big weakness in the Scottish National party's economic case for independence. Mr Brown will quote data from the Department for Work and Pensions that he says shows how Scottish pensioners receive a disproportionately large share of UK pension benefits.
The former UK chancellor says the data shows it costs the UK £1,725 per head of the population for all pensioner benefits, but Scotland receives £1,805 per head - an advantage of £80 per person that will rise to £120 over the next two decades.
"It is clear that pensioners are better protected when the risks are spread across the UK and it is also clear that in the year the SNP want independence the Scots pension bill alone is three times the income from oil revenues," Mr Brown said in a press release ahead of a speech he will give in Glasgow on Tuesday afternoon.
The SNP dismissed Mr Brown's intervention as scaremongering from a former UK leader with an "abysmal track record" on pensions.
"Far from relaunching as a positive campaign this contribution is negative, repetitive and lacks any credibility," said Eilidh Whiteford, SNP Work and Pensions spokesperson.
Nationalist campaigners argue that independence would help Scotland shoulder its pensions burden by promoting faster economic growth and by opening the way for higher immigration than would otherwise be possible as part of the UK.
Mr Brown sees the pensions bill rising as Scottish pensioner numbers rise by 300,000 and Scotland's working age population grows more slowly than that of the UK.
The former PM says that as Scottish pensioners numbers rise from one million to 1.3m, the UK will pay the escalating cost of Scottish pensions that will rise from a £425m-a-year extra benefit to a £700m-a-year extra benefit over the next two decades. This is because while Scotland pays 8 per cent of UK national insurance, it receives upwards of 9 per cent of the benefits.
The reason for the higher Scottish payout is that Scotland benefits far more from UK-wide pension credits to top up the basic pension, with £700m a year paid to 248,000 Scots in credits worth £25 per week to the typical recipient.
In addition, the UK will underwrite what Mr Brown says is estimated confidentially as a £100bn Scots public sector pensions bill. The UK will cover Scottish liabilities that are 10 per cent of the UK's total, while Scotland has only 8 per cent of the population.
Mr Brown estimates that it would cost around £1bn for Scotland to administer the first years of a separate Scottish pensions and benefits system once IT costs were included. On top of £720m running costs, there would be £300m-400m in computer bills, costs incurred he says because of "unnecessary duplication".
Document FTCMA00020140422ea4m0012x
