{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"371"}
____
  
Heathrow focuses on rail links in case for expansion
By Jane Wild   
737 words
2 May 2014
00:04
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Heathrow will argue that new rail links such as HS2 and Crossrail will help it build on its position as the best-connected airport to the UK's regions, as it steps up its campaign to be allowed to expand.
The west London airport has had discussions with business leaders and says its expansion campaign has support from chambers of commerce including South Wales, Newcastle, Liverpool, Inverness and Glasgow.
It will make a submission this month to the independent body assessing how to add flight capacity in the UK.
Heathrow will argue that it offers the shortest journey times to cities such as Sheffield, Bristol and Manchester and will do the most to bring growth to those regions by connecting them to international markets. It will make HS2, Crossrail, upgrades to London Underground's Piccadilly line and the proposed rail link to the Great Western line part of its case.
Colin Matthews, chief executive, said: "Heathrow is already the UK's best-connected transport hub. It is in a better location for most UK passengers and companies than other options for airport expansion."
Heathrow said it was confident it could factor the rail links into its plans, despite work having begun only on Crossrail. The others are at various stages of planning. HS2 was voted through the Commons this week, but the plan to link it to the airport is on hold.
Businesses in the North East wanted a bigger Heathrow, said Mark Stephenson, manager of policy and research, at the North East Chamber of Commerce.
"Most of our links to businesses elsewhere in the world go through Heathrow," he said, but added their main concern was for a quick decision, because political uncertainty was holding back foreign investment.
"Feedback from members is this is something that concerns board members and senior staff elsewhere in the world when looking at making significant investment decisions," he said.
Regional flights have been gradually squeezed out of Heathrow in the past two decades as landing slots have been given to airlines flying to international destinations. Heathrow says that with increased capacity it will be able to restore those flights.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>Inverness chambers said that while all connectivity was good, it was most focused on Heathrow because as a hub airport, it helped feed tourists to the region - a key source of regional business.
"We could be doing so much better if we had a direct link to Heathrow," said Stewart Nicol, chief executive of the Inverness chambers.
Not all regions have offered support. Birmingham chambers has previously attacked Heathrow's claim it would benefit the whole country, saying it misunderstood businesses, which want to use their local airport.
Campaigners warned that the railways would be strained by the millions of extra passengers a third runway would bring.
Stephen Joseph, chief executive of the Campaign for Better Transport, said: "Our research showed that the public transport improvements planned around Heathrow are needed just to keep pace with London's growing economy.
"We await the airport's new proposals with interest, but the risk is that extra journeys generated by a third runway would threaten gridlock on local roads and public transport networks."
* * *
Border Agency apologises for computer glitch delaying passengers
Passengers were held in airport queues for up to four hours on Wednesday after a Border Agency computer problem meant officials were unable to scan passports and had to enter details manually.
Heathrow, which also suffered a shortage of taxis because of a Tube strike, said it was sorry passengers had a bad experience and that it had helped by providing water and free WiFi. Gatwick and other airports affected declined to comment, saying it was a Border Agency issue.
James Brokenshire, immigration and security minister, said that engineers had worked through the night to fix the problem and all airports and ports were now functioning normally.
He added: "We apologise for the delays that some passengers experienced at passport controls yesterday, but security must remain our priority at all times."
He visited Heathrow on Thursday and asked technical staff "to look into the incident to ensure lessons are learnt," he said.
The airports that suffered delays included Heathrow, Luton, Gatwick, Stansted, London City, Manchester and Birmingham, as well as ports.
Document FTCMA00020140501ea51005xx
