{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1929"}
____
  
Tories take tougher stance on immigration to shore up votes
By George Parker, Political Editor   
753 words
7 March 2014
16:39
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
It could have been an episode of the Westminster TV satire The Thick of It.
While David Cameron was at an EU summit in Brussels on Ukraine, his immigration minister was at home creating political havoc with a speech accusing a "wealthy metropolitan elite" of fuelling migration with their demand for "cheap" labour.
By the time Mr Cameron arrived back in Downing St, James Brokenshire's speech was being mocked by Labour, described as "feeble and pathetic" by the Institute of Directors and nominated by Daily Telegraph blogger Dan Hodges as "the most stupid, intellectually bankrupt and vacuous address of the year".
Worse still for Mr Brokenshire, his boss suddenly found himself forced to answer questions about why the Camerons had hired nannies from Australia and Nepal: was it because they were "cheap"? Downing St said the nannies were chosen for the excellent childcare they offered.
But what was behind a speech that seemed to offend almost everyone, including natural Tory supporters in the business and media world? Was it evidence of a Tory party which has lost its political bearings?
Downing St insists Mr Brokenshire's speech was simply a statement of fact: that the benefits of migration - especially in the downturn - accrued mainly to the middle classes who employed Polish builders and not "ordinary, hardworking people".
However, the Tories' tougher tone on immigration is seen by pollsters as an attempt to counter the danger posed by Nigel Farage's UK Independence party ahead of May's European and local elections, not least because net immigration is rising.
As a Populus/FT poll found this month, Ukip supporters are drawn disproportionately from a group of swing voters that will be pivotal in those elections: manual workers, unskilled workers and the unemployed.
Mr Brokenshire's attempt to identify with working people against a "metropolitan elite" - presumably encompassing most of the cabinet - comes just days after Grant Shapps, Tory party chairman, tried to badge the Conservatives as "the workers' party".
Meanwhile, David Cameron's promise this month to cut taxes if he wins the next election - funded by more public spending cuts - and his promise of an EU referendum are aimed at a similar audience.
Anthony Wells, associate director of the pollsters YouGov, says Mr Cameron is following a familiar path trodden by former Tory leaders, including William Hague and Iain Duncan Smith, in heading to the right when things get tough.
"Conservative leaders know what their problem is. Every new leader comes in and recognises the party needs to modernise and needs to move to the centre, but that takes 10, 15 or 20 years to get right," he said.
"When it doesn't immediately work out, they start talking about immigration and tax cuts. The thing about David Cameron is that it has taken him a bit longer to get to that point."
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>Mr Cameron's political prospectus now is almost unrecognisable from the one he ran on in 2010, before the full gravity of the economic crisis became apparent. His "vote blue, go green" slogan and Big Society rhetoric were binned long ago.
The prime minister who promised to "share the proceeds of growth" between tax cuts and higher public spending is now wedded only to tax cuts; the man who told his party to "stop banging on about Europe" has conceded an EU referendum.
Theresa May, home secretary, recognised the party's long-term problem in 2002 when as party chairman she admitted the Tories were seen by some as "the nasty party" and warned against "demonising" minorities.
Mr Wells believes that the recent focus on core Tory messages on immigration, tax cuts and Europe could work in the short term, shoring up the party's support in May's elections and getting the vote out.
After all, those who found Mr Brokenshire's tone most grating this week are hardly at the top of Mr Cameron's list of priorities. Captains of industry and members of the "metropolitan elite" are unlikely to stomp off in protest into the arms of Labour.
But Mr Wells argues that by singing the old Tory tunes Mr Cameron is making a fundamental mistake: "It's the ongoing tragedy of the Conservative party over the last 20 years: it's the triumph of short-term tactics over long-term strategy."
Document FTCMA00020140307ea37002ux
