{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"213"}
____
  
British Asian Ukip youth leader quits over 'racist populism'
By Jim Pickard, Chief Political Correspondent   
493 words
13 May 2014
19:13
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The UK Independence party has been dealt a fresh embarrassment after a prominent British Asian supporter said she was leaving the party because of its "form of racist populism".
Sanya-Jeet Thandi, who chaired Ukip's youth wing in London, said the anti-Brussels party was going in a "terrifying" direction and she could no longer vote for it.
The departure of the 20-year old is awkward for Nigel Farage, party leader, coming only a week after he held a rally featuring ethnic minority council candidates.
Ukip insists that it is not racist and has banned former British National party members from joining its ranks. But its strong anti-immigration message has made it a target for critics across the political establishment.
Ms Thandi, who is a student at the London School for Economics, appeared on Channel 4 recently to defend Ukip. She said then that Britain was implementing unfair immigration rules by allowing in vast numbers of EU workers but clamping down on those from outside the EU, including highly skilled workers.
The student is the daughter of immigrants from India and joined Ukip's youth wing in 2011 as a teenager because she backed its support for a smaller state and lower taxes.
She has appeared in public alongside Mr Farage several times, including a photo opportunity outside Downing Street. The Ukip leader he described her in 2011 as a "rising star".
But in an article in The Guardian Ms Thandi urged Ukip supporters to abstain from voting in next week's European elections.
"The direction in which the party is going is terrifying," she wrote. "Ukip has descended into a form of racist populism that I cannot bring myself to vote for. This week I decided to leave the party."
Ms Thandi said she had been alarmed by Ukip's poster with a large pointing finger alongside the words: "26m people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?"
She wrote: "The poster epitomises where the party is going wrong. This anti-immigrant campaign undermines Ukip's claim not to be a racist party. They are turning the election into a game of 'us' and 'them'. Well, I am with 'them'."
A party spokesman said he had not yet had time to read the article. "People join and leave political parties all the time, particularly young people," he said. "We're in the fortunate position of having more and more people join than leave."
Ukip's youth wing has about 2,000 members, according to officials.
Ms Thandi said the party was young but this was not an excuse to allow "racists" to stand for election.
"Nor is it an excuse to exploit the ignorance in British society and indulge the racist vote by telling them 'they'll take your jobs'. Sorry Ukip, you've lost another vote," she said.
Document FTCMA00020140513ea5d004pi
