{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"2167"}
____
  
Danny Alexander tipped to replace Vince Cable in Lib Dem role
By George Parker in York   
729 words
8 March 2014
00:10
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Vince Cable, the business secretary, rallied Liberal Democrats on Friday night in a Tory-bashing spring conference speech in his home town of York.
Speculation is growing, however, that the veteran minister could lose his role as his party's "shadow chancellor" at the next election.
Senior Lib Dems say the high-profile job is very likely to go to Danny Alexander, the Treasury chief secretary, who is on the right of the party and is seen by some as being too close to George Osborne, the Tory chancellor.
Nick Clegg's spokesman said no decision had been made. But his choice will say much about the party's economics stance at the next election.
Mr Alexander is closely associated with the Treasury's tough fiscal "Plan A" and has implemented the coalition's public spending cuts, while Mr Cable is sceptical about further big cuts to balance the books.
"Danny has been so closely chained to the Treasury mast that our distinctive Lib Dem economic message just won't be credible if he leads for us on it instead of Vince at the election," said Lord Oakeshott, the party's former Treasury spokesman in the Lords and a friend of Mr Cable.
Another senior Lib Dem MP said he feared that in any televised "chancellor's debates" in the run up to the 2015 election, Mr Alexander would lack credibility attacking Mr Osborne, after serving as his deputy.
At the last election Mr Cable was in charge of the party's economic message and was seen as such an asset to the party that he featured alongside Mr Clegg on the party's manifesto cover and on the side of its election battle bus.
But the two men have grown apart in government. Mr Cable feared that Plan A was undercutting vital investment and has criticised the Treasury's Help to Buy housing scheme. He is also the party's most vocal critic of the banks. At last year's party conference he signalled his disquiet over Lib Dem economic policy by letting it be known he might be too busy to turn up to vote for it. Eventually he did, but his behaviour infuriated Mr Clegg.
Mr Cable, aged 70, has lost none of his appetite for politics and friends think he would love to hold an economics job - even chancellor - in a coalition with Labour, a party he belonged to for many years.
Meanwhile, Mr Alexander, aged 41, has become indispensable to Mr Clegg. He sits with Mr Clegg in the coalition's ruling "quad" and was this week put in charge of his party's coalition negotiating team, in the event of a hung parliament in 2015.
"Of course Danny will be the lead economics spokesman at the election," said one senior Lib Dem MP close to Mr Clegg. "He will have been a Treasury minister for five years."
But Mr Cable said: "The roles have not been decided. It would be very presumptuous of anyone to second guess what the leader wants to do."
In recent weeks, Mr Alexander has adopted a more hostile stance towards the Tories, including saying he would let the them cut the top rate of income tax to 40p "over my dead body".
In a speech to the party's spring conference on Saturday he will say that the Lib Dems' top priority in any coalition negotiations at the next election would be a promise to raise the income tax threshold from £10,000 to £12,500, giving a £500 tax cut to "working people".
He has also joined Mr Cable in pushing for a more liberal immigration policy; Mr Alexander wrote to Theresa May last month urging her to let in more foreign engineers and scientists to meet a skills gap.
Mr Clegg is expected to announce his party's election line-up in the autumn, but he knows he will have to treat Mr Cable with care, not least because the business secretary continues to be popular in his party and with the public.
Mr Cable has refused to rule out a future bid for the Lib Dem leadership, but told the Independent newspaper on Friday that there was no question of the leadership coming into question before the 2015 election.
Document FTCMA00020140308ea380005l
