{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"718"}
____
  
A lesson in fiddling the numbers
By John McDermott   
776 words
4 April 2014
15:36
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
"Overseas student numbers in England fall for the first time in 30 years."Financial Times, April 2
Good. I'm sick of all these immigrants coming over here, taking our exams.
A man is but the product of his thoughts; what he thinks, he becomes.
I like that. Who said it?
Mahatma Gandhi.
He was a wise man.
He was also a student at University College London.
I didn't know that.
It was TS Eliot, an Oxonian (and an American by birth), who said human kind cannot bear very much reality.
OK, I get the point. But I don't think of them when I think of immigrants.
You have company. In 2011, Ipsos Mori asked Britons what kind of immigrants they "normally had in mind" when they thought about migration. Sixty-two per cent said asylum seekers, who made up 4 per cent of immigrants in that year. Only 29 per cent thought of students, who made up37 per cent.
So what? British people still want fewer of them.
It depends what you mean by "them". Only one-third of those polled said they wanted fewer students. Fifty-six per cent said they wanted fewer asylum seekers.
I suppose students are good for the economy - and I care about that.
Don't you also care about how we can learn from people with other cultures?
You studied abroad, right? Stick to the economics.
Have it your way. Overseas students at UK universities contribute about £10bn in export earnings per year, according to the government.
If they like it so much then why are fewer coming?
There was a small drop in the number of overseas students enrolled full-time in English universities: from 311,800 in 2011-12 to 307,205 in 2012-13. That is still double a decade ago.
You didn't answer my question.
I turned the other cheek in the direction of perspective. Part of the answer is cost. The maximum annual tuition fees for undergraduates has increased to £9,000 from £3,465. This led to a drop in both English students and those from the EU, who are subject to the same rules.
I don't see why we should subsidise Spanish students to study at Cambridge.
Spanish students might wonder why they subsidise British retirees in Tenerife.
You've changed the subject again. We were losing moneyvia EU students.
True. And that is still the case elsewhere in Britain. Due to a loophole in EU law, the Scottish government can charge Scottish students less than English students. But students from the rest of the EU must be charged the lower, Scottish rate. The number of EU students in Scotland is rising. QED, as they say at All Souls.
So, may I blame Scotland?
There is no need for blame, but if we're playing that game, try Australia.
I thought that Australia hasn't let in an immigrant since James Cook.
Australia has tight rules on unskilled migrants but in 2011 it announced it would reduce the requirements for a student visa, while making it easier for graduates to stay after their studies.
The UK used to have a similarly easy system that led to hundreds of bogus colleges and thousands of illegitimate immigrants.
Yes but the subsequent crackdown on ersatz scholars has reduced the number of non-EU university students, too. Last year, the number of Indian undergraduates enrolling at English universities fell by 26 per cent. In Australia, they increased by 66 per cent.
It's a big world. There are plenty of other students.
There were 4.3m globally mobile international students in 2011, according to the OECD, a think-tank.
Exactly.
The UK has about 13 per cent of that market but that fraction hasn't changed for a decade.
Is that really a problem?
There is no "right" number of international students. But the UK still subsidises some EU students, while making life needlessly difficult for non-EU students who spend lots of money.
But what about reducing net inward migration?
The Conservative party is trying - and failing - to reduce that number to the tens of thousands.
I like a target. But now I also like international students.
So let's fiddle the figures. Like the US and Australia, the UK should count international students as temporary, and exclude them from net migration statistics. The Tories can meet their daft objective while limiting the damage to the economy.
That's not very British.
Au contraire, it's exactly the sort of pragmatism we should be teaching the world.
john.mcdermott@ft.com
Document FTCMA00020140404ea440028m
