{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3647"}
﻿Ukip's Farage gaining ground in poll breakthrough
By George Parker, Kiran Stacey, Jim Pickard and Michael Mackenzie   
1,382 words
22 May 2014
08:41
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Counting continues in UK local elections as Ukip makes its mark Nigel Farage was heading for a breakthrough in local and European elections early on Friday, as early results suggested strong gains for the UK Independence party.
Mr Farage was hopeful that Ukip would win the European elections, the party's first victory in a nationwide poll, leaving big questions for the leaders of each of the three traditional parties over how they deal with the populist insurgency.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
< > At shortly after 7.30am both Ukip and the Labour party were showing gains in the areas that had declared results, at the expense of the Conservatives and the Lib Dems.
Ukip had won 86 new seats, performing well in Essex in particular, while Labour's tally was up by 101 wards as it wrestled control of Hammersmith and Fulham in West London, known as prime minister David Cameron's "favourite council".
By contrast, the Conservatives had lost 100 seats and lost control of eight councils. The Lib Dems were down by 55 seats and had lost control of Portsmouth.
So far, seven councils across the UK have slipped to no overall control after the vote was split.
Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader told Sky News that he was "very pleased" with the party's "good, solid performance." However, he recognised that London remains a weak area of support for Ukip.
In terms of seats gained, Mr Farage predicted Ukip was likely to win nearly double the 80 seat forecast made by experts before the election. He dismissed any type of pact with the Conservatives.
''The Tories have always viewed me and Ukip as being members of the lower orders'' said Mr Farage, who added any pact with the Conservatives was ''extremely unlikely''.
Yet as town hall results come in from around England and Northern Ireland the anti-Brussels party has not taken control of any local authority, demonstrating the limits to its support. Instead it has pushed several southern councils out of Tory command and into "no overall control".
In reaction, Michael Gove, the Conservative education secretary told Sky News that voters' concerns about immigration would be heeded by the government.
''We have to pay attention to those concerns,'' he said. Mr Gove focused on the performance of Labour and said their results did not suggest the party had sufficient momentum to challenge the government at the next general election.
''You would have expected Labour to make gains . . . they're not making progress. In fact they're going backwards.''
Douglas Carswell, a Tory eurosceptic MP, was quick to declare last night that the Tories had finished third in the European elections and that the time had come for a non-aggression pact with Ukip.
Nick Clegg also was braced for another night of heavy losses in town halls and in the European Parliament elections: early signs suggested a big swing from the Lib Dems to Ukip in many areas.
Meanwhile the election results could be uncomfortable for Ed Miliband, Labour leader although the party is expected to gain several hundred council seats.
Douglas Alexander, Labour's elections co-ordinator, admitted that there was "alienation and anger" around the country, but said: "We still believe we are well placed if we do the right things . . . to win the general election."
Early results from Sunderland showed Ukip gaining a 24 per cent vote share from a base of virtually zero, a sign that the Farage phenomenon is taking hold in Labour heartlands as well as in the Tory shires.
<>Labour lost control of Thurrock council - which it had regained in 2012 - amid a surge in Ukip support. The anti-Brussels party also took 10 out of 21 seats being contested in Rotherham, a one-time Labour bastion.
The party failed to win back Swindon, a key marginal council, after Mr Miliband failed to recognise the name of his party's local leader in a radio interview.
Graham Stringer, a Labour backbench MP, said his party's campaign had been "unforgivably unprofessional".
"We have not done as well as we should have done in both the presentation of our policies and the organisation of the campaign," said the Blackley and Broughton MP.
"The centrepiece of our campaign has been the cost of living and Ed didn't know his own cost of living, he didn't know how much he was spending on shopping."
John Curtice, a psephologist, said Labour had so far advanced only 3 per cent on its 2010 performance - and was down substantially on its position two years ago:
"When it comes to local elections, we have quite high expectations of what oppositions should achieve because we basically say, if a party looks as though it is potentially regarded as an alternative government, it should be doing very well in local elections, even better than you would expect to do in a general election in 12 months' time. The truth is, by that test at least, Labour have not done well enough."
He added: "It is not entirely clear that the British electorate regard Labour as a clear alternative."
However, Labour managed to take Cambridge from no overall control, and party officials were still optimistic that Labour would perform well in London boroughs when more results come in during Friday.
An early success for Labour was seizing Hammersmith & Fulham, an affluent west London seat which has been held by the Tories since 2006. The local authority has been known as "David Cameron's favourite council" given its radical programme of cutting council tax, selling council housing and merging services with neighbouring boroughs.
Meanwhile, Nick Clegg was braced for another night of heavy losses in town halls and in the European Parliament elections: early signs suggested a big swing from the Lib Dems to Ukip in many areas.
Yet the Lib Dems kept all 12 of their wards being contested in Eastleigh, which they will seize as proof that they are holding out in key areas where they also have MPs.
<>Mr Clegg is also expecting criticism from some on the Lib Dem left but Vince Cable, business secretary, said: "There isn't a leadership issue." Mr Cable said Mr Clegg had "enhanced respect" for taking on difficult issues such as Europe.
The biggest shock could come on Sunday night when the results of the European elections are declared: the poll is the last nationwide poll before the May 2015 general election and Mr Farage is confident of victory.
The big parties admitted there would be profound lessons for the political class. Chuka Umunna, Labour's business spokesman, said Ukip was "a repository of anger" and a symptom of an economic and political malaise in the country. He said Britain had entered an era of "four-party politics".
Grant Shapps, Tory chairman, said the Conservatives would take on Ukip by delivering on their rather "dull and boring" economic rescue plan. He said there was no question of a Con/Ukip pact at the next election.
Jeremy Browne, Liberal Democrat MP and former minister, said Mr Farage was a rare politician who, like Alex Salmond or Boris Johnson, had an air of authenticity and did not sound like he was part of "a hectoring, out-of-touch elite".
"People have a sense with them that they are saying what they fundamentally believe in," he said.
The tone of the comments suggest that mainstream politicians will tread carefully in their response to Ukip's election success for fear of insulting the party's millions of supporters - potentially key swing voters at the next election.
Professor Colin Rallings, a local government expert, has projected that Labour will gain 500 seats in the local elections, with the Lib Dems losing 340 and the Tories down 160.
All three party leaders are expected to face internal pressure to change course.
Mr Clegg is also expecting criticism from some on the Lib Dem left but Vince Cable, business secretary, said: "There isn't a leadership issue." Mr Cable said Mr Clegg had "enhanced respect" for taking on difficult issues such as Europe.
Document FTCMA00020140523ea5m000gp
