{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3609"}
____
  
UK migration committee to unveil proposal for 'visa auctions'
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
679 words
23 February 2014
15:07
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Droposals due to be unveiled this week would allow UK visas to be auctioned off to the highest bidders, despite criticism from immigration lawyers that this would create an "eBay culture" for permanent residence in Britain.
Under current rules, overseas investors can pay £1m, £5m or £10m to speed up the grant of the right to live permanently in Britain. Depending on the amount paid, the process takes from two to five years. Applicants who cannot afford investor visas must comply with strict requirements depending on what job they are seeking, how much they will be paid, or whether they have a family member who can prove they can earn enough to support them.
But the Migration Advisory Committee has been scrutinising these arrangements following Home Office concerns that the investments - usually made in Gilts, or as a loan to the applicant's own business - are not sufficiently beneficial to the UK economy. The programme has proved popular with Chinese, Russian and Middle Eastern families seeking a safe haven from political unrest such as the Arab spring.
Having reviewed the evidence Sir David Metcalf, chair of the committee, will on Tuesday publish a range of options such as auctioning off a set number of investor visas each year, as well as recasting the million-pound investments as "endowments" to universities.
However, the auction proposal is already understood to have met significant scepticism from within the Home Office and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills.
The idea comes at a sensitive time, given that recent proposals by the Maltese government to sell off passports for €650,000 each have been slammed by fellow EU members concerned that the scheme would turn citizenship into a "tradeable commodity".
Malta's plan sparked particular controversy because, unlike the UK investor programme, it would not require applicants to be resident on the island in order to be granted a passport, which would allow immediate rights of settlement in all EU member states.
The Home Office has been careful not to criticise the Maltese scheme, with former immigration minister Mark Harper telling MPs in December that citizenship was a sovereign issue for each individual country to consider. "I would not be very happy if other European countries tried to tell us who could be citizens of Britain," he said. But ministers are thought to be wary of introducing visa auctions in the UK so close to the general election.
The number of investor visas issued by the Home Office rose from 423 in 2011-12 to 530 in 2012-13, according to figures obtained under the Freedom of Information Act. The majority were issued to Chinese applicants, with Russians and Americans not far behind.
The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.
<>But despite the rising demand, immigration lawyers representing wealthy foreign clients have universally criticised the auction proposal. Nick Rollason, head of business immigration at Kingsley Napley, warned that this would create an "eBay culture" for handing out visas. "It will also leave a bad taste in the mouths of the British public," he said.
Julia Onslow-Cole, head of global immigration at PwC Legal, says the current system of a set investment threshold, which has to be maintained for the duration of the visa, was more beneficial to the economy than a one-off payment. "Selling visas to the highest bidder, thereby treating them as a commodity, does not guarantee that they will continue to invest in the UK," she said.
Kamal Rahman, head of immigration at Mishcon de Reya, said the most important thing was to find an efficient way of channelling money to boost growth.
"Philosophically, the idea of directing investors into areas of public services where finance is most needed is not controversial, but the system has got to be clear and simple for clients and there is also the question of who would manage and monitor any new fund," Ms Rahman said.
Document FTCMA00020140223ea2n001uq
