{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"1384"}
____
  
Conservative party still hopes to meet migration target
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
467 words
2 March 2014
11:46
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The Conservative party has said it still hopes to meet its "tens of thousands" net migration target before the next election despite unexpectedly high recent figures and calls from Tory backbenchers to abandon the pledge.
Liam Fox, former defence secretary, urged the prime minister to ditch the "statistical nonsense" of his immigration policy and introduce more radical reforms based on "which individuals, with what skills" were entering the country.
Mr Fox's comments in The Telegraph were prompted by data last week showing net migration rose by more than a third to 212,000 in the year to September, with a surge in migrants from crisis-hit southern European countries including Spain, Portugal and Italy. Immigration experts agree it is now extremely unlikely the Tories can bring the figure down to less than 100,000 by May 2015.
But Grant Shapps, Tory party chairman, told the BBC on Sunday that the government had brought down immigration from outside the EU to its lowest level since 1998.
"The pledge is for the end of the parliament - we are only partway through," he said. "That is still our goal - to bring the numbers down."
When asked whether he thought the target could still be reached within the electoral deadline, he said: "I very much hope so."
However, Ukip leader Nigel Farage lambasted the government's record on immigration, saying the recent figures exposed ministers' inability to prevent "hundreds of thousands more people" coming to the UK from within the EU.
"I think that the British public now understand that we cannot have our own immigration policy, that it's utterly meaningless to set targets of tens of thousands a year - whatever you choose - we can't have any control over who comes to Britain all the while we're members of the European Union and it's as simple as that," Mr Farage told the BBC.
The Ukip leader also expressed his concerns about the effect of immigration on Britain's poorest. "We have a mass oversupply of unskilled, semi-skilled and in some cases skilled labour," he said. "It's driven down wages and it's hurt those at the bottom of society most."
Alive to the electoral threat presented by Ukip - which is expected to make significant gains in this May's European elections - Mr Fox warned the Tory leadership that failure to take firmer action on immigration would be "dangerous complacency".
"If the Tories are to bring back enough of these voters to win an overall majority at the election, there needs to be a clearer narrative on immigration, stressing not only the need to restrict numbers, but also to determine which individuals, with what skills, enter our country," Mr Fox wrote.
Document FTCMA00020140303ea3200136
