{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"984"}
____
  
Abandon ethnicity as a means of gathering votes
433 words
20 May 2014
00:24
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
From Prof Shamit Saggar.
Sir, Janan Ganesh ("Conservatives still fail to grasp the minority vote", Comment, May 13) fairly indicts the Conservatives for their tough line on immigration without grasping what this policy does to its relationship with earlier waves of migrants. But there is more to it.
The Tories and their opponents have struggled with finding the right balance in a post-imperial world, but their particular problem has been the ghost of Enoch Powell - a prediction that an ethnically diverse society would not succeed. The interim evidence (though mixed in parts) shows otherwise.
For any right-leaning group of voters to feel that they will "never think of voting for the Tories" is a very serious problem. Their growing size and movement into leafier, Tory-target seats makes it an urgent one.
Minority voters' allergy reflects a deeper, gut reaction that is about the party's basic brand. And this is intertwined with a larger problem in which too many voters see it as not in touch, nasty in its tendencies, sceptical towards women in the workplace, and worse. This has been addressed by Tory modernisers and yet the feeling endures.
For blacks and Asians it is underscored by reminders that the forces that brought about ethnic diversity are resented in the Tory rank and file, however much cabinet ministers claim it is not. The problem has been restated endlessly and many false dawns have resulted.
Margaret Thatcher, in opposition in 1977, set up the first Anglo-Asian and Anglo-West Indian Conservative Societies, and these measures have been copied by all leaders ever since. So there is a big "how" question lurking among those who wish to embrace new groups of voters.
The Conservatives have relied on a model that Labour widely uses and profits from. This has two elements: first, a preposterous reliance on self-appointed leaders from these communities; and second, embracing campaigns to attract these voters that are limited to seeing them as ethnically colourful creatures separate from voters at large.
The latter of these is the biggest mistake since research carried out by Anthony Heath and myself in the first British Ethnic Minority Election Study demonstrated that although minorities do not move much from their Labour moorings, where they do, this is due to social class.
The implication is clear - the Conservatives should concentrate on using their appeal as a middle-class party. In short, the Tories should junk ethnicity as a means of gathering votes.
Shamit Saggar, Institute of Social Economic Research, University of Essex, Colchester, UK
Document FTCMA00020140519ea5j005xx
