{"newspaper":"Financial Times (FT.Com)","id:"3611"}
____
  
Merkel calls for Britain to remain at heart of Europe
By Stefan Wagstyl   
709 words
23 February 2014
18:06
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
German chancellor Angela Merkel will urge Britain to ignore the eurosceptics and stay at the heart of the EU in a speech to both houses of Parliament on Thursday.
But during her one-day working visit to Britain, she is unlikely to make significant concessions to prime minister David Cameron on his key concerns, including immigration curbs and changes to EU treaties to return powers from Brussels.
"Germany and the UK are, for each other, important partners - not only bilaterally but in Europe," said Steffen Seibert, Ms Merkel's spokesman. "That will naturally be a theme of the visit . . . we want an active, strong UK in the EU."
Ms Merkel will highlight this in her speech, the first by a German leader to both houses since 1986. She will then have lunch with Mr Cameron before taking tea with the Queen at Buckingham Palace, returning to Berlin in the early evening.
Ms Merkel will be getting "the reddest of red carpets", in the words of one British official. London hopes the lavish welcome could encourage Berlin to be more accommodating to Mr Cameron's demands for EU reforms, including his hopes of diluting the union's powers and curbing migration to appease eurosceptics at home.
William Hague, foreign secretary, said on Sunday the government planned to use Ms Merkel's visit to try to persuade Berlin to support measures discouraging people from moving within the EU to access other nations' welfare systems.
Mr Hague said on Sunday that he believed the Germans and British shared "common ground" over concerns about benefit tourism within the EU.
"We support the principle of free movement . . . but we don't support people moving from one country to another because of the incentives of different benefit systems," Mr Hague told BBC1's Andrew Marr Show. "And I think again with Germany we have a lot of common ground on that and there will be no problem discussing that."
Officials in Berlin also hope Ms Merkel will press Mr Cameron to spell out exactly what concessions he wants from the EU as the price for staying in.
A German foreign policy expert said: "The UK lacks a consensus on what it wants from the EU. Outsiders like Germany cannot get a clear idea of what the UK actually wants."
Ms Merkel shares some of Mr Cameron's views on the EU. Like him, she wants to trim the powers of the Brussels bureaucracy and defends the market economy against criticism from countries that favour a state-led approach, notably France.
Britain sees Berlin as a possible ally in its bid to change some of the EU's key treaties because Germany has also spoken of treaty change, albeit in the opposite direction - to boost the key institutions of the eurozone.
But German officials are wary about starting treaty change talks for fear of opening a Pandora's box of demands from 28 countries. They also say Berlin's plans for closer integration in the eurozone and London's proposals for a looser union outside the eurozone could be incompatible.
Ms Merkel may give Mr Cameron some comfort on combating welfare abuse by EU migrants: members of her conservative CDU and its CSU have called for action. But, unlike Mr Cameron, the chancellor is a firm supporter of intra-EU migration.
German officials say there can be no question of reimposing migration controls on the bloc's newest members, Romania and Bulgaria. Mr Cameron has threatened to veto the entry of future new member states like Serbia and Albania unless new migrant curbs are agreed but there is little interest in Berlin in even discussing this.
Berlin is worried that Britain is moving down a road that could, with a planned referendum on EU membership, result in its leaving the union.
Thomas Matussek, a former ambassador to the UK and now head of the Alfred Herrhausen Society, a think-tank, says: "We would like to help to keep Britain inside. But we can only keep the door open. Walking through the door must be done by the British themselves."
Ms Merkel is likely to make the same point.
Additional reporting by Beth Rigby
Document FTCMA00020140223ea2n002uv
