{"newspaper":"FT","id:"1781"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Bloomberg urges UK to welcome migrants
By George Parker, Political Editor   
678 words
23 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed1
03
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Former New York mayor's comments come as hostility towards foreign workers grows, says George Parker
Interview
Michael Bloomberg
Philanthropist
Michael Bloomberg, former New York mayor, has urged Britain to keep its doors open to immigrants, arguing that new arrivals helped to give the biggest US city a vital competitive advantage.
One international survey recently suggested New York had overtaken London as a global financial centre and Mr Bloomberg said immigrants had played a crucial part in his city's success.
The media magnate and philanthropist believes Britain made a strategic mistake in refusing to issue passports to Hong Kong residents in the 1990s and needs immigrants today to keep its economy on its toes.
"We definitely need immigrants and that's exactly true of London and the whole of the UK in particular," Mr Bloomberg told the Financial Times.
His comments come against a backdrop of greater public hostility to immigration in Britain, with the UK Independence party running an aggressive advertising campaign warning that low wage European migrants are lining up to take Britons' jobs.
However, Mr Bloomberg, who is sponsoring a competition to promote innovation in European cities, argued that immigrants "challenge" the resident population and provide entrepreneurial verve.
"A very big percentage of all new companies created in the US have at least one founder born outside the US," he said. "One of the great strengths of New York City is that 40 per cent of people living there were born outside America."
David Cameron, prime minister, has attempted to assuage public opinion by promising to limit immigration to the "tens of thousands", although he now seems certain to miss that target. However, Mr Bloomberg suggested the policy was misguided.
"It requires a special kind of person to emigrate," he said. "Immigrants are preselected to be people who will contribute to society, look at the glass as half-full and see the good thing about a place when they arrive."
The 72-year-old former New York mayor, chairman of London's Serpentine Gallery, predicted that the two rival transatlantic financial centres would continue to dominate their geographical regions and see off Asian rivals including Hong Kong and Singapore.
He said the English language was a decisive factor working in favour of New York and London but declined to enter the perennial debate about which city might ultimately emerge as global champion. "The fourth estate will write a lot of stories about who is winning and who is losing, but they are inextricably tied to each other and the world," he said.
His 12 years as New York mayor ended this year when he was succeeded by Bill de Blasio , the Democratic candidate, who campaigned against inequality.
Bloomberg Philanthropies, the former mayor's charitable arm, is running a "Mayors Challenge" to promote innovations in Europe's cities and urban areas with a €5m prize for the most creative idea and €1m for four runners-up. Providence, Rhode Island, won the inaugural challenge staged in the US.
London is one of the cities on the European shortlist of 21 with a public health initiative; other British entries are Bristol with an anti-obesity plan; Cardiff with a drive to raise local productivity; Kirklees with a scheme to pool underused local assets, from vehicles to unused spaces; and York with an initiative to improve local government.
Mr Bloomberg insisted that New York became a healthier place during his mayoralty - he says life expectancy increased - and now freely dispenses the expertise acquired by his team to other cities around the world.
He believes cities are the key to the world's future success as well as home to most of humanity's problems and he is spending part of his $33bn fortune on ventures including moves to reduce pollution, cut gun crime and improve public health.
Some argue "city states" could usurp nation states as geopolitical building blocks: Mr Bloomberg said they needed more financial autonomy from national governments to guide their own fate.
Document FTFT000020140423ea4n00006
