{"newspaper":"FT","id:"120"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Polls give Farage debate victory
By Kiran Stacey, Political Correspondent   
547 words
3 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed3
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Ukip elated after TV battle with Clegg
Lib Dem leader puts focus on Putin
Both the Liberal Democrats and the UK Independence party claimed victory last night after the second of two live leaders' debates over membership of the EU - despite polls suggesting Nigel Farage had emerged the clear winner for a second week in a row.
Two polls conducted after the clash, broadcast on BBC Two, showed nearly 70 per cent of viewers thought Mr Farage, Ukip's leader , had performed better than his Lib Dem opponent.
But senior Lib Dems said they believed Mr Clegg's performance over the two debates would win a vital few percentage points in the polls at May's European elections, which could save scores of their MEPs.
The most bitter clashes during the debate centred on Mr Farage's views on Vladimir Putin, whom he claimed was the world leader he most admired.
Mr Farage repeated his assertion that the EU had "blood on its hands" over its treatment of Ukraine, where thousands of Russian troops remain stationed on the border. The Ukip leader said the Russian president had "outwitted and outclassed" western leaders, accusing Ukrainian rebels of having "toppled a democratically elected leader".
Last night's debate focused more closely on Syria after Mr Farage told the BBC hours before the debate that he believed Syrian rebels had been responsible for chemical weapons attacks, rather than the regime of Bashar al-Assad. Mr Clegg responded: "Nigel Farage says he admires the way Vladimir Putin has played - as if it is a game - the terrible human catastrophe in Syria."
Both leaders claimed to represent a more modern view of Britain but Mr Farage aimed many of his comments directly at white working-class voters who feel left behind by increasing globalisation.
Recent studies have shown such voters make up Ukip's core support, rather than middle-class Conservative defectors. Mr Farage appealed to them by saying recent waves of European immigration had "left the white working-class effectively as an underclass", something he called "a disaster for our society".
Both parties say they enjoyed a boost in membership after the first of the two debates, broadcast live on Sky last week. They hope that last night's debate, which was set to attract more than double the number of viewers, would help that further.
Danny Alexander, the Lib Dem Treasury chief secretary, said: "We are getting the point across to people that we are the only party arguing the case for British membership of the EU."
Another party official said: "How often do we get that much airtime to so many viewers? Whatever happened, this would have been a success."
But the Ukip delegation was the more obviously elated by the results of the YouGov and ICM polls after the debate which, respectively, showed that Mr Farage won by 68 per cent to 27 per cent, and by 69 per cent to 29 per cent.
A spokesman for Mr Farage said: "This is a game-changer, particularly for Nick Clegg. Nigel smashed him out of the park for the second week running and on his own niche subject of the EU. This is incredibly exciting for Ukip."
Document FTFTA00020140403ea430001l
