{"newspaper":"FT","id:"1292"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Immigration data deal PM blow
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
600 words
28 February 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed1
04
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Cameron faces setback on targets
EU countries account for increase
Net migration to the UK soared by more than a third to 212,000 in the year to September, dealing a blow to David Cameron's hopes of reaching his "tens of thousands" target by May 2015.
The 58,000 rise in immigrants was largely due to a surge in arrivals from within the EU with 60,000 more arriving from countries such as Spain, Portugal, Italy and Poland than in the previous 12 months. By contrast, the number of non-EU arrivals dropped by 25,000 in the same period.
The latest data from the Office of National Statistics give credence to fears that the UK's education exports are suffering as a result of the government's stringent immigration controls , since statisticians attributed the 25,000 fall to a drop in migrants from New Commonwealth countries coming to the UK to study.
But while potential students from India and Pakistan are being deterred from applying to study in the UK, there has been a significant increase in arrivals from Romania and Bulgaria. In total, 24,000 migrants arrived from these countries in the year to September 2013, nearly three times the 9,000 who arrived the previous year. About 70 per cent came to work and 30 per cent for education.
Data on national insurance registrations showed a rise of less than 30 per cent in the number of EU nationals seeking work in the UK, an increase of 97,000 in the year to December 2013.
The Conservatives promised before the last election to bring net migration down to fewer than 100,000 by 2015 but, despite early reductions, the overall figure is creeping towards the highs of 250,000 seen just after the coalition took over.
Responding to the data James Brokenshire, immigration minister, said he and his team were building an immigration system that was "fair to British citizens and legitimate migrants", while being "tough on those who abuse the system or flout the law".
"The government is ensuring that our controls on accessing benefits and services, including the NHS and social housing, are among the tightest in Europe," Mr Brokenshire said. "We cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants, so we are focusing on cutting out the abuse of free movement between EU member states and seeking to address the factors that drive European immigration to Britain."
But Yvette Cooper, shadow home secretary, said the figures showed that the net migration target was "in tatters".
"David Cameron and Theresa May chose this target despite being warned that it would be counter-productive as it includes students who contribute to Britain but doesn't include illegal immigration which is very damaging," she said.
"These figures show the number of students is falling, while evidence shows illegal immigration is getting worse. And now they are even failing against their chosen net migration target, too."
Nigel Farage, Ukip leader, said the figures showed "just what a failure the government has been" on controlling immigration.
Scott Blinder, director of Oxford university's Migration Observatory, described the release as "challenging news" for the government.
"The key changes in this report are to EU migration, an area over which immigration policy has less direct influence," Mr Blinder said. "This highlights the fact that the net migration target is not something that can be delivered purely through policy but relies on other trends as well."
Blog: migration statistics that only Ukip could love www.ft.com/offmessage
Document FTFT000020140228ea2s0000d
