{"newspaper":"FT","id:"119"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Farage and Clegg lock horns
By Kiran Stacey, Political Correspondent   
562 words
3 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Ukip leader wins in post-debate poll
Deputy PM keeps focus on Putin
Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage clashed last night over European immigration, trade and foreign policy as the two leaders took part in the second of two debates on whether Britain should remain in the European Union.
Mr Farage, the UK Independence party leader, argued that recent waves of European immigration had "left the white working class effectively as an underclass", something he called "a disaster for our society".
But Mr Clegg, leader of the Liberal Democrats, argued Mr Farage was trying to "turn the clock back to some 19th-century bygone Britain which simply doesn't exist any more".
The deputy prime minister wasted no time attacking Mr Farage for his comments last week that the European Union had "blood on its hands" over its actions in Ukraine in the run-up to the Russian invasion of Crimea.
He said: "If I am the leader of the 'Party of In', Nigel Farage is the leader of the party of Putin."
Mr Farage hit back: "What I said was that he outwitted and outclassed you . . . I also said I didn't like him as a human being and I wouldn't want to live in Russia."
He also accused Ukrainian rebels of having "toppled a democratically elected leader".
But this time the debate centred as much on Syria as on Ukraine, with Mr Farage having told the BBC hours before the debate that he believed Syrian rebels had been responsible for chemical weapons attacks, rather than the regime of President Bashar al-Assad. Mr Clegg said: "One telephone call to Assad could bring the participants in that awful conflict to the negotiating table . . . and Nigel Farage says he admires the way Vladimir Putin has played - as if it is a game - the terrible human catastrophe in Syria."
"This isn't some pub or bar discussion; this is terrible violence on an unimaginable scale. Nigel Farage doesn't want to work with America, with the rest of Europe, he wants to side with Putin."
On the economy, Mr Clegg said staying part of the EU would make Britain "richer, safer and stronger". He had fresh ammunition with a new estimate by the Centre of Economics and Business Research showing that UK exports to EU countries help support 4.2m UK jobs and are worth £211bn to the economy.
Mr Clegg said: "Last week, he told you that 485 million people would vacate the whole of the European continent and end up in Britain. Well 5 million people in Scotland are entitled to move to Orpington - it's just not going to happen."
The comments reflected a debate during which both leaders tackled the other in a more combative style.
A snap YouGov poll after the debate, broadcast on BBC2, showed 68 per cent saying they thought Mr Farage had won, against 27 per cent for Mr Clegg and 5 per cent "don't knows". The Ukip leader's margin was higher than the 57 per cent he polled last week.
After last week's event Mr Clegg, hailed as the victor of the 2010 leaders' debates, was said to have been bested by the leader of a party with no MPs, arguing a case not supported by most voters.
Document FTFTA00020140403ea4300004
