{"newspaper":"FT","id:"1390"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Poll dispels stereotype of tweedy Ukip voter; FT/Populus
By George Parker, Political Editor   
700 words
3 March 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
03
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Survey provides intriguing insights into where the parties are drawing support, writes George Parker
Ukip is not primarily a party of tweedy Tory colonels in the shires and David Cameron does not have a particular "problem" with women: those are two political stereotypes dispelled by a Populus poll for the Financial Times.
Using a large scale -sample of voters, the poll provides an intriguing insight into where the political parties are drawing their support from - and their most glaring weaknesses - as they prepare for the May 2015 general election.
Over the coming months Populus will track shifts in political mood - whether by gender, race, region or class - replicating the kind of modelling being carried out behind closed doors by the political parties.
The February Populus poll of more than 14,000 voters gives Labour the lead with 37.1 per cent, enough to give Ed Miliband a Commons majority, with Tories on 32.5, Lib Dems on 9.6 and Ukip on 13.5.
It shows that Nigel Farage's anti-Brussels and anti-immigration insurgency has reached out to manual, unskilled and unemployed voters, some of whom do not normally vote, many of them living in the Midlands - one of the 2015 election battlegrounds.
The attempt to redesignate the Tories as "the Workers Party" at a behind-closed-doors event at Conservative HQ last week is a sign of the unease caused by Mr Farage's beer-drinking, cigarette-smoking populism.
Some Tory MPs complain that Mr Cameron could do more to engage with working people by widening his inner circle - drawn heavily from Eton College and Oxbridge - and the "elitist" tag is one the prime minister is keen to shed.
However, the Populus survey dispels the idea that Mr Cameron is alienating women voters; the Tories have the lowest proportion of women supporters but only just: 46 per cent of Tory supporters are women, compared with 47 for Labour and 48 for the Lib Dems.
All parties appear to over-represent men and under-represent women because female voters are disproportionately likely to be "don't knows".
The survey shows that the only demographic groups among whom Labour does not have a lead over the Tories is the over-55s (Con 39, Lab 26) and the top AB social groups (Con 38, Lab 32).
It also picks up the regional disparities that will define the next election. Mr Cameron's party only leads in the southeast, although it is neck-and-neck with Labour in the Midlands and Wales and the southwest.
Labour leads the Tories by 6 per cent among people who work in the private sector and by 24 per cent among people who work in the public sector, a split that may reflect Ed Miliband's reluctance so far to set out radical public service reforms or job cuts.
The poll confirms the Conservatives as the party of home ownership, a factor that may explain George Osborne's determination to help people on to the housing ladder through his Help to Buy mortgage support scheme.
Educational achievement also appears to be a factor in political choices. Lib Dem voters are most likely to have both a first degree and a higher degree.
Ukip voters are much more likely than supporters of other parties and than Britain overall to have finished education at secondary school level; the proportion of Ukip voters with higher degrees is half the national average.
On the question of ethnicity, Lib Dem supporters are about the most representative of the country; Labour supporters are nearly twice as likely to be non-white as the national average. Ukip supporters are more than 98 per cent white.
Supporters of Nigel Farage's party are the most likely to be married and the least likely to have children under 18. Tory supporters are disproportionately older and Labour disproportionately younger; Ukip voters tend to be the oldest of all.
Rick Nye, Populus managing director, said the series of FT polls would help to analyse "the issues and audience that matter most in the run-up to the next general election".
Document FTFTA00020140303ea330000u
