{"newspaper":"FT","id:"121"}
____
  
FT REPORT - RECRUITMENT
Can I have work meetings without a business visa? Your Questions Answered
By Gill Plimmer   
705 words
3 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
Surveys REC1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
A colleague from the US was scheduled to meet me next week while he is over in London on holiday. He will help me finish an important report. He travels a lot and this is something we have done many times. However, this time, my HR manager has found out and says I must not do this because my colleague does not have a business visa. Is this right? Surely it is OK to have a quick meeting with me while he is in London anyway? Owen Jones, head of business immigration at employment solicitors Doyle Clayton, says: It is good that your HR manager has alerted you to the issue, as it is indeed a surprisingly serious one and something of a hot topic.
It is important to realise that visitors without a business visa have only a number of "permissible" activities while they are in the UK and do not have permission to work.
Meetings such as the one you mention do typically count as a permissible activity, as visitors are allowed to attend meetings provided they were arranged in advance. However, should he intend actually to work on the report himself, he would be viewed as being in breach of his visit visa.
What complicates this is that it has been done "many times in the past". If it is your colleague's US role to have oversight of employees or work product in the UK, then I consider that your company should look to formalise this situation by arranging a multiple entry visa for him. These can be arranged for overseas employees visiting the UK on a regular basis.
My advice is always that, if in doubt, get the appropriate working visa. If your company is already a licensed sponsor, this will take only a week or so to arrange. UK border control staff are increasingly vigilant and often choose to question visitors carefully.
The Home Office also conducts spot checks on businesses, sometimes based on tip-offs. If in breach, your colleague would face a UK re-entry ban (lasting up to 10 years) and the business could be fined up to £10,000 (due to increase to £20,000 next year). Tijen Ahmet, an immigration solicitor at SA Law, says:
Your HR manager is correct in this instance. Given that your colleague is a US national on holiday in the UK, there are restrictions on any employment-related activities during the period of his temporary stay - up to six months - even if the activity in question is a "quick meeting".
The restrictions on an individual entering the UK as a general visitor (on holiday) are explicitly stated in immigration legislation, at paragraph 41 of HC 395.
Under paragraph 41(iii) an individual must "not intend to take employment in the UK". This intention must not change while your colleague is in the UK, otherwise they would be deemed to have breached the terms of their leave, and this may directly impact any future visits or UK visa applications, whether for employment or otherwise.
"Employment" for these purposes includes engaging in any work-related activity. Attending a meeting to help you finish an important report that is related to their work would be interpreted as "work related activity" for the purpose of the immigration rules, and would therefore result in your colleague breaching the terms of his visa.
However, there is a "business visitor" visa that would allow your colleague to carry out various activities such as attending meetings.
Attending meetings is in fact one of the permitted activities under the business visitor route, as long as they are scheduled prior to the arrival in Britain. Finally, given that the US is on the UK's "non-visa nationals" list, your colleague will not necessarily require a visa document to enter the UK, but may want to obtain one before travelling to the UK to save time at the point of entry.
The Home Office strongly advises that the visa is applied for before travelling to avoid refusal on arrival if the immigration officer is not satisfied with the purpose for entry.
Document FTFTA00020140403ea430001s
