{"newspaper":"FT","id:"1782"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Ukip donor promises publicity spending spree
By Jim Pickard in Sheffield   
693 words
23 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The reclusive multimillionaire behind the antiBrussels UK Independence party has vowed there will be "no limit" to his spending in the run-up to next year's general election.
Paul Sykes , a self-made businessman worth an estimated £400m, said he wanted to counter the tens of millions spent every year by Brussels on promoting the EU. "The British people need the facts," he said.
Mr Sykes appeared alongside Nigel Farage , the party leader, in Sheffield for the launch of the party's campaign for May's European elections. It is expected to come first or second.
Having quit the Conservatives in the 1990s over Europe, Mr Sykes said he had so far spent about "£1.2m or £1.4m" on a media blitz that includes hundreds of contentious posters attacking the EU. "We haven't stopped yet," he said. "I'll spend whatever to make British people aware that power has been transferred from Britain without permission."
The billboards have been criticised as "racist" by Labour MP Mike Gapes. One poster claimed: "26m people are looking for work, and whose job are they after?" In the year to last September net migration of EU citizens doubled to 131,000, up from 65,000 the previous year.
Mr Farage dismissed the criticism, saying a large proportion of the public agreed with the sentiments. "There are 26m unemployed people across the EU, all of which can come to this country," he said. "We are not totally against immigration - we are for the right immigration."
Mr Sykes asked: "Do I look like a racist? We have Pakistanis standing in the election, and Indians."
The businessman, who built the nearby Meadowhall shopping centre , described himself as a "tyre fitter" by trade who was not from the so-called chattering classes.
The poster and digital campaign was put together by Family, a small media company from Edinburgh. "You'll see this campaign from the moon before long," said Mr Sykes. He predicted the elections would be all about Britain's borders and the failure of Westminster to control them. "We'll end up with the same levels of unemployment as Greece."
Sheffield was chosen for the launch not only because it is home to the constituency of the Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg, the pro-European deputy prime minister. It also demonstrates how Ukip is seeking to shift from its roots in the Tory south to reach out to northern voters who used to support Labour.
Mike Hookem, a Yorkshire Ukip candidate, said he had previously voted Labour for most of his adult life. "The reaction we are getting is fantastic, even in Labour strongholds such as Hull," he said. "Lots of people are supportive. We are seeing a real sea change."
The insurgency into Labour areas is starting to alarm the opposition party. Jon Ashworth, shadow Cabinet Office minister, said: "Ukip would have us believe they stand for working people but the truth is they are even more rightwing than the Tories."
Mr Farage said he wanted to "hit Labour hard" next month. "It's no longer like the 80s where you had just two parties, left and right, competing," he said.
He has been criticised for his expenses claims , for extolling e-cigarettes after taking donations from a manufacturer, and for his hypocrisy in attacking the "establishment" despite being a privately educated former stockbroker.
Yet this does not seem to be denting Ukip's popularity. "Farage has been honest," said Steve Milner, a 55-year-old from Sheffield. "It's the other parties that haven't been honest. He's a decent bloke. I used to vote Labour and am going to vote Ukip." His wife Margaret agreed: "I think he stands for the everyday person. I'm not opposed to immigration but it should be properly controlled."
For many in Sheffield it is Mr Clegg who is dishonest by raising university tuition fees, despite having promised not to. "There is no love lost for Clegg in this city, not now. He is weak," said Lindsay Brown, a 34-year-old mother.
Document FTFT000020140423ea4n00005
