{"newspaper":"FT","id:"1664"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Cameron's attempt to 'do God' faces test of faith by electorate
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
643 words
19 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Before the last election, David Cameron said that, although an Anglican, he did not wear his faith on his sleeve. It seemed he had taken heed of a line on religion from Alastair Campbell, Tony Blair's former communications chief - "we don't do God" - and appeared bashful about discussing his beliefs.
So the prime minister's recent comments that Britain should be "more evangelical" about Christianity, that Jesus "invented the Big Society" and that his moments of "greatest peace" were while attending church, prompted speculation about what could have caused the change.
But there are plenty of reasons why it might be the right time politically for him to focus on faith.
With the election just over a year away, Mr Cameron is the only committed Christian in the running for Downing Street - both Labour's Ed Miliband and the Liberal Democrats' Nick Clegg are avowed atheists.
Even Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence party, is quiet on the subject of his beliefs, a Christmas and Easter-type Anglican who aides say is "private" about his faith.
Not only will being enthusiastically religious allow the PM to appeal to the Christian vote: it might also help repair relations with Church-going Tories antagonised by the legalisation of gay marriage.
Mr Cameron also needs to find a way of engaging with high-ranking clergy who have attacked his welfare reforms for hurting the poorest in society.
Number 10 plays down talk of a change of strategy, with aides pointing out that Mr Cameron delivers an Easter message every year, and that he is the first prime minister to have an annual reception for every major faith during their festivals. Nonetheless, the prime minister's comments have been met with cynicism.
Alastair Campbell was scornful. "Unless this is absolutely authentic, people will be turned off by it at every level," he told the Financial Times.
"I think in Britain we respect faith, but whenever anyone tries to ally it to politics then people just resent that," Mr Campbell added. "I think in Cameron's case, it's a way of making himself feel better about some of the things he's doing in government."
The religious community has also expressed scepticism. In a piece for the Daily Mail, Giles Fraser, the former canon chancellor of St Paul's Cathedral, called it "a pallid imitation of Christianity, the equivalent of empty-gesture politics".
Elizabeth Oldfield, director of Theos, a Christian think-tank, also warns that discussion of Anglicanism in these terms - saying it's good for the community, for the Big Society - "doesn't really wash".
"There's a bit of a repair job [following gay marriage] being attempted here, but it might not be worth it," she told the FT. "I would be surprised if there's a significant proportion of Christians who will have this in their minds when they decide who to vote for."
In fact, Theos research published in January showed that those who identify themselves as Christians prioritise the same issues as the rest of the electorate - such as the economy, or immigration - when they come to vote.
As a result, it seems unlikely Mr Cameron's more visible religious faith will appeal to the electorate - regardless of his intentions. Peter Kellner, president of pollsters YouGov, dismisses the Tory leader's pre-Easter protestations as "neither here nor there" in vote-winning terms.
"I don't think old maids cycling to church every Sunday will be thinking: at last, a prime minister who takes religion seriously," Mr Kellner said. "The question voters will be asking is: does this really mean Cameron is a decent, sincere, moral person, or is he just saying this because he thinks he needs to?"
Document FTFT000020140419ea4j0000a
