{"newspaper":"FT","id:"1112"}
____
  
ANALYSIS
Beyond the fringe; Europe's new populists
By Kiran Stacey and Jim Pickard   
2,504 words
7 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
09
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Eurosceptics In the first part of a series on antiEU parties shaking up politics across the continent, Kiran Stacey and Jim Pickard look at Britain's Ukip
Nigel Farage almost did not survive the last general election. The aeroplane crash that nearly killed the leader of the UK Independence party on polling day in 2010 has gone down in its folklore as the moment the man previously regarded as jovial, if not amateurish, got serious.
"That crash changed him," says Marta Andreasen, an MEP who quit the populist anti-EU party last year amid disagreements about strategy. "It made him ruthless."
Mr Farage, the privately educated, pinstripe-wearing former commodities broker and son of a stockbroker, has carved out a niche as Britain's most unlikely anti-establishment politician. He has done an effective job of targeting disenchanted Conservative and Labour voters, worrying party leaders. Now he wants to capture the anti-elite sentiment being expressed by voters across Europe and channel it into a poll victory in European parliamentary elections in two weeks' time.
In the run-up to the elections, the Financial Times is examining Ukip and other populist parties that are altering the political landscape across the continent. They are the Tea Parties of Europe and, like their US equivalents, threaten to overturn the consensus that parties do well by fighting on the political centre ground. EU officials fear that antiEuropean parties could win as much as 30 per cent of the vote.
The worrying thing for politicians of those mainstream parties is that the nascent economic recovery in Europe does not seem to be eroding support for their populist rivals. The UK is a case in point. It is growing more quickly than most developed economies yet Ukip continues to rise; the grievances of its supporters seem too deeply ingrained to be dispelled by a few months of good economic news.
Despite his establishment credentials, Mr Farage has successfully tapped into a well of resentment felt by a large chunk of British voters at the elites who govern them, both in Westminster and Brussels. Often found propping up the bar dispensing his brand of "commonsense" wisdom, Mr Farage's blokeish façade masks a professional operator determined to shake up British politics.
Once regarded as a fringe party, Ukip is riding high in the polls, on course to win up to a third of UK votes in the European elections. Some pollsters predict it will top the ballot.
The party will then try to do something it has never achieved before: turn that strong midterm support into seats at the 2015 general election.
Mr Farage's ambitions have been helped by two televised debates in which he attacked Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister and Liberal Democrat leader, for his stance on Britain's EU membership. The debates gave the Ukip leader a new air of respectability and boosted his party's poll ratings by 4-5 points, to about 13 per cent.
Winning May's election would be a huge moment for the party, which began as an enthusiastic, if donnish, group of political lecturers at the London School of Economics in the early 1990s. The group, led by Alan Sked, was united mainly by its opposition to the Maastricht treaty, the document that led to the creation of the euro.
For Prof Sked, the party has now changed beyond all recognition, having turned from an EU-focused campaign group into a political party focusing on issues such as immigration and equal marriage.
"It has become corrupt, racist and obsessed with immigration and Islam," says Prof Sked. "It hardly talks about the EU but its MEPs do travel to Brussels to get on the gravy train. I despise it now."
Ukip's increasing focus on issues that animate a wide section of conservative voters, such as race, religion and sexuality, has changed the face of the party and forced the political establishment to take it seriously.
So far, the coalitions of disenfranchised voters that have given Ukip some success in European elections have not translated into success at Westminster. At the 2004 European elections, the party won 16 per cent and came third, ahead of the Liberal Democrats, only to collapse at the 2015 general election to just 2.2 per cent. The pattern was repeated in 2009, when it beat Labour into second in European elections but plummeted a year later to 3.1 per cent in the national poll.
Mr Farage is desperate for a different outcome this time, and has set about building a slicker, more professional party structure. He has targeted Tory strongholds in the south where, through by-elections, local elections and defections, Ukip has built a solid base of campaigners.
Figures published today by the British Elections Survey show over half of those who intend to vote for Ukip this month also say they will in 2015. That is double the number who said they would continue to support the party in 2009.
The strategy of building battalions of enthusiastic supporters in targeted areas is borrowed from Lord Ashdown, who used it as Lib Dem leader in the 1980s.
William Dartmouth, a Ukip MEP, says: "We are learning from the Lib Dems. They swarm. They go big on local issues, and when they fight elections they fill the constituency with hundreds of people."
Another sign Mr Farage is learning from mainstream leaders is his insistence on message discipline from the rest of his party. No longer is the Ukip leader willing to indulge offensive views from high-profile members, which in the past might have been brushed off as merely "politically incorrect". Godfrey Bloom, the MEP, was pushed out after a string of gaffes, including ridiculing foreign aid going to "Bongo Bongo land" and calling a room full of women "sluts".
Nor does Mr Farage tolerate the quirky policy ideas previously championed by the party. In January he publicly disowned the party's entire 2010 manifesto , which included ideas such as compulsory uniforms for taxi drivers and repainting trains in more "traditional" colours.
One person involved in drawing up the 2010 manifesto says: "There were dozens of people involved in writing that manifesto. The party was desperate to prove it wasn't stupid and had ideas on all sorts of issues. Now everything has to go through just a handful of people at the top and, ultimately, Nigel."
Ukip's leadership is also gearing up for a fight over a pamphlet being planned by some of the party's senior policy advisers, who want to set out some of their more radical ideas in a book called "Purple Vision".
These ideas are likely to include scrapping a range of taxes, including national insurance and VAT, and folding it all into a single tax rate, something advocated by libertarian think-tanks.
But those close to the party leader deride what they call "purple sky" thinking, which they fear will play into the hands of those who accuse Ukip of not properly costing policies. One Farage ally says: "No one is licensed to speak on policy except Nigel."
Another potential pitfall is that Ukip may have peaked too early. Having led the party into a position where it consistently outpolls the Lib Dems, Mr Farage faces pressure to win the European ballot and a seat in Westminster in 2015.
Mr Bloom says: "We have to win or the party is over. Ukip is finished if it doesn't come top." Mr Farage himself has promised to quit if the party fails to win any seats in 2015.
The most significant risk of Mr Farage's attempts to rebrand the party, however, is that it could undermine his and the party's antiestablishment credentials.
Joe Twyman, head of political research at YouGov, the pollsters, says: "The only thing that could seriously weaken Farage's appeal is if he starts to be seen as another member of the establishment."
The party is already struggling with some of the extra attention. In February the FT revealed that Ukip's MEPs failed to attend important meetings and votes in Brussels, triggering claims it is not defending British interests. Since then, the party's expenses have come under scrutiny. Having made political capital out of the expense row that engulfed Westminster in 2009, Ukip has been embarrassed by allegations it has misused Brussels allowances .
One particularly tense encounter came at the hands of Nick Robinson, the BBC's political editor, who grilled Mr Farage on the fact he employs his German wife as his personal assistant, for which she is paid up to £20,000 a year through the EU. The Ukip leader struggled to explain why she should take that job rather than a British worker.
Since then the party has sought to reassert its outsider status, attacking the private education of journalists at The Times, where allegations over the party's expenses were made, and rebranding itself the "people's army".
Mr Farage has found a way of breaking through to a section of voters the mainstream parties have not reached for years. Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin, political academics whose book Revolt on the Right analyses Ukip's support, call these voters the "left behind", saying they are largely poor and poorly educated white men who feel alienated from the pace of cultural change in Britain.
Ukip has done better at eating into Conservative support than any other party - 45 per cent of its supporters backed the Tories in 2010. But Mr Ford and Mr Goodwin point out that the same views are held in large parts of the urban north, where those who may once have voted Labour have not done so since Tony Blair rebranded the party.
Of the 15 seats Mr Ford and Mr Goodwin believe are most receptive to Ukip's message, 12 are held by Labour.
Rob Hayward, an expert in local elections, says: "It's always a misconception to believe they are all exTories. Many of them are non-voters or people who switch their allegiances."
Ukip is aware of its potential among disaffected Labour voters in the north: it launched its European campaign in Sheffield, a city built on steel manufacturing, with a series of posters focusing on immigration and jobs.
"The point is that euroscepticism is not confined to one particular side of the political debate," Mr Farage told the FT at that launch.
In the short term, Ukip's impact is being felt most keenly by the Conservatives, who are aware that even if the party does not win a seat in the general election, it could deprive the governing party of enough votes to prevent a Tory victory.
For that reason, all parties are carefully watching the reaction of the Tories to May's vote. If Ukip does as well as expected, and the Tories as badly, many expect the Conservatives to engage in one of their periodic bouts of infighting, as some pull to the right while others insist they must stay on the centre ground.
There are concerns, however, over Mr Farage's health and the effect the campaign will have on him. A committed smoker and enthusiastic beer drinker, he has told friends he is worried about making it through the election. "Nigel is convinced he is going to have a heart attack before the general election," says one person who has spent considerable time with the Ukip leader.
But having survived an air crash, Mr Farage has begun to acquire an aura of invincibility. And the robustness he showed in 2010 after picking himself out of that wreckage will need to be there in spades if he is to fight off the political onslaught he is likely to face in the next year.
Constituency
Farage agonises over his choice of seat
As the last general election approached, it became clear that Nigel Farage's latest attempt to win a Westminster seat was doomed, writes Kiran Stacey .
After dropping from about 16 per cent of the vote in European elections the year before to just over 3 per cent, his party struggled to make headway against a rising Conservative party and unexpectedly resilient Labour party.
But more damaging was the choice of where to run. Mr Farage thought it clever to pick Buckingham, the southeast English seat held by John Bercow, House of Commons speaker.
By tradition none of the main parties tries to unseat the speaker, so Mr Farage was given a clear run. But many voters in the small market town saw the move as a gimmick, and the UK Independence party leader came in a distant third behind an independent candidate, John Stevens.
This time round, the party is determined not to repeat the mistake, and has been agonising over where its leader should stand. Its dilemma highlights the various strands of the British electorate to which Ukip is trying to appeal.
Some in his party think he should take the first opportunity to run in a by-election where the former incumbent has been discredited, capitalising on Ukip's anti-politics appeal. They say Eastleigh, which was vacated after Chris Huhne, the Liberal Democrat, was jailed for persuading his wife to accept his speeding points, would have been a perfect choice.
Others say he should run in the north, where Ukip does not have a good ground operation but where many disenfranchised voters are receptive to his message. Great Grimsby, where the Labour MP Austin Mitchell is standing down in 2015, would be one option.
But Mr Farage's advisers are urging him not to make another tactical pick that could look like a gimmick. Instead, under their advice, Mr Farage is set to choose one of two coastal Kent seats, most likely South Thanet, where Laura Sandys, the pro-European Conservative MP, is standing down.
UK seats up for grabs
Great Grimsby (Lab); Plymouth, Moor View (Lab); Ashfield (Lab); Walsall North (Lab); Waveney (Con); Hartlepool (Lab); Bishop Auckland (Lab); Blackpool South (Lab); Stoke-on-Trent North (Lab); Great Yarmouth (Con); Eastleigh (LD); Rotherham (Lab); South Shields (Lab); Barnsley Central (Lab); Middlesbrough (Lab)
Analysis by Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin, based on demographics and two-party swing
Prof Alan Sked, Ukip cofounder
'It has become corrupt, racist and obsessed with immigration and Islam. It hardly talks about the EU but its MEPs do travel to Brussels to get on the gravy train. I despise it now.'
Rob Hayward, elections analyst
'It's a misconception to believe they are all exTories.
Many of them are people who switch allegiances'
Ukip MEP on election strategy
'We are learning from the Lib Dems. They go big on local issues and when they fight elections they fill the constituency with hundreds of people
Joe Twyman of pollsters YouGov
'The only thing that could seriously weaken Farage's appeal is if he starts to be seen as another member of the establishment'
Document FTFTA00020140507ea570000k
