{"newspaper":"FT","id:"1111"}
____
  
LEADER
Science and the UK merger regime; Research is a national asset that should be protected
626 words
7 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
08
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Britain has one of the most liberal takeover regimes in the world. Foreign businesses face few obstacles if they wish to invest in UK companies or buy them outright. Beyond the preservation of competition, decisions on deals are firmly reserved for shareholders.
This simple and robust regime has many virtues. It has arguably secured for Britain a greater share of foreign direct investment than its economic weight would allow.
Overseas capital and management knowhow have patiently turned round once-moribund sectors, such as the car industry. Jaguar Land Rover and Mini are now world-beating brands whose output adds to the UK's export balance. Had their foreign owners been subject to controls and approvals, some might never have made their way to Britain's shores.
Any liberal regime, of course, has exceptions. Few would dispute the UK's right to police acquisitions of companies involved in activities vital to national defence.
The question posed by Pfizer's hostile approach to AstraZeneca is whether those criteria should be widened. Should the state enjoy the power to review deals involving companies that form part of the country's science base?
Britain has a big interest in the future of AstraZeneca. The company is Britain's second-largest drugmaker. It employs nearly 7,000 scientists in the UK and supports a wider supply chain. AstraZeneca is not only important to Britain's future as a leader in the pharmaceuticals industry. Losing such a chunk of infrastructure could imperil the country's strategic objective of remaining a high-tech manufacturing base.
The worry is that a deal could lead to just this outcome. To justify the premium it might have to pay, Pfizer would slash the combined company's costs - including research. Pfizer has not spared R&D in the past . Since acquiring large US rival Wyeth in 2009, it has cut its research budget from $11bn to $6.7bn. To believe it would act differently with AstraZeneca seems simply naive.
The US bidder has acknowledged the legitimacy of Britain's interest. The company's boss, Ian Read , has written to the government to offer assurances about its commitment to the UK. These, however, are time-limited and without force.
Meanwhile, the government has appointed two senior civil servants, including Sir Jeremy Heywood, cabinet secretary, to consider how to respond.
While this informal horsetrading may be the only way the government has of dealing with its concerns, it is unsatisfactory. First, it is excessively political, and Britain's experience of ministerial involvement in merger control has been very mixed. Second, the lack of legal force means any reassurance given is flimsy.
Research - whether into pharmaceuticals or other high-tech sectors - is a global activity and Britain should compete as an attractive location for investment. Primarily, this should mean pursuing excellence in education and enlightenment in immigration policy.
But the government should not allow facilities built up over many years - and often with the benefit of public support - to be neglected or stripped for financial or competitive advantage through the short-sightedness of shareholders. Once lost, these are very hard to restore.
This should not mean imposing a French-style industrial strategy of picking winners. The government should establish an independent body to assess bids from buyers, whether foreign or domestic, that might damage the UK's science base. This should have the power to seek structural remedies if necessary. In extremis it should be able to block deals outright.
These powers must be tightly defined and used sparingly. Protecting the science base is vital. But it should not mean dumping an open-door policy that has, on balance, served the country well.
Document FTFTA00020140507ea570002k
