{"newspaper":"FT","id:"200"}
﻿WORLD NEWS
Le Pen criticises UK rightwing party chief for racism claim; European elections
By Hugh Carnegy in Paris   
760 words
14 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
04
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The National Front leader in France says Farage's comments were dishonest, writes Hugh Carnegy
Marine Le Pen has launched an outspoken attack on Nigel Farage , leader of Britain's UK Independence party, for labelling her National Front party racist in the run-up to European elections at the end of May.
"[UK premier David] Cameron said Ukip was a bunch of drunks and racists. [Mr Farage] is no better; he's using arguments against the FN of which he himself has been a victim. It's dishonest," declared Ms Le Pen
Speaking in an interview with the Financial Times, she said Mr Farage's stance was a ploy intended to surpass her in the role of the EU's leading eurosceptic after the elections, in which both their parties are vying for victory in their respective countries.
"Of course. Clearly it's the main reason for his behaviour. It's an old story between France and England," she said.
Mr Farage, rejecting the FN for its "anti-Semitism and general prejudice", has allied instead in France with a fringe eurosceptic Gaullist group.
Expressing her irritation at his "tactical choice", Ms Le Pen said the two had met a number of times: "I have had good contacts with him, and we met members of Ukip in London. There are Ukip members who don't understand his aggression against us."
But Ms Le Pen, buoyed by polls showing the FN with a clear chance of topping the European poll in France, said she would not need Ukip to be able to form a strong group of hardline anti-Brussels parties in the European Parliament that she said would seek to "block all the federalist advances of the EU".
She predicted like-minded parties from the Netherlands, where the FN is allied with the Dutch Freedom party, Austria, Italy, Belgium and Sweden would be able to muster numbers needed to boost the European Alliance for Freedom as the dominant group on the hard nationalist right, eclipsing Ukip.
Speaking in her party headquarters in Nanterre, on the outskirts of Paris, Ms Le Pen, fresh from making significant advances in France's local elections in March, branded the EU in her characteristic style as "a big jellyfish" that had been "a fantastic failure".
Rejecting accusations that the FN - it takes a hard line against immigration, warns of the threat of Islamism in Europe and calls for restoration of national frontier controls - is a racist party, she said a strong showing by the hard right in the elections would signal the "rejection of the European construction".
"That means opposing the transatlantic trade negotiations with the US, opposing the austerity imposed by the EU, opposing all new transfers of sovereignty from member states to the EU and all new enlargement of the EU."
Ms Le Pen, who has led a rise in popularity of the FN since she took over leadership from her father Jean-Marie Le Pen in 2010, said France needed "intelligent protectionism, our own money and economic patriotism to recover growth - like the US has done".
Her campaign for the dismantlement of the euro has been one of the main pillars of her leadership as France's economy has stalled and unemployment increased. "The eurozone is the black hole of global growth over the past 10 years. It is not a coincidence," she says.
"The euro will explode. My aim is a concerted, considered exit from the single currency, rather than to wait for the explosion." She proposes instead a reflotation of national currencies, with a revaluation for Germany and a devaluation for France, followed by a return to a system like the precursor European Monetary System that sought to manage exchange rates.
Her anti-euro stance has not convinced the public, however, with a BVA poll on Sunday showing 79 per cent of voters did not think it was desirable. It also showed 68 per cent saying they had a bad opinion of Ms Le Pen.
She dismissed the poll as politically biased, confident that the flow of polls in recent weeks showing the FN in first or second place on May 25 were what would count. If the party wins, she will proclaim it as a new sign that "those who believe in the nation" are gaining ascendance over Europe's supra-nationalists who have held sway for so long. "That," she says, "is the real divide today" in France and Europe.
Document FTFTA00020140514ea5e0001y
