{"newspaper":"FT","id:"232"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Opinion polls put Tories ahead of Labour
By George Parker and Jim Pickard   
439 words
13 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Two opinion polls give the Conservatives a lead over Labour for the first time since the aftermath of George Osborne's "omnishambles" Budget in 2012, raising spirits in Downing Street ahead of next week's local and European elections.
David Cameron expects to come third in the polls on May 22 behind the UK Independence party and Labour and is braced for another round of Tory introspection on whether the party needs to toughen its stance on Europe and immigration.
But Tory strategists believe the political tide is moving in the prime minister's direction and the party can build a lead over Labour in the next 12 months by focusing on the economy and Mr Cameron's leadership qualities.
A poll for Lord Ashcroft, a Tory peer, asked people how they would vote in a general election: it recorded a 2 percentage-point Conservative lead, with the Tories on 34 per cent, Labour on 32 per cent, Ukip on 15 per cent and the Liberal Democrats on 9 per cent.
A Guardian/ICM poll also has the Tories ahead by 2 points, on 33 per cent, Labour on 31 per cent, Ukip on 15 per cent and the Lib Dems on 13 per cent.
The moment is significant for its symbolism but pollsters always stress the need to look at the trend in polls rather than individual surveys; for example a YouGov/Sunday Times poll last weekend gave Labour a seven-point lead.
However, Lord Ashcroft's polls are generally regarded as reliable and the peer has been a frequent critic of Mr Cameron's leadership. He said the Tory lead was slender and that only 12 per cent said "the economy is recovering from the recession and I am feeling better off as a result".
The latest round of coalition infighting over education policy is unlikely to boost support for either the Tories or Liberal Democrats, but the Ashcroft poll - in which 1,001 adults were interviewed by telephone between May 9 and 11 - suggests some voters would like to see Nick Clegg's party have a bigger say in government.
Meanwhile Ed Miliband sought to shift the debate on to safer ground as he unveiled a new "GP guarantee" that anyone can get an appointment at their surgery within 48 hours.
Speaking in Manchester last night, the Labour leader said the proportion of patients receiving a GP appointment within two days had fallen from 80 per cent under the last Labour government to 40 per cent today.
Janan Ganesh, Page 11
Document FTFTA00020140513ea5d0000h
