{"newspaper":"FT","id:"264"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Political risks pose threat to recovery, CBI warns; Business fears
By Brian Groom and Emily Cadman   
880 words
12 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
03
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Lobby group says 'headline-grabbing' as elections near is bad for investment, write Brian Groom and Emily Cadman
Corporate Britain faces a "cocktail" of political risks that present a serious threat to the economic recovery , the head of the biggest business lobby group has warned.
John Cridland , director-general of the CBI , urged politicians to refrain from "headline-grabbing policies that weaken investment, opportunities and jobs".
He said business faced an unusually intense combination of political risks because of next spring's general election, this autumn's Scottish independence referendum and a possible referendum on EU membership.
The CBI raised its growth forecast to 3 per cent this year and 2.7 per cent next, up from its previous prediction of 2.6 per cent and 2.5 per cent respectively, but said that "political uncertainty remains a major risk to the recovery".
Although the organisation insisted it would remain non-partisan, many business chiefs are alarmed by salvos by Ed Miliband , the Labour leader, against banks, energy companies, betting companies, pension providers, housebuilders and transport companies.
They fear that if Labour were elected and Mr Miliband translated his rhetoric into action, it could create a climate more hostile to big business than at any time since the 1970s.
However, the CBI said its concerns applied to all the main parties. It called for the coalition's "unhelpful" net migration target to be scrapped and urged the parties to commit themselves in advance to implementing the recommendations of the Davies Commission on airport capacity .
It also cited "flirting with leaving the European Union" as a risk. David Cameron, the prime minister, proposes to renegotiate Britain's relationship with the EU and hold a referendum by 2017 if the Conservatives win the election.
The CBI also urged the next government to "stick with what's working" and keep the deficit reduction strategy on track.
"Political positioning must not be allowed to stifle investment, whether it's an unrealistic immigration target, unjustified interventions into specific markets, flirting with leaving the European Union, delaying vital long-term infrastructure projects or restricting labour market flexibility," said Katja Hall, chief policy director.
She cited Mr Miliband's promises to freeze energy prices and break up big banks as concerns. Other business leaders are worried about Labour's plan to raise the top income tax rate to 50p, but Labour says it is seeking to protect consumers and champion small businesses.
"If Miliband carries through with the interventions he has promised, it would certainly damage the economy's competitiveness," said the head of a large professional services business.
The business leader added: "We have to hope he would be more pragmatic in office, and realise that investment can move very quickly these days."
A FTSE 100 chairman said the speed of reaction of global markets had changed since the 1970s. "The markets wouldn't let Miliband get very far if they didn't like what he was doing. In France, President [François] Hollande has had to change course more rapidly than [François] Mitterrand did."
The CBI urged the next government to be prepared to raise the "tier two" visa cap for skilled migrants as the economy recovers. It called for current industrial strategy to continue and urged swifter opening-up of public services to private sector bids. The CBI gave strong backing to the government's flagship Help to Buy scheme , which has faced criticism over concerns it is contributing to rapidly rising house prices.
Mr Cridland said it was important to remember the scheme had been introduced because the market "was completely stuck" and pointed to evidence it had mostly been used outside London and mainly for first-time buyers. "Its original purpose is being achieved," he said, adding Britain had "ducked for too long" the fundamental requirement to build more houses.
Latest figures from Acadata, whose numbers include cash sales, unlike other indices, suggest house prices rose 7.3 per cent in the year to April. Mr Cridland said the housing market was high on the CBI's risk register but he was confident that regulators were ready to act.
The CBI joined the market consensus in bringing forward its expectation of interest rate rises to the first quarter of next year, on the back of a sharp upgrade in its growth forecasts to 3 per cent for this year. In particular, it forecasts businesses becoming more willing to invest.
The business organisation said there were encouraging signs growth was becoming more broad-based, but it played down hopes that exports would play a big role in the recovery. It said exports were likely to strengthen as the global economy picked up but that this was likely to be neutralised by increasing consumer demand for imports.
Despite concerns about a hit to the export sector from the growing strength of sterling, which hit a new five-year high against the dollar last week, Mr Cridland stressed that the pound was still substantially weaker than its pre-crisis peak and unlikely to be a large inhibiting factor.
Areas of concern Policies vexing the employers' group
- Energy price freeze
- Airport capacity
- Break-up of big banks
- Immigration targets
Document FTFTA00020140512ea5c0000x
