{"newspaper":"FT","id:"2295"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Rebuttal of 'racist' charge backfires as Ukip's carnival descends into farce; Croydon rally
By George Parker, Political Editor   
920 words
21 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Even detractors admit chaotic event will not damage party in elections tomorrow, reports George Parker
Nigel Farage pulled out of a "carnival" themed election rally in Croydon yesterday that was intended to highlight his supposed multicultural appeal, after the leader of a steel band booked by Ukip said he was embarrassed to play for the "racist" party.
Party officials said Mr Farage had decided against attending the rally for "security reasons", apparently a reference to a handful of placard-wielding Romanian protesters denouncing his policies on immigration.
A more likely explanation for his failure to appear was the sight of the Endurance Steel Orchestra - booked to provide a "bold and vibrant" Caribbean flavour at the event - packing up early after claiming they were booked under false pretences.
Marlon Hibbert, 22, said he had been asked to play at a political event but had not been told it was a Ukip rally. Asked if he thought the party was racist, he said: "From what I've heard, yes."
"My parents came over here from Jamaica to work. If Ukip had their way I would not be here. The country would be a lot less diverse than it is," he said.
As the event descended into farce, Winston McKenzie, a former boxer and a Ukip candidate for Croydon council, explained that his home town was "a dump" and too "unsafe" for Mr Farage to visit.
"It's not a case of being scared but you have a responsibility as a family man and a party leader: there are certain situations you have to avoid." Although Mr McKenzie repeatedly insisted that Mr Farage was about to turn up, the Ukip leader later denied that he had ever intended to visit.
The chaotic event, held in the town centre of Croydon, was intended by Mr Farage to be a riposte to claims that he has pursued a racist campaign with his -criticisms of Romanian immigration - an allegation he categorically denies.
But even Mr Farage's critics do not believe that any of this is likely to damage Ukip ahead of tomorrow's local and European elections; Mr McKenzie predicted: "The earthquake is coming."
Throughout the campaign Conservative and Labour officials have trawled through the Twitter accounts of Ukip -candidates, hoping to substantiate David Cameron's characterisation of the party as a refuge for -"fruitcakes and closet -racists".
To some extent the tactic has been successful: Mr Farage has found himself defending Ukip against the charge that it is racist, a claim taken up enthusiastically by pro-Conservative newspapers and some broadcasters.
Mr Farage squirmed in an LBC interview when asked to justify why Londoners might worry if Romanians moved in next door; he blamed the prevalence of Romanian criminal gangs.
"There's an opportunity cost for him," said one Tory strategist. "While he's spending time saying he's not a racist, that means he has less time to get his message across.
"It is also starting to -contaminate the Ukip brand. People don't want to be associated with a party that might be seen as racist - they hesitate, they don't want to give them money."
But that may be wishful thinking. Even the most optimistic Tory campaigners admit that any such damage to Ukip is "a slow burner", unlikely to do much damage to the party's share of the vote in tomorrow's elections.
Prime minister David Cameron has admitted as much, telling colleagues that the Tories cannot expect to beat Ukip in European elections: "It's like a pub quiz and they're playing their joker on their specialist round."
But Mr Cameron's hope is that Ukip's support will fade away at the next general election, when the Tories will warn rightwing voters that a Ukip vote could let in Labour.
Mr Farage's advance is also being watched with concern by Ed Miliband. The Labour leader can see the party's working-class supporters seeping away to Ukip in urban areas.
Patrick O'Flynn, Ukip's communications chief, has claimed that his party may already have "maxed out the Tory vote" and that it is coming for Labour.
Inside Mr Miliband's team, a fierce debate is raging about the extent to which Labour tries to address the threat by toughening its stance on immigration and welfare; neither approach sits easily with Mr Miliband's political vision.
What is unknown is whether Ukip can achieve during the next 12 months what it has never achieved before: turning headline-grabbing results in European elections into -success at a Westminster poll.
The party's record suggests not. In the European elections of 2004 and 2009, Ukip recorded a vote share of 16 per cent, but this subsequently collapsed to 2 per cent and 3 per cent in the general elections that followed a year later.
This time may be different. The Farage phenomenon has taken off and could take Ukip on an unpredictable trajectory, with uncertain implications for Mr Cameron and Mr Miliband.
Turbulent record
16.2%
UK Independence party's share of the vote in the 2004 European elections
2.2%
Ukip's share of the vote in the 2005 general election
16.5%
Ukip's share in the 2009 European elections
3.1%
Ukip's share in the 2010 general election
24%
Ukip's share in the latest YouGov poll on European election voting intentions
Document FTFTA00020140521ea5l00010
