{"newspaper":"FT","id:"231"}
____
  
COMMENT
Conservatives still fail to grasp the minority vote
By Janan Ganesh   
858 words
13 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
07
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Conservative MPs who fancy themselves as no-nonsense should spend a day with the patriarch of an Asian household. Tories who think they are serious about faith and family should visit a black Pentecostal church. They will leave both establishments feeling like dilettantes. Self-reliance, enterprise, educational rigour - many causes imagined to be "rightwing" in London's politico-media zones constitute mere common sense in some ethnic minority communities.
So the Conservatives should fare well among such voters. Instead, they are not loosely competitive with the Labour party. Last week a report by the think-tank Policy Exchange charted the dimensions of a problem that has the potential to crush the Tories. Britain's five largest minorities - Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, black Africans and Afro-Carribeans - are growing from 14 per cent of the population to potentially 30 per cent by 2050. Even adjusting for income, they are overwhelmingly Labour. Sixty-one per cent identify with the opposition party; just 9 per cent favour the Tories. Even the most pro- Conservative group, Indians, prefer Labour by 54 per cent to 17 per cent.
Just as US Republicans struggle with the growing Hispanic electorate, the Tories face their own demographic reckoning. They are in this fix for the same reason they have been generally unpopular for a generation: they think politics is about policy. If someone agrees with you on most of the issues of the day - so this line of reasoning goes - you can count on their vote. This is exquisitely logical and very wrong.
Voters do not judge a party only or even mainly by its manifesto. Many cannot name a specific policy commitment even as they mark their ballot paper. A party stands or falls by the gut impression it creates during the sporadic flashes in which voters pay any attention to politics. Its "brand", to use an obnoxious but stubbornly useful term, is what it lives by. If all the Tory modernisers have achieved in the past decade is to make this point, their movement was worthwhile.
For many minority voters, the impression created by the Tory party is one of ambivalence about diversity. Specifically, they detect something verging on regret about the waves of migration from the Indian subcontinent and the Caribbean that reconstituted British society after the second world war.
This impression is grievously wide of the mark; a prejudice in itself. Many Tories, including several in the cabinet, are effortless cosmopolitans. Even those who are not mean it when they say that Britain has been enriched by its newcomers over the past half-century and more. These are not people who daydream about going back in time and turning the Empire Windrush away at Tilbury docks. But a reputation does not have to be accurate to be fatal.
Some of this reality is dawning on the party. More Tories accept that, if even some very conservative people are voting Labour , policy might not be the decisive variable. They are especially taken by the example of the Canadian Conservatives, who improved their standing among minority voters through grand gestures and constant campaigning. There is another example nearer at hand. Alex Salmond, the nationalist first minister of Scotland, has crafted that unusual thing: a nationalism that minority voters feel relaxed about signing up to. It probably helps that he talks about Scotland as an open country with an eye for industrious immigrants.
And here is the crux. The Tories quote impeccable research showing that minorities are at least as hostile to immigration as white voters. So the party talks about immigration often and very negatively in the confidence this is not turning off blacks and Asians. And after all, the migrants who bear the rhetorical brunt are white Christians from eastern and central Europe.
This is where the politics of logic hits a wall. Put simply, a Tory complaining about immigration "means" something different - in the mind of a voter - than a Labour politician saying the same words. It means unease with a diverse society. This is even true among white voters, who in focus groups are less likely to endorse a given immigration policy once they learn it belongs to the Tories.
Immigration is intensely unpopular in the country and within the Tory party. Its leaders would be quixotic to not reflect that view. But whenever they do, it risks aggravating their reputation among minorities. It is very difficult to hear the party grumble about the immigration of the past decade without wondering what it makes of the immigration of the past 60 years.
A political message can be popular on its own terms but still lose votes by hardening suspicions about the party propounding it. The Tories used to dominate entire centuries of British politics because they had the subtlety of mind to intuit this kind of human quirk, while others bet the house on cold logic and literalism. A party that used to define itself against rationalist naivety has become drunk on the stuff. It is only making it harder to entice a multicoloured electorate.
janan.ganesh@ft.com
Document FTFTA00020140513ea5d0002p
