{"newspaper":"FT","id:"201"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Balls tells chancellor to rein in Help to Buy
By George Parker and Jim Pickard   
714 words
14 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
03
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Recovery at risk as house prices rise
Labour 'upbeat' in spite of Tory lead
Chancellor George Osborne is endangering the recovery by "washing his hands" of responsibility for rising house prices and passing the buck to a Bank of England still coming to terms with new regulatory powers, Labour has claimed.
Ed Balls, shadow chancellor, said Mr Osborne needed to rein in the Help to Buy scheme in London and put fresh effort into building new towns and more social housing to boost supply.
"You can't as chancellor wash your hands of responsibility for balancing the housing market," Mr Balls said, adding that Labour would also use fiscal powers such as a tax on homes worth more than £2m to damp price rises.
Mr Osborne has called on BoE officials to "use the tools that I've given them" to stop the housing market from overheating; the bank can place restrictions on riskier mortgage lending.
But Mr Balls warned that the bank was still trying to make sense of its new structure, in which two separate committees with "a very substantial overlap" in powers and membership are charged with keeping a lid on house price inflation.
"The danger when you have a large overlap is that people think it's someone else's responsibility," Mr Balls said in an interview with the Financial Times.
He feared that the bank's Monetary Policy Committee could be forced to use "the blunt instrument" of an interest rate rise prematurely to contain London house price inflation, harming the wider economy.
Meanwhile, he claimed the Financial Policy Committee, which is charged with using other tools such as bank lending restrictions to maintain economic stability, had a similar membership and responsibility to the MPC.
Although he refused to commit a Labour government to another restructuring of the bank, he said that Mr Osborne's reforms of the BoE were "unfinished business" and it was still unclear where responsibility lay in the event of a crisis.
Mr Balls has called on Mr Osborne to cut from £600,000 to £400,000 the threshold for house purchases eligible for government mortgage guarantees under Help to Buy; the chancellor says he is waiting for the BoE to tell him to act.
Mr Osborne is likely to say Mr Balls was an architect of Labour's decision to give the BoE independence and was at the Treasury while the last housing bubble was inflating.
Mr Balls's comments came ahead of today's Bank of England Inflation Report, in which the central bank will come under pressure to explain how it proposes to cool the housing market without derailing the wider economic recovery.
He said Labour was "upbeat" in spite of polls showing the Tories taking a lead for the first time in two years, but he admitted the party was struggling to get its message across, including in areas of economic credibility.
Mr Balls said the party needed to "make more noise to say we'll take tough decisions on the deficit" and that it also needed to make "more noise" to show Labour was serious about tackling immigration, welfare abuse and reforming the EU.
He admitted voters needed reassuring that Labour would "make the sums add up" and that the party understood the need for wealth creation and supported entrepreneurs.
Lord Jones, a business minister in the last Labour government, said he believed Mr Miliband was "one of the least business- friendly leaders of political parties I've seen for years".
But Mr Balls, seen as a supporter of business and the City in the Labour leadership team, said: "I don't think Labour will win the next election as an anti-business party."
Additional reporting by Chris Giles
The shadow chancellor on...
House prices
'You can't as chancellor wash your hands of responsibility for balancing the housing market'
BoE structure
'The danger when you have a large overlap is that people think it's someone else's responsibility'
Party priorities
Labour needs to 'make more noise to say we'll take tough decisions on the deficit'
Need for noise
'People can be influenced by your opponents' attempts to characterise your debate'
Document FTFTA00020140514ea5e00009
