{"newspaper":"FT","id:"2154"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Ministers urged to ease visa rules to help plug skills gap
By Brian Groom, Business and Employment Editor   
312 words
7 March 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Britain's skills shortages will grow unless visa restrictions are eased for highly skilled workers, recruiters have warned.
Vacancies were close to a 15-year high in February, but the number of candidates available to fill them continued to fall, according to a monthly survey of 400 job agencies by the Recruitment and Employment Confederation and KPMG professional services.
Demand for permanent staff was strongest in engineering, construction and the medical and care sector.
"Recruiters are struggling to source the managerial and technical skills that employers require, and this will only get worse as the economy strengthens," said Kevin Green, REC chief executive. He added: "Negative rhetoric on immigration from politicians fails to consider the immediate needs of British businesses. The government must address the restrictions on visas for highly skilled workers. This would allow businesses to access the people they need to grow and create jobs for more British workers."
The UK Commission for Employment and Skills warned recently that skills shortages threatened to hold back the pace of recovery in parts of the economy. Faced with shortages, employers complain of delays and uncertainty in knowing whether they will be allowed to hire staff from outside the EU.
Mr Green called for the "shortage occupation list", under which work permits can be fast-tracked in areas of skill shortage, to be widened to include more categories in technology and engineering.
The REC-KPMG survey also shows that starting pay for permanent workers grew at its highest rate last month for more than six years - a potential sign that the six-year squeeze on real wages may end this year, as the Treasury and Office for Budget Responsibility have forecast.
Permanent staff appointments grew at their fastest pace for almost four years.
Document FTFT000020140307ea3700003
