{"newspaper":"FT","id:"2965"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Farage declares Ukip on verge of breakthrough in Scottish politics; May 22 poll
By Mure Dickie in Edinburgh   
631 words
10 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed3
04
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Party leader aims for victory in one of six European parliamentary seats north of the border, says Mure Dickie
Only a year after being chased off the streets of Edinburgh by radical protesters, Nigel Farage has declared his United Kingdom Independence party to be on the brink of a breakthrough in Scotland.
As protesters outside a party meeting in Edinburgh chanted: "Fascist scum off our streets" and "We'd rather have the immigrants than you", Mr Farage said Ukip was poised to take one of six European Parliament seats in the May 22 election. The party has never won election to any office in Scotland.
"The polls look pretty good," Mr Farage said before a meeting of scores of Ukip members that was shielded from demonstrators by police and security contractors. "I'm very confident we will win a seat; very confident we will have a legitimate voice in Scottish politics - which of course it has been difficult for us to claim before."
While Ukip is far less popular among Scottish voters than in other parts of the UK, crumbling support for the Liberal Democrats has offered the party an opportunity under the proportional representation system used for European voting.
Ukip's message of tighter immigration controls and exit from the EU remains a harder sell in Scotland than in other parts of the UK. When Mr Farage visited Edinburgh in May last year he was pursued by radical independence and pro-immigrant activists - eventually departing after being cornered in a pub.
Protest organisers yesterday said they wanted to "articulate our vision of a welcoming, inclusive and diverse society that embraces internationalism, and rejects the narrow and prejudiced mindset represented by Ukip".
Mr Farage dismissed suggestions that Ukip was racist, citing its ethnically diverse European candidates. He said most Scots and members of ethnic minorities agreed with Ukip's message that immigration needed to be brought under control - a task that would be impossible if the UK remained within the EU.
Ukip success on May 22 could have implications for Scotland's independence debate. The party's rise has been seen by Scottish nationalist campaigners as evidence that political cultures across the border are diverging as England shifts towards the right. The Scottish National party says leaving the UK is the only way to ensure Scotland continues to be part of the EU.
A YouGov opinion poll for the University of Edinburgh last month found that almost 30 per cent of voters in England said they might back Ukip on May 22, but only 10 per cent in Scotland.
However, for the European parliamentary elections, a relatively small increase in support could gain Ukip its first Scottish seat, said John Curtice of the University of Strathclyde.
"They are likely to do a lot less well in Scotland than we expect in England or even in Wales . . . but they might be in the race for the last seat," said Prof Curtice.
Mr Farage said winning an elected Ukip presence in Scotland would weaken support for independence by exposing the contradictions in the SNP's desire to leave the UK while staying in the EU.
"I think we can shape the debate," he said.
Alex Salmond, Scotland's first minister, has previously portrayed Ukip as irrelevant to Scottish political debate.
However, in an apparent sign of concern about its prospects, the SNP leader changed tack on Friday to argue that May 22 offered voters a "stark choice" between electing a third SNP member of the European Parliament and Ukip's candidate.
"I am confident that people will make the right choice by keeping Scotland free of the politics of Ukip," said Mr Salmond.
Document FTFTA00020140510ea5a0001k
