{"newspaper":"FT","id:"263"}
____
  
WORLD NEWS
Survey shows gloomy mood of EU voters; Pessimism expected to boost eurosceptics
By Gordon Smith in London   
686 words
12 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Two-thirds of French voters believed the state of their country's economy was worse than it was a year ago and felt less secure in their jobs, according to an opinion survey conducted for the Financial Times.
The survey, carried out across the EU 's five biggest economies, underlines the pessimism felt by many voters in the run-up to this month's European elections.
In Spain , which has been held up as an exemplar of the eurozone's recent recovery, many voters saw little change - even though the country notched up its highest growth rate for six years in the first quarter of this year. More than a third of those questioned felt the economy was worse than a year ago and 43 per cent said it was no better.
The gloomy responses show the challenges confronting mainstream politicians across Europe as they seek to persuade disenchanted voters about a nascent recovery in the economy that many still do not discern.
That sense of frustration and insecurity is expected to propel a band of eurosceptic and populist parties to new heights in the European parliament when -voters go to the polls from May 22-25.
Respondents in France, the EU's second-largest economy, stood out as the most negative, according to Harris, which questioned more than 5,000 people in the UK, Spain, Italy, Germany and France.
Thirty-nine per cent of respondents in France said the economy was "much worse" than it was a year ago, while 22 per cent said it was "slightly worse". In Italy, too, a majority of voters felt the economy was weaker than it was a year ago. Asked if they felt more secure in their jobs, 58 per cent of Italians answered: "No, not at all."
By contrast, more than a third of voters in Britain felt the economy was in better shape than it was a year ago, providing another example of growing consumer confidence. The UK recently had its 2014 growth forecast upgraded by the OECD club of mostly rich nations to 3.2 per cent, giving it the strongest economic outlook of any G7 country.
France, by contrast, was downgraded by the OECD, emphasising the sluggish rate of recovery that has compounded the deep unpopularity of president François Hollande . Mr Hollande conceded last week that he would not run for re-election if the persistently high unemployment rate was not falling by the time of the next presidential election, in 2017.
"French people have no confidence in politics and are worried about unemployment and they think they will not have enough money for tomorrow," said Jean-Daniel Levy, head of opinion and political research at Harris Interactive.
The survey also shows that French voters are the most disillusioned with the European parliament, with only 10 per cent viewing the institution as more relevant than it was at the last EU elections, in 2009 - even though its powers have increased dramatically since then.
In Britain, where the City was stung by a cap on banker bonuses, which MEPs had pushed for, respondents were twice as likely as their French counterparts to judge that the parliament had become more relevant.
But British voters were clearly the most eurosceptic when asked which party they were likely to vote for.
Thirty-six per cent of Britons said they were "most inclined" to vote for a party that campaigned for their country's withdrawal from the EU. That compares with just 15 and 16 per cent in Germany and Spain, respectively. In France, where the rightwing National Front is leading neck and neck with the centre-right UMP, 22 per cent of voters said they would support a party that sought an exit from the EU.
The survey also underlined the importance of immigration as an issue in the European elections.
More than half of all voters asked - rising to 77 per cent in the UK - agreed with the statement their country had "too many immigrants from the EU".
Document FTFTA00020140512ea5c0001n
