{"newspaper":"FT","id:"2963"}
____
  
LEADER
A pettifogging row over halal meat; The debate over Islamic food says much about the UK
612 words
10 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
08
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
With European and local elections just weeks away, the casual observer might expect the political debate in Britain to be engaged with pressing matters: the provision of local services, a renegotiation of EU membership or the neuralgic issue of immigration.
The casual observer's confidence would be misplaced. This week, the country has been convulsed by a debate about halal butchery . This follows reports in newspapers about PizzaExpress, a restaurant chain that uses only chicken killed in conformity with Islamic tradition. In the eyes of some people, the chain's fault has been to offer halal meat without informing its customers when they order.
It is not clear how many of PizzaExpress's thousands of customers had halal on their mind as they tucked into their leggera pollo . In practical terms there is little difference between conventional butchery and the halal version, save the saying of a prayer before slaughter. In all non-halal abattoirs, and the majority of halal ones, animals are stunned - left alive but unconscious - before being killed through conventional bloodletting.
True, a small proportion of halal slaughterhouses do not stun the animals before they are killed, which some object to on the grounds of animal welfare. But this accounts for only 10 per cent of the total. Most important, the meat purchased by PizzaExpress does not fall into this category.
The answer, it would seem, is that shops and restaurants should inform their customers how their meat has been butchered. The EU is already looking at options and will report its findings in the summer. But labelling is expensive and potentially misleading.
Some consumers do have strong views about animal welfare. They might object to consuming meat from animals that had been sentient when slaughtered. Similarly, they would abhor battery-hen farming or the transportation of animals over long distances. In this particular controversy, however, something else is at stake.
Behind the vilification of PizzaExpress lies the same thinking that has driven similar campaigns across other countries in Europe and which appears to speak to an incipient Islamophobia.
Marine Le Pen , the French National Front leader, has complained about halal produce. Her party has even made the bizarre claim that consumption of meat prepared in this way could induce citizens to convert to Islam. In all cases, certain people seem intent on triggering moral panics designed to highlight the influence of Muslim communities over local traditions.
These outbursts are easily used as proxies to whip up prejudice against religious minorities. They generate anxieties that, in turn, sow divisions among ethnically diverse communities. In Britain, which has experienced waves of immigration from its former colonies in the postwar period, this is a dangerous phenomenon, chiefly because the Islamic proportion of society is increasing.
This week Policy Exchange, a think-tank, estimated that by 2050 nearly one-third of the UK will be non-white, up from 13 per cent today. Britain's politicians should therefore be careful about giving such rows the oxygen of publicity.
David Cameron, prime minister, has done no service with his own halal intervention. He said that if shops and restaurants are not more forthcoming about whether their meat is halal, then he will review UK labelling laws. Inevitably, Nigel Farage, head of Ukip, joined in supporting mandatory labelling, despite failing to support an EU vote on the issue in 2010.
Britain is a tolerant and open society that benefits from immigration. But the image projected by unsavoury debates of this kind is of a country unwelcoming to foreigners and ashamed of its diversity. We are all diminished.
Document FTFTA00020140510ea5a00040
