{"newspaper":"FT","id:"2566"}
____
  
WORLD NEWS
Free flow of labour starts to ebb as Belgium cracks down on migrants; Working abroad
By Andrew Byrne in Brussels   
732 words
17 March 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
04
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Authorities last year contacted a record number of foreigners, telling them to leave, says Andrew Byrne
Three years ago, 28-year-old Fatima Donaire thought she was living the European dream.
Born and raised in the Andalucían town of Jaén, Ms Donaire took advantage of the EU's promise of a borderless European labour market in 2011 to leave crisis-stricken Spain and move to Liège in Belgium , where she got her first break as an intern in a design company.
But not only did she fail to get a job after her internship ended, after six months scraping by on temporary jobs and unemployment benefits, she received an even bigger shock: a letter from the Belgian government notifying her that she had 30 days to leave.
"Being a European, I could not understand how they could make me leave like this," said Ms Donaire, who with the help of a pro bono lawyer and a contract as a teaching assistant was allowed to stay. "I felt devastated, destroyed."
On a continent still struggling to recover from a four-year-old economic crisis and with anti-immigrant populist parties on the rise from Britain to Greece, the free flow of workers within the bloc's common market has come under unprecedented attack.
Even mainstream leaders such David Cameron, UK prime minister, and Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, have called for a rethink of how workers from other EU countries access their national welfare systems.
Belgium has not only talked about a rethink, it has acted. Last year, the government sent 2,712 letters to out-of-work EU immigrants, including Ms Donaire, informing them they had no right to stay because they had become an "unreasonable burden" on the country's generous welfare system.
Workers from Romania, Bulgaria, Italy and Spain were the most common recipients, according to interior ministry statistics. Although Belgium has been sending such letters to small numbers of EU migrants since 2008, authorities ramped up their efforts last year, with letters reaching an all-time high.
"The free movement of citizens of the EU is not an absolute right," said Dominique Ernould, a spokeswoman for Belgium's immigration office. "These citizens have the right to move freely within the EU, but they also have responsibilities."
Even in a country that has traditionally welcomed foreign workers - more than 10 per cent of Belgian residents are foreign nationals and Elio Di Rupo, Belgium's Socialist prime minister, is the son of Italian immigrants who arrived to work in Wallonia's coal mines in the 1940s - the initiative has proved popular.
"Since the early 1990s, immigration and integration have been major issues in Belgian politics," said Marc Swyngedouw, a professor of politics at the University of Leuven. "They are trying to restrict the rules on freedom of movement in the EU as much as possible and they are making a lot of noise to show they are doing something about it."
Indeed, the letter-writing programme has been so politically successful that is has begun to attract notice outside Belgium. The immigration ministry has begun fielding calls from other European governments.
Belgium has long attracted workers from all over Europe. And like other countries in Europe's "core", until recently anti-immigration sentiment was the exclusive province of the political fringe.
A decade ago, the far-right Vlaams Belang, a Flemish nationalist party with a virulent anti-immigrant streak, broke into double digits in national elections, winning 18 seats in the federal parliament.
But more recently, such anti-immigrant sentiment has moved into the mainstream, particularly in Flanders. A poll taken in November by the Flemish regional government found 47 per cent of respondents believed foreigners come to Belgium to exploit its welfare system. The largest party in the Belgian parliament, the more moderate separatist New Flemish Alliance, has made getting unemployed immigrants off benefits and speaking Dutch a key policy.
Even Flanders' traditional mainstream parties have jumped on the bandwagon.
Mina Andreeva, a spokeswoman for the European Commission's justice commissioner, said Belgium had done nothing illegal, noting European law allowed any country to send home labourers from another EU member after six months if they lacked "sufficient means to support themselves and pay for their health insurance".
Document FTFTA00020140317ea3h00027
