{"newspaper":"FT","id:"2296"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Tory leader optimistic on keeping control of urban stronghold; Trafford
By Andrew Bounds in Sale   
702 words
21 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Sean Anstee is not your typical Conservative. He is 26, gay, but, rarest of all, runs a city council in the north, writes Andrew Bounds in Sale .
Trafford is the last blue urban stronghold in the region after swing cities such as Leeds and Carlisle have fallen to Labour in the past few years.
Mr Anstee believes the party can hold on to the district south of Manchester, which includes expensive suburbs such as Hale and Altrincham as well as grittier Stretford.
"We have the lowest council tax in the northwest, the lowest parking charges in Greater Manchester, excellent grammar schools and good services." Conservatives in the north had "a responsibility to get our message out", he said.
Mr Anstee, who trained as a banker and still holds down an occasional job at Bank of New York Mellon in Manchester, said his age had not been a factor on the doorstep.
"We have got to get young people involved in politics. But I don't want to be defined by my age. I want to get things done for Trafford," he said.
He won the Conservative leadership in an election in January after Matt Colledge stood down over time pressure.
He admitted delivering cuts was a "challenge" but has made a virtue of it, with a plan to privatise much service delivery and by working in partnership with the police, National Health Service and charities by sharing offices and budgets.
"We cannot just throw money at problems. We have to work better. Labour councils do not cope well with austerity," he said.
Trafford has cut £60m of spending in the past four years and its revenue budget will decrease by a further £50m over the next four years. "If a council is not adding value to a service, it will have to stop," he said.
The Labour party is playing down its chances of seizing Trafford but believes it can deny the Tories a majority.
The Conservatives have 33 seats, Labour 26 and the Lib Dems four, with 21 contested this time. "We are targeting four seats and aim to move it to no overall control," said David Acton, opposition leader on the council. He said residents had felt service cuts.
The council has closed residential homes for the elderly and children's day centres while libraries are being staffed mostly by volunteers, with bin collections moved from weekly to fortnightly.
The closure of the local hospital's accident and emergency department and some bus routes were also big factors in the election, as well as the so-called bedroom tax cutting housing benefit for those with a spare room.
In St Mary's ward, where Labour lost by only 19 votes last time, candidate James Wright received a generally sympathetic hearing.
"We could do with a change," said David Mayon, a pensioner, promising to vote Labour as he talks to Mr Wright over the garden fence.
Patricia Daly, a housewife, was not so certain. "I don't want false promises," she said. "You all tell us what you are going to do and then don't do it."
Political distrust remains rife after years of expenses scandals. On the street of semi-detached homes at least 10 undecided voters committed themselves to Labour.
But there are signs of growing support for the UK Independence party.
Rob, a retired firefighter behind the wheel of a Land Rover, said he was a Labour voter but would switch to Ukip in protest at rising immigration and falling living standards. "I am doing garden maintenance to give my son £400 a month to pay for university. None of the big parties is any different to another." He did not think Nigel Farage's infamous comments about Romanians causing crime were racist. "He's just saying the truth. All the other parties are frightened."
Dave, a serving firefighter, said he would stick with the Liberal Democrats as Ukip did not have a coherent set of policies. But he said he and his wife, a teacher, were getting poorer every year. "The Tories just look after the southeast," he said.
Document FTFTA00020140521ea5l0000w
