{"newspaper":"FT","id:"2409"}
____
  
WORLD NEWS
Young people in Myanmar show an appetite for language study; Education
By Michael Peel in Bangkok   
678 words
14 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
USA Ed1
06
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
As the door opens, political change is fuelling dreams of opportunities at home and abroad, writes Michael Peel
Foreign language study is booming in Myanmar as political change fuels young people's hopes of opportunities at home and abroad their parents never dreamt of.
While English remains a favourite in the former British colony, Chinese, Japanese and Korean are also proving popular as students seek jobs with multinationals and throw themselves into the high-energy Asian musical craze of K-pop.
The linguistic spree is part of a re-emergence of a cosmopolitanism in a country at Asia's heart that saw millennia of immigration but was sealed off from the wider world by decades of repressive military rule .
"For our citizens, our country just developed in the last two or three years," said Aung Khant Zaw, a 15-year-old studying Mandarin, who also wants to learn French to set up a tourism company to help people visit Europe. "It is a good chance for us, for our young people in Myanmar, to go to other countries - and also to have a connection with other countries."
While reliable data on numbers of language students do not exist, experts and students say the appetite for learning seems to be growing - and widening.
Argus Ang, an 18-year Myanmar veteran and chief executive of RVi Group, a Singapore-based education business, said he had seen a "huge pick-up" in the study of English, Chinese and Korean since the junta gave way three years ago to a quasi-civilian government led by President Thein Sein, a former general.
A survey by RVi this year suggested there were at least 255 language centres in Yangon, the biggest city, with 180 offering Japanese, 174 Chinese, 92 Korean, 50 English and 40 Thai.
Mr Ang said the thirst for study was natural in a polyglot nation, with Mandarin, Hindi, Bengali and Thai spoken in border regions - and 100 or so tongues among ethnic group
"You have this melting point of a country, with multiple races and multiple ethnicities, learning different languages," he said.
Optimists say it can gain advantage over neighbouring Thailand, because it is more comfortable with outside influences - and English is more widely spoken.
David Maynard, director of English in Myanmar for the British Council, the UK cultural organisation, said the change in English language learning since the easing of dictatorship was "who is studying and why".
He had seen interest from a growing middle class, the children of government officials, and young people who wanted jobs with foreign organisations in Myanmar.
"The wealthy elite have always had the wherewithal to study English and then use that to do tertiary study abroad," said Mr Maynard. "After 2011, we've seen growth in a different clientele for English emerge."
Some students are relishing the opportunities for study overseas that international engagement brings.
Among the crowded at tables of a J'Donuts fast-food café in Yangon, Kaung Ko Ko Sint, a biochemistry student, wanted a scholarship to Japan - a big aid donor and investor in Myanmar. "Nowadays, the Japanese are trying to help our education system," he said. "So I can study in Japan more easily than in other countries."
Others are preparing for the world to come to them, as excitement grows over the prospects in a resource-rich land that McKinsey consultants say could have a $200bn economy by 2030.
Khin Yoon Thar, 14, said she was learning Mandarin because her mother worked for a Chinese company but could not speak the language - and did not want her daughter to have the same problem.
The teenager admitted she also had a passion to learn Korean, so she could watch the country's popular soap operas without subtitles - and throw herself deeper into the K-pop mania sweeping Asia.
"It's just very catchy - better than English pop," she said. "We don't know the lyrics but we can feel the melodies."
Document FTFT000020140414ea4e00025
