{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3778"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Labour to ambush 'zombie government'; Westminster
By Kiran Stacey, Political Correspondent   
624 words
28 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Party is planning to keep coalition MPs busy in the Commons and off the campaign trail, writes Kiran Stacey
Labour is planning to spring a series of ambushes on the coalition government in the form of surprise debates over the coming weeks designed to force MPs to return to Westminster from their -constituencies.
Senior figures in the opposition complain that the government has run out of legislation to pass - calling it a "zombie government" - and is using the time to send its MPs to campaign in marginal constituencies instead.
Labour whips are therefore planning to call for last-minute debates on a range of topics including childcare, teacher qualifications and veterans' rights, in the hope of forcing -Conservative and Liberal Democrat MPs back into parliament.
Jonathan Ashworth, Labour's shadow Cabinet Office minister, said: "This zombie government has run out of steam and ideas at a time when the country needs action to tackle the cost-of-living crisis hitting families across the -country."
Government whips deny Labour's claims, pointing out that they have passed 27 bills so far this parliamentary session, the same number as at the equivalent point in Gordon Brown's government.
One Conservative aide said: "With three bills still to [be debated at] second reading, it is clear we aren't a zombie government and haven't run out of steam."
But there is evidence for Labour's complaint that the government has run out of substantive business to achieve.
By the midpoint of the second Labour government, from 2001-2005, the government had allocated nearly 390 hours of Commons time to government business. Half way through its third government, from 2005-2010, the party had spent just over 370 hours. By the midpoint of this parliament, however, the equivalent figure was just over 284 hours.
Labour has already used its maximum allocation of 18 days' worth of opposition day debates in this session, and the government has given them an extra day and a half to fill the time before the next recess.
The malaise has got to such a point that backbenchers are beginning to return to their constituencies as early as Wednesday afternoon to complete their constituency casework, and more importantly, begin campaigning before next year's election. For the past two Wednesdays, the Commons has ended before 7pm, three and a half hours earlier than normal.
There are several reasons for the relatively empty Commons calendar. One is that it normally takes only about three years for any government to get through its most important legislation. Taking into account time for campaigning, this is why most governments in the past have ruled for four years before calling an -election.
Another is that Lynton Crosby, the Conservative strategist, has instructed departments not to spend too much time focusing on issues that are not core to the government's agenda. He has urged ministers to "scrape the barnacles" off their policy agenda and concentrate instead on the Tories' key election themes: the economy; crime; immigration; and welfare. But this has left little legislation to pass.
A final reason is that the government is keen to clear space for its MPs to campaign in their own constituencies, especially in marginal seats, with the prospect of the tightest election in decades just over a year away.
But Labour's ambush tactics to stop MPs in marginal constituencies being allowed to return home are not guaranteed to succeed. A recent attempt to force MPs into the Commons to vote for the government's controversial badger cull was simply ignored by coalition MPs, with only one member voting for the policy, and hundreds of others boycotting the debate.
Document FTFTA00020140428ea4s0000l
