{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3550"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Cameron begins EU offensive
By Kiran Stacey, Political Correspondent   
612 words
22 February 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
04
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Dutch premier dines at Chequers
Merkel invited to address parliament
David Cameron has wined and dined the Dutch premier at his country retreat as the UK prime minister begins a European diplomatic offensive in the run-up to a visit by Angela Merkel next Thursday.
Mark Rutte arrived in Britain yesterday for talks and a dinner at Chequers. The red carpet will be rolled out in even more style when the German chancellor visits London: she will address both houses of parliament and meet the Queen.
Downing Street hopes Mr Cameron's hospitality to two of his strongest natural allies in Europe will help Britain to secure a plum job on the European Commission this year, and lay the ground work for a longer-term reduction in powers held by the EU.
A Number 10 official said: "The meeting with Angela Merkel is a sign of the deep links between the two countries.
"This is a good time for the prime minister to be meeting his European counterparts, as they start to think about what they want from Europe over the next few years."
Mr Cameron hopes to make Mr Rutte a key ally in his push for a repatriation of powers from Brussels to sovereign governments. The Netherlands said recently that its policy towards the bloc was: "Europe if necessary - national where possible."
Ms Merkel's support is even more important, which is why she will be granted the rare honour of addressing both houses of parliament - the first German leader to do so for 28 years.
She will make her address in the large and ornate robing room, where the Queen usually puts on her ceremonial crown and robes before the state opening of parliament. Ms Merkel will also meet the Queen privately, with no officials present.
Mr Cameron will then use a private meeting of his own to lobby Ms Merkel on a range of issues. They include securing a senior economic role for the UK's next EU commissioner, who will take over this year from Lady Ashton, the bloc's foreign policy chief.
London ideally wants the single market portfolio held by Michel Barnier, rather than the foreign policy role, which officials view to have been ineffective in protecting Britain's interests.
More importantly for Mr Cameron's long-term aims, he will also push for European reform on access to social security benefits and on freedom of movement, which he hopes to secure before a 2017 referendum on Britain's EU membership.
Ms Merkel is likely to be receptive to the prime minister's argument that it is too easy for EU migrants to claim benefits in their host nations, having established a committee in Berlin to look into the same question.
But German officials say the chancellor will be more robust in defending the principle of free movement - in defiance of Mr Cameron's wish to ensure that new member states enjoy full freedom of movement only if their national in-comes reach a certain level. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, the German foreign minister, gave a flavour of Ms Merkel's likely response when he visited Britain two weeks ago.
Mr Steinmeier told a press conference he did not support changes to freedom of movement, saying: "The immigration of a larger workforce is not always a problem. In certain cases, it is part of the solution."
Ms Merkel is also likely to dampen British hopes for a change to the European treaties. The UK hopes this process would allow it to lobby for wider changes to the balance of power between Brussels and sovereign governments.
Document FTFTA00020140222ea2m0000g
