{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3717"}
____
  
INSIDE BUSINESS
AstraZeneca shows Europe's innovation malaise
By Sarah Gordon, Europe business editor   
750 words
22 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
20
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Aside from some shareholders, there have been more sighs of relief than regret at AstraZeneca's rejection of Pfizer's "final" bid this week. The US drug company may yet force talks but, for the moment at least, many feel the future of life sciences research in the UK has been protected against the predatory cost-cutter from across the Atlantic.
What the furore over Pfizer's bid has obscured, though, is that AstraZeneca's UK research operation is not quite the innovative powerhouse its defenders would claim.
True, between 2002 and 2011, AstraZeneca launched seven new blockbuster drugs, compared with Pfizer's four. But half of its top 10 drugs by revenue, and many of its most advanced experimental medicines, originated outside the UK, often at Medimmune, the Maryland-based biotech company AstraZeneca bought in 2007, which operates as a subsidiary. Analysts estimate that all but one of the pipeline of drugs cited in AstraZeneca's bid defence were not generated in the UK, but bought in .
AstraZeneca's difficulties in generating new products in the UK and getting them to market is indicative of a wider European malaise. Another glaring example is the race to commercially exploit graphene, the "miracle" material discovered in Manchester in 2004.
As reported in the Financial Times on Monday, of the 11,372 graphene-related patents and patent applications lodged worldwide, the UK has filed just 101 - less than 1 per cent - and continental Europe has filed just 772. The US, meanwhile, has applied for 2,000 patents, and nearly two-thirds of applications were made by Asian companies or organisations.
The fact that Europe is, relatively, so bad at innovation, and, even when it innovates successfully, so bad at turning discoveries into marketable products, has already caused much agonising at regional policy level. A recent report by a group of experts on innovation policy management for the European Union Council gives a depressingly long list of why Europe and its companies are lagging behind in this area, including limited market access, lack of efficient intellectual property systems and "missing entrepreneurial spirit". These, it said, were "just a few" of the reasons behind the underperformance.
Academics and business people agree the problem is not a lack of research in Europe, but the difficulties of translating it into commercial products. They often disagree, though, on the priorities for action.
Professor Michael Jacobides, who holds the Sir Donald Gordon Chair of Entrepreneurship and Innovation at London Business School, argues that Europe, unlike the US or China, labours under the disadvantage of being a collection of small disparate economies overburdened with regulation. He also believes career structures in Europe do not encourage innovators. "In London, impressive flats are owned by people in financial services, not entrepreneurs," he points out.
Entrepreneurs predominately blame a lack of capital - both human and financial. One who runs an early stage venture capital fund investing in European technology companies says he struggles to find suitable managers in his sector, and that immigration policies should be tweaked accordingly.
He also points to the examples of Uber, the San Francisco-based taxi app which raised $258m in funding last year, and Hailo, its European equivalent, which raised just $30m, to highlight the difficulties not just in raising initial funding, but sourcing follow-up financing. "Pension funds don't talk to start-ups," he complains.
There is a lot of public money for commercialising innovation around - the EU recently launched a 10-year €1bn programme to develop graphene technology , for example - but effective funding models work best when driven by the private sector. Successful examples from elsewhere include Israel's matched funding scheme , Yozma, or the Small Business Administration's start-up grants in the US. The EU's high-level group recommends exploring the idea of using "innovation bonds".
These theoretically offer governments a risk-free way of encouraging investment in projects that may take years to yield results, by entering a contractual agreement with an intermediary that is responsible for raising capital from independent investors. If the project achieves its objectives, the government repays the investors with the savings it accrues as a result of the programme's success.
Imaginative financing mechanisms like this are only part of the battle - but Europe's entrepreneurs deserve innovation from policy makers too.
Sarah Gordon is the FT's Europe business editor
sarah.gordon@ft.com www.ft.com/insidebusiness
Document FTFTA00020140522ea5m00014
