{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3718"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Rivals braced for Ukip aftershocks; Elections 2014; Farage surge
By George Parker, Political Editor   
741 words
22 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Tories, Labour and Lib Dems wait to gauge what results foretell for fortunes at Westminster, says George Parker
Nigel Farage has predicted "an earthquake" and, by the time polling stations close at 10pm today, his UK Independence party may have achieved what once seemed incredible: it might have won a nationwide poll.
The party once described by David Cameron as comprising "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists" believes it can win the European Parliament elections, setting off aftershocks at Westminster and Brussels.
In spite of weeks of hostile media coverage, Mr Farage claims his party will emerge victorious when the ballot boxes are emptied, while building its base in a series of local elections across the country.
Mr Farage insisted yesterday Ukip could build on these contests and win its first seats at Westminster at the next election, in spite of the unfavourable first-past-the-post voting system.
But mainstream parties doubt Mr Farage and his party will take any seats in May 2015; they also expect the Ukip balloon to start deflating as the general election approaches. But for now, the Farage phenomenon grips Westminster.
The latest YouGov poll for the European elections puts Ukip level with Labour on 27 per cent, although other polls show Mr Farage in front. The survey has the Tories on 23, with Lib Dems on 10 and Greens on 8.
Election experts point out that town hall and European elections are notoriously unreliable predictors of a general election, but none of the main party leaders is likely to take much comfort from the results.
David Cameron expects to finish third in the European elections behind Ukip and Labour and is preparing for further losses in local contests taking place in parts of England, including London, and Northern Ireland.
While such results are hardly auspicious, Mr Cameron believes most of his Tory MPs will grit their teeth and get on with it.
This outbreak of loyalty seemed unlikely even a month ago, with eurosceptic MPs talking of "sending in the men with grey suits" to tell Mr Cameron to toughen up his stance on Europe to head off Mr Farage. The party will split again on Europe, but most MPs have concluded that now is not the time.
The sense of a party rallying together was illustrated by the sight of Mr Cameron sharing a slice of rocky road cake with Boris Johnson, the London mayor, on a campaigning visit to Newark yesterday for the forthcoming by-election.
The picture is unlikely to be much more reassuring for Ed Miliband: a gain of several hundred town hall seats is not stellar for an opposition party in midterm elections, nor the party's predicted 27-28 per cent vote share in the EU elections.
Mr Miliband has had some shaky campaign moments, while his party's high command seems unsure how to tackle Ukip. The Labour leader does not want to toughen up his language on welfare or immigration. But David Axelrod, Barack Obama's former campaign chief, told the party to focus on areas where it has to do well at the next general election: 7m doors have been knocked as activists poured into target seats.
Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrat leader, may have more to worry about as the results come in and his pain could be protracted: town hall results start coming in at about midnight while some European results may not arrive until Monday morning.
The Lib Dem leader's attempt to halt Mr Farage by staging two televised debates on Europe appear to have had little success. Mr Clegg has admitted he could lose all 12 MEPs, although that would require a truly dreadful result.
Of equal concern would be signs of the Tories making gains in Lib Dem council strongholds such as Kingston upon Thames and Richmond, an ominous sign for MPs defending southern seats at the election.
Mr Clegg told the Financial Times this month he did not expect his party, after a fourth midterm electoral hammering, to rise up against him.
"I don't think there are many in the party who think there is an alternative strategy to the one that we've agreed collectively and that I've led on," he said. Most senior MPs agree, but Mr Clegg is ready for renewed criticism from the left of the party.
Document FTFTA00020140522ea5m00008
