{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3014"}
____
  
FT REPORT - THE FUTURE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION
A political narrative framed by frustration
By Peter Spiegel   
1,226 words
9 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
Surveys FEU1
01
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Despite better prospects for the eurozone, big gains are expected for populist anti-EU parties in this month's elections, says Peter Spiegel
Judging by the eurozone's bond markets, which just 18 months ago served as the most important globally watched gauge of the European project's health, the EU should be cruising through its most contented period in years.
Spain and Italy have seen borrowing costs on their benchmark bonds fall to levels not seen since the heady days before Lehman Brothers collapsed. Ireland - the first eurozone member officially to exit its international financial rescue programme - is borrowing in the private market at the cheapest rates on record. Portugal auctioned its first 10-year bond in three years. Even the eurozone's perpetual problem child, Greece, has been able to dip into the private markets and raise €3bn on its own.
Reza Moghadam, head of the European department at the International Monetary Fund, said last month: "There are improving economies, lower spreads and a return of market access."
Despite the unabashedly good news coming from what was once ground zero of an EU existential crisis, however, government leaders are bracing for Europe-wide elections that are expected to see a rash of anti-EU parties reach unprecedented heights.
Although this month's European Parliament elections will see these populist groups fall well short of a majority - even those predicting a huge groundswell forecast no more than a third of the chamber going to such parties - in some of the EU's biggest and oldest members, they are poised to make unprecedented gains.
Half of the EU's six founding members - France, Italy and the Netherlands - are expecting populists or far-right parties to finish first or second in the vote. In the UK, Denmark, Austria, Greece and Finland, similar parties are also near the top two slots.
Even in Germany, where anti-EU sentiment has historically played almost no role in political campaigns, the anti-euro Alternative for Germany party is expected to attract enough votes to win seats.
Mujtaba Rahman, head of European analysis at the Eurasia Group risk consultancy, says: "Despite the positives, voters have yet to experience the benefits of the pain they have endured over the past few years.
"Voter frustration and political populism will therefore continue to define political narratives in the periphery until living and social conditions improve on the ground."
Supporters of further European integration are hoping the sudden rise of such anti-EU sentiment is a protest vote that will subside once Europe's economies return to pre-crisis growth rates. The eurozone, after two years of recession, is expected to grow sluggishly this year.
But some fear that anti-EU sentiment is no longer a temporary phenomenon tied to economic cycles.
Even the EU's greatest supporters note that the movements are emerging as long-dormant nationalist and sectarian frictions are on the rise in Ukraine, the Middle East and Iraq.
José Manuel Barroso, the European Commission president, said during his final address to the European Parliament last month: "Now that some of our old demons are reawakening, we should not forget that those who defend ultranationalism and xenophobia are also attacking the European Union and the values which we hold dear."
He added: "We must never - I repeat, never - take peace and stability in Europe for granted. We need to defend [the EU in order] to defend peace and stability in Europe."
Some analysts had hoped Russia's assertiveness in Ukraine, where demonstrators in Kiev fervently waved EU flags in the months before the downfall of Kremlin-backed President Viktor Yanukovich, might galvanise Europe's voters and their politicians, creating the kind of unified EU-wide foreign policy that many federalists had long hoped for.
But the continuing debate over sanctions has produced only fresh divisions, with ex-Communist members such as Poland and the Baltic states pushing for full-scale economic penalties, while western countries with strong economic ties to Russia, such as Italy, try to apply the brakes.
Despite the divisions on foreign policy and the widespread expectations of a strong populist showing, most EU officials believe the next group of Brussels leaders - which will be chosen in the weeks following the parliamentary elections - will face a landscape not overly dissimilar to the current one.
Though poised for big gains, populist parties will still be dwarfed by the two mainstream groupings: the centre-left Party of European Socialists and the centre-right European People's Party. Combined, they are expected to hold on to well over 400 seats in the 751-MEP chamber.
If the centrist Liberals can minimise their losses from the widely expected trouncing of their largest member parties, Germany's Free Democrats and Britain's Liberal Democrats, the traditional parties should be able to pass legislation with large majorities on their own.
Still, even if populist and anti-EU parties have little direct impact on EU legislation, their new Brussels platform could serve as a soapbox affecting the political calculus in their home countries.
Timo Soini, leader of the eurosceptic True Finns party (which now calls itself The Finns), achieved his best result in the party's history during 2011 national elections. Using his MEP perch, he railed against eurozone bailouts.
Similarly, Nigel Farage, the head of the UK Independence party, has caught national attention in Britain for his combative speeches in Brussels and Strasbourg.
Analysts argue that it was Mr Farage's rise in public opinion polling that forced David Cameron, the UK prime minister, to take a tougher line on the EU, including the promise of an in-out referendum by 2017.
And in the Netherlands, where the Freedom Party of anti-Muslim populist Geert Wilders has seen a surge in popularity as he has broadened his political rhetoric to attack Brussels alongside North African immigrants, Mark Rutte, the sitting Liberal prime minister, last year issued a list of 54 policy areas the EU should stay out of.
If such developments spread, it could cause problems for those advocating the EU's further integration, which has stalled as financial market pressure has subsided.
EU leaders were able to pass two landmark pieces of legislation creating a European banking union before the current parliament dissolved. The first set up a Frankfurt-based EU bank supervisor. The second created and funded a bank rescue system.
However, efforts to move further on fiscal integration within the eurozone have been met with a chilly reception.
A plan to require eurozone countries to sign "contractual arrangements" that would legally bind them into economic reform programmes similar to those currently agreed with bailout countries was set aside this year, in spite of the strong support of Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, in what officials said was a clear sign of reform fatigue.
If enthusiasm for eurozone integration continues to wane, the EU treaty change debate may instead be dominated by Mr Cameron, who has vowed to renegotiate Britain's relationship with the EU ahead of his 2017 referendum.
So far, other countries - including Germany - have been cool to his push to re-open the treaties for such a renegotiation. But a successful election for anti-EU parties could change the dynamics of that debate as well.
Document FTFTA00020140509ea5900001
