{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3719"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Anti-immigration rhetoric woos poorer wards; Working-class vote
By Jim Pickard in Sunderland and Chris Tighe in Newcastle   
808 words
22 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
St Anne's ward in Sunderland, home to one of Britain's biggest council es-tates, is emblematic of the UK Independence party's rapid rise in northern England's Labour enclaves.
In 2012, Ukip was invisible in local elections. But this March, a Ukip candidate won 28 per cent of the vote in a by-election - largely at Labour's expense.
It is a story likely to be repeated in other deprived Labour wards in the UK, where the anti-immigration rhetoric of the anti-Brussels party has tapped into a widespread sentiment that the three big parties are deaf to people's concerns about immigration, joblessness and the EU.
Residents of the rundown Pennywell estate of almost 3,000 homes suffered from high crime levels throughout the 1980s and 1990s.
They were rough times, said Adrian Robson, an unemployed 54-year-old. "Kids used to take stolen cars to that square and set fire to them."
More recently, the area has been transformed with a new school and rows of modern houses with gardens and solar panels. But the area's regeneration has not led to increased political engagement: most of the locals who spoke to the Financial Times yesterday said they would not vote.
Of those who said they would vote, many were Ukip supporters. Jeff Pearson, a taxi driver, said there was a groundswell of support for Nigel Farage locally. "He is getting stick for saying people don't want to live next to Romanians. . . He is only saying what people think."
A passing man in a football shirt said he would vote Ukip to "get the darkies out".
Elsie Hipwood, 63, said her father had taught his children to vote Labour, but added: "I stopped backing them a few years ago. If I bother to go, it'll be Ukip."
Ukip has tiny representation in the region's 12 local councils - a total of three councillors - but it has big aspirations, contesting 105 of the 124 northeast seats up for grabs.
Rob Hayward, a psephologist and former MP, said St Anne's was indicative of white working-class areas targeted by Ukip. "It is a working-class, solid-Labour area, and Ukip suddenly leapt into second place, from nowhere, without any damage to the Tory vote."
This has been echoed in several Westminster by-elections in the north, including South Shields and Doncaster , where Ukip won second place. Neil Fleming, Labour's acting regional director, pointed to a "culture change" in the past five years, adding: "The old traditional voting patterns are breaking down."
Thomas Wright, a Labour councillor in St Anne's, predicted a close contest today. "I think this will be a tough battle," he said.
Politically they are poles apart but, tactically, Ukip can draw lessons from the Liberal Democrats in Newcastle. In 1974, David Faulkner became the first Liberal councillor on Newcastle city council since the 1930s. In 2004, after 30 years of building a presence through dogged grassroots politics, he and his fellow Lib Dems seized control of the council and ran it until Labour regained it in 2011.
Mr Faulkner said that if Ukip wanted to develop a lasting support base, rather than fizzling out locally like the British National party, it needed to understand each locality and build a profile for its candidates. He said: "They will never build a power base in local government as a one issue, one man party."
Northeast's Brussels representation set to change
The northeast's trio of MEPs, one Labour, one Tory and one Liberal Democrat, is set to be replaced by one Ukip, one Labour and one other candidate, writes Chris Tighe .
Labour, which polled 25 per cent of votes last time, and Ukip, are both managing expectations about their chances of snatching a second seat.
Lib Dem prospects look poor. In 2009 they came third with 17.6 per cent of votes cast and Ukip fourth with 15.4 per cent. Since then, Ukip's profile has risen, while the Lib Dems now have to justify their coalition with the Tories.
A vote for the Lib Dems was often a protest vote against Labour - this role is now claimed by Ukip.
The bigger unknown is whether the Conservatives, who won 19.8 per cent of the vote in 2009, can hold on. If not, it would be the first time since 1979 that there has not been a Tory presence from the region in Brussels. Their man, Martin Callanan, is the only local MEP seeking re-election. In Brussels, he is lead spokesman for the European Conservatives and Reformists Group. But that may leave voters, whose big concern is the region's high unemployment rate, unimpressed.
Document FTFTA00020140522ea5m00007
