{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3289"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Lifted visa curbs loosen no 'flood' of immigrants
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
555 words
15 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
04
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The number of Romanians and Bulgarians employed in Britain has fallen slightly since controls were lifted in January, confounding predictions by anti-migration campaigners of a "flood" of immigrants.
A total of 140,000 people from the EU's two newest member states were working in the UK during the first three months of this year - a fall of 4,000 since the final quarter of 2013.
However, a year-on-year comparison of the statistics, which allows for seasonal variations in migration, does suggest that the removal of restrictions has caused an uptick in arrivals. The number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in the UK is up 25 per cent, or 28,000, on the first quarter of 2013.
Both pro-and anti-migration campaigners seized on aspects of the figures, released by the Office for National Statistics yesterday, as evidence for their arguments.
Danny Alexander, the Liberal Democrat chief secretary to the Treasury, said the latest data "give the lie" to scaremongering about migration by the UK Independence party, which is expected to perform strongly in this month's elections for the European Parliament.
"The very modest numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians coming to work in Britain this year is in stark contrast to the inflammatory rhetoric of earlier this year," he said.
Ion Jinga, Romania's ambassador to the UK, also derided predictions from the Migration Watch campaign group, which had suggested that 50,000 Romanians and Bulgarians would come to Britain every year after controls were dropped.
"I believe it time now to stop the scaremongering and unfair campaign against Romanians (and Bulgarians, Poles and east Europeans in general) and to concentrate on what we can do together for our common future," Mr Jinga wrote on the Huffington Post website yesterday. "The Romanians' flood to the UK is over even before it started."
But Nigel Farage, Ukip leader, said the numbers represented a "huge increase" in the number of foreign workers coming into Britain. He said the data did not show dependants of foreign workers or those migrants who were not in work.
"Far from controlling immigration, this government has shown it has absolutely no control over Britain's borders and no intention of putting the British people first," he said. "Having promised the British electorate that they would bring net immigration down to the tens of thousands, the government has instead overseen another massive increase in those coming to Britain."
Keith Vaz, a Labour MP who chairs the Commons home affairs committee, suggested that the government was partly to blame for the heightened debate by failing to produce a migration estimate for new EU states.
Academics from the Oxford-based Migration Observatory warned against drawing any immediate conclusions.
Carlos Vargas-Silva, senior researcher at the observatory, said the most recent changes "cannot really be seen as a result of the end of controls on the employment opportunities of A2 [Bulgarian and Romanian] migrants".
"It is important that we see this data for what it is - an important first step in understanding how A2 migration is changing - but until we have complete data for 2014 it is impossible to achieve any definite conclusions about the impact of the end of restrictions," Mr Vargas-Silva said.
Document FTFTA00020140515ea5f00014
