{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3424"}
____
  
COMMENT
Europe's voters shake their fists at the world
By Philip Stephens   
931 words
16 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
07
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Europe is bracing itself for a howl of rage. Populists promise to steal the show in elections to the European Parliament next week. Unashamedly anti-EU parties - mostly of the extreme right, but joined by a handful from the left - may well garner 30 per cent of the vote. The result will probably be read as a damning verdict on European integration. This is a mistake.
It is fair to say that citizens of the 28 member states are not much enamoured these days with eurocrats. The euro crisis has taken its toll, particularly in the peripheral economies. So too has the habit of politicians in national capitals to blame Europe for their domestic failings. Those seeking evidence of disenchantment need look no farther than a poll released this week by the independent Pew Research Centre.
After canvassing opinion across seven countries - including Germany, France, Italy and the UK as well as Spain, Poland and Greece - Pew reported that sizeable majorities thought the EU intrusive and inefficient. Almost two-thirds saw the union as "remote"; seven out of 10 said their voices went unheard. There were strong complaints about immigration and fears about jobs and living standards. As for the worth of the Strasbourg parliament, only 36 per cent of the respondents offered a positive view.
There are one or two bright spots. Pew thinks the hostility may have "bottomed" out. As economies have picked up so too have the numbers saying that, on balance, EU membership is a positive. Only in once enthusiastically federalist Italy has faith continued to dim. In notoriously eurosceptic Britain, a slim majority now vouchsafe a favourable view.
Those who think the euro put the EU on the road to perdition will draw comfort from the fact that the European Central Bank is held in lower esteem even than the parliament - only 30 per cent see the ECB in a good light. But the sceptics may be surprised by the evidence that, for all the pain of adjustment, big majorities want to hold on to the single currency. Nearly 70 per cent of Greeks prefer the euro to the drachma. Spain is not far behind. The outlier, again, is Italy, where the economy is still mired in recession.
The continent's rightwing populists - Marine Le Pen's National Front in France, Geert Wilders' PVV in the Netherlands, the UK Independence party in Britain, Austria's Freedom party, Hungary's neo-Nazi Jobbik and the rest - blame the EU for every conceivable ill. Stir in a virulently anti-immigrant rhetoric, latent and not so latent anti-semitism, and a cultural conservatism that stigmatises minorities and you have a formula to harvest the anger of society's marginalised and dispossessed.
The mistake is to see these parties as resembling a homogeneous group. They may now be marching under the same eurosceptic banner, but, as narrow-minded nationalists, they have little inclination to collaborate. Some, as in Golden Dawn and Jobbik, are unreconstructed fascists. Ms Le Pen downplays her party's antisemitic heritage to promote a racist islamophobia.
In Britain, Nigel Farage's Ukip - memorably described by David Cameron, the Tory prime minister, as "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists", wears a cloak of respectability to appeal to the fearful over-60s. Mr Farage demonises immigrants from formerly communist states . His fellow travellers in southern Europe focus on incomers from the Middle East and Africa
The European elections offer voters a classic opportunity to lodge a protest - to kick national governments and let off steam about the state of the world. Most people know little of the parliament and care less. Low turnout (likely to fall below the 43 per cent of 2009 across the EU and to 30 per cent in the UK) will thus exaggerate support for the extremists.
The second misreading of the populists is to see their appeal as a reaction to European integration. Of course, there are complaints about the EU, many of them legitimate. Brussels is too remote. But the EU is what economists might call an "intermediate" target. The anger has deeper roots - in austerity, falling living standards, high unemployment and, above all, in heightened insecurity.
The real villain, if you could call it that, is globalisation. The populists' political trick has been to channel these wider discontents into antipathy to the EU. The polls tell the story. Dislike of the EU comes behind immigration, living standards and jobs in the concerns even of Ukip voters. The islamophobia stoked by Ms Le Pen has nothing to do with Brussels. The financial crash would have led to harsh economic times if the euro had never been invented - witness Britain's travails.
The currency of populists is fear. Europeans see a world in which the gains of globalisation are being scooped up by the richest 1 per cent. Their own incomes are stagnating, their jobs are insecure and many of their children unemployed. The extremists have identified immigrants and the EU as the enemy. In truth, voters are shaking their fists at the global economic integration that has torn down national frontiers.
Bruce Stokes, director of Pew's global economic attitudes surveys, has it right: "Globalisation has nurtured a loss of control - the sense that more and more decisions that affect citizens' daily lives are taken far away and without regard for their interests". The EU is not to blame but, in the present mood, that will not prevent people from aiming a powerful kick at Brussels.
philip.stephens@ft.com
Document FTFTA00020140516ea5g00028
