{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3553"}
____
  
FT WEEKEND SUPPLEMENT - LIFE & ARTS
Theatre
By Sarah Hemming   
753 words
22 February 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
18
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
The Knight of the Burning Pestle
Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, London
This pretty, candle-lit new replica of a Jacobean playhouse has already proved its credentials with a dark and brooding tragedy - The Duchess of Malfi - but how will it fare with a comedy? Time to find out, as Adele Thomas directs a bit of sprightly nonsense and meta-theatrical mayhem. What begins as an apparently run of the mill comedy of manners suddenly changes course when two members of the audience invade the stage and start fixing the play to fit in with their tastes. Period piece or strikingly modern drama? Actors Phil Daniels, Matthew Needham and Pauline McLynn join the chaos. shakespearesglobe.com, 020 7401 9919, now previewing, runs to March 30
The Full Monty
Noel Coward Theatre, London
The 1997 film was a great success, and Simon Beaufoy's new stage version went down a storm when it played in Sheffield last year (the location of the story). Now the tale of six unemployed steelworkers who embark on a mad plan to do a live striptease to raise some cash arrives in the West End. Kenny Doughty plays Gaz, the ringleader, and the comedy is directed by Daniel Evans. For all the laughs, this is a sad and serious piece about unemployment, recession and loss of identity. And yes, they do do the "full monty." fullmontytheplay.com, 0844 482 5141, now previewing, booking to June 14
I Do
Hilton Hotel, Islington, London
Weddings are wonderful occasions for backstage dramas and with this in mind, the site specific company Dante or Die has come up with an immersive piece that looks at the crises and comedies surrounding one ceremony. Audiences, split into six groups, take turns to visit six different rooms in the hotel, where various guests and key players (including the bride and groom) are in various shades of disarray and emotional extremity. danteordie.com, almeida.co.uk, 020 7359 4404, previews February 26, opens February 27, runs to March 9
1984
Almeida, London
Headlong's brilliant adaptation, directed by Robert Icke and Duncan Macmillman, doesn't just transpose George Orwell's chilling novel to stage, but creates a dynamic contemporary response. Drawing on the appendix to the novel, entitled "The Principles of Newspeak", the show combines past, present and future and uses multiple layers of action and several media to create a terrifying world in which the truth is never certain. The affair between Winston (Mark Arends) and Julia (Hara Yannas) is still central, but the framework around them keeps shifting. It's a production that punctures complacency as it suggests that our own ideas of freedom of choice and action may be far more manipulated than we imagine. almeida.co.uk, 020 7359 4404, runs to March 29
Oh What a Lovely War
Theatre Royal, Stratford East, London
Joan Littlewood's staging of this show 50 years ago at this theatre was a landmark production in so many ways. Its multi-layered, end-of-the-pier style used the songs that the soldiers sang to create a show that was popular, shocking and deeply upsetting and that played a seminal role in theatre development. Now director Terry Johnson revives it in a lovingly affectionate production. It shows its age where the satire is concerned, coming over as rather heavy-handed and laborious. But the songs emerge as tartly and poignantly affecting as ever: a direct link with all those ordinary soldiers who made up the terrible statistics of battle losses that run across the electronic display board behind the action. stratfordeast.com, 020 8534 0310, runs to March 15
Superior Donuts
Southwark Playhouse, London
With August: Osage County recently in cinemas, here is a chance to see the UK premiere of a Tracy Letts play on the stage. Letts explores the price of the American Dream through the medium of a small donut shop in Chicago. Arthur Przybyszewski is struggling to keep the shop, set up by his Polish immigrant father, afloat amid the twin rivals of big chains such as Starbucks and organic coffee shops. It survives thanks to its motley collection of regular customers. But when Arthur employs a new worker, Franco, things take a twist. In keeping with its subject, the play is a little sugary, but it also offers a touching analysis of hope and survival and is well served in Ned Bennett's production. southwarkplayhouse.co.uk 020 7407 0234, runs to March 8
Document FTFTA00020140222ea2m0006q
