{"newspaper":"FT","id:"3221"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Visa change damages sector, warns O'Neill; Students policy
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
455 words
9 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed3
03
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Ministers' efforts to increase education exports comes at a time of intense scrutiny over the appeal of British universities and schools to overseas customers, writes Helen Warrell .
The number of international students coming to UK institutions has dropped for the first time in nearly three decades , according to research published last week by Hefce, the university funding body. While this was partly due to a tripling of tuition fees to £9,000 a year in 2012, education sector leaders also blamed Home Office immigration restrictions , which have made it harder for non-EU students to come to Britain, and the abolition of the previous visa, which allowed them to stay and work for two years after their course.
The effects following the visa changes are stark. Between 2010-11 and 2012-13 there was a 13 per cent fall in students from India, an 11 per cent fall in those from Pakistan and a 15 per cent drop in pupils from Saudi Arabia. In postgraduate courses, the decrease was even higher: 26 per cent for India and 20 per cent for Pakistan.
Jim O'Neill, former Goldman Sachs chief economist and now a non-executive director at the Department for Education, told the Financial Times that the government's tougher immigration restrictions on international students were "definitely" damaging the push to export education.
"The visa policy is really bad as it relates to this opportunity," Mr O'Neill said. "It sends a message that we're not serious when we talk of this ambition to export education and that we're not joined up. It suggests we don't know how to prioritise."
However, the economist also said schools and universities needed to adopt a more expansive world view if they were to make the most of opportunities overseas. "I think universities should think of themselves as some sort of global institution rather than something that's just in some city or town in Britain, and want to attract students from some of these fast-growing countries," he said.
Sir Steve Smith, vice-chancellor at Exeter university, said that if ministers really wanted to increase exports then they should do their part by removing students from the net migration figures and breaking down the "very real barriers" to working and studying in the UK. "We continue to make international students feel unwelcome," he said.
Sir Steve said Exeter was pursuing the development of a "small number of deep partnerships with a dozen or so strong universities abroad". Instead of creating new branches overseas, the Exeter model involves setting up joint degrees and creating research projects between professional staff.
Document FTFT000020140409ea490001g
