{"newspaper":"FT","id:"453"}
____
  
COMMENT
London is more than a playground for the rich
By Janan Ganesh   
846 words
11 March 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
USA Ed1
09
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
London has impressed itself upon the world as an imperial metropole, a financial hub, a destination for migrants - and now as a subject of moral panic. Excitable chronicles of this "billionaire's playground" have become a genre of foreign journalism in recent years.
According to these lurid dystopias, which have been given new life since the Ukraine crisis , London is being hollowed out by venal and sometimesbloodstained plutocrats from countries steeped in authoritarianism. Entire streets stand empty - it is rarely specified which ones - as the mere investments or trophies of remote foreigners. Ordinary people flee the excruciating cost of everything. Between the overclass and the indentured workers who serve them (exactly how they serve them if they are not present is never explained) languishes a withered, resentful middle.
Against this kind of hysteria, only numbers will do. Between 2001 and 2011, London's population grew from 7.3m to 8.2m. It is expected to reach 9m before the decade is out. The only one of the 33 boroughs to experience a drop was Kensington and Chelsea, which lost 200 of its 158,000 residents. Westminster council, which includes Mayfair, Marylebone and other oligarch neighbourhoods, grew by 21 per cent.
The exact nature of London's population boom rebuts the gloominess as much as the mere fact of the boom. Fertility rates have driven up the numbers, not just immigration. In other words, the city is becoming such a Babel of gaudiness and moral turpitude that lots of people choose to come here and existing residents choose to have lots of children here. As a way of registering their disapproval of the place, it is eccentric.
According to the annual Wealth Report by Knight Frank , a property consultancy, London has more ultra-wealthy individuals - those with at least $30m in assets, aside from their main home - than any other city in the world. Still, they number only 4,224. The notion that their comings and goings could affect the feeling of fullness in a city of more than 8m people does not even make sense in theory. For almost all Londoners almost all of the time, the presence or absence of foreign tycoons is not palpable at all. The only one most of them could name is Roman Abramovich, the owner of Chelsea Football Club.
Whether London's unquestioning openness to outsiders is right or wrong, it is not new. In the 19th century, European regimes resented London for hosting exiled radicals trying to foment revolution across the continent. One of them - his name was Karl Marx - made his home in Hampstead. In the 1970s, there was snooty distaste as wealthy Arabs made London their home from home ("They owned Al-Klaridges, Al-Dorchester, Al-Browns . . ." wrote Anthony Burgess in his dystopic novel 1985 ). The French sneered at "Londonistan" for its tolerance of Islamic radicals.
The idea that London was a fortress of gentlemanly values until a moral fall that occurred at some indistinct time around the millennium is ahistorical. It has always been open to the point of nihilism, hosting even troublemakers and scoundrels, some rich, some not. If that is lamentable, it was worth lamenting 30, 50 or 100 years ago. It should not be shown as a particular quirk of our age in frothy works of zeitgeist journalism.
Neither should we pretend that London's hospitability to globalisation does nothing for ordinary Londoners. Foreign investment and contributions from the City (which, given the internationalism of that financial centre, amounts to the same thing) are helping to pay for London's most extensive makeover since at least the docklands revival of the 1980s, which itself had foreign help. Areas that used to serve as bywords for dilapidation - King's Cross, Battersea power station, Elephant and Castle - are the subjects of lavish regeneration. The colossal Tate Modern, the world's most-visited modern art gallery, is getting even bigger to meet demand. Taking shape underground is Crossrail, the biggest construction project in Europe. This great fury of building - London is now a city of cranes and giant drilling machines - would not happen in a city that turned away from globalisation.
Critics say London is an unequal city as though Paris, Moscow and New York are not. They lament the price of property as though Hong Kong and Tokyo are famous for their affordable town houses. London suffers all the pathologies of a city of its size and importance.
There was a time when London really was depopulating year on year, when infrastructure decayed, when whole parts of town were left to fester without even a plan for revival. These were the decades before the 1980s, a period romanticised by those down on the London of Abramovich. It is now a city of ever more people, of endless construction, of falling crime and improving schools - a magnet to Europe's young.
Londoners appreciate the anguish shown on their behalf by the foreign media. But, really, we are coping.
janan.ganesh@ft.com
Document FTFT000020140311ea3b0002g
