{"newspaper":"FT","id:"512"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Jobless migrants who claim children's benefits face tougher rules
300 words
9 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Tougher rules for jobless migrants claiming children's benefits were unveiled by the government yesterday in a signal "that our welfare system is not open to abuse", according to a Treasury minister.
Would-be claimants from overseas will also have to prove their English skills to be entitled to receive cash.
From July, unemployed people will have to live in the UK for three months before they are allowed to claim child benefit and child tax credit. This three-month qualification period already applies to jobseeker's allowance. In a further crackdown, new claimants eligible for the allowance will no longer have routine access to interpretation services and from the end of the month their spoken English will be tested in England.
"If claimants' language is found to be a barrier to looking for work they will be expected to improve it," said the Treasury,
It would no longer subsidise "unemployed migrants who do not learn English, hindering their ability to find a job and integrate into British life".
Claimants will be expected to improve within six months and sanctions will apply if they refuse to attend language training or show insufficient effort to improve.
Immigration will loom large in May's European elections, with the UK Independence party expected to make significant inroads into Conservative support.
Nicky Morgan, the economic secretary to the Treasury, said: "These changes send a strong message that our welfare system is not open to abuse and will deter those who think they can move to the UK primarily to claim benefits.
"Making work pay is part of our long-term plan to ensure Britain's growing economy and dynamic jobs market deliver for those who work hard and play by the rules."
Document FTFTA00020140409ea4900007
