{"newspaper":"FT","id:"528"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Prime minister offers fresh support to Miller
By Elizabeth Rigby and George Parker   
890 words
8 April 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
David Cameron has defied leading newspapers, many of his own MPs and public opinion by giving a fresh vote of confidence to embattled culture secretary Maria Miller, one of only four cabinet women running departments.
The prime minister yesterday insisted that Ms Miller, who has been ordered to repay £5,800 in overclaimed expenses on a second home , had "done the right thing" by apologising.
Mr Cameron brushed off suggestions that he was only standing behind Ms Miller because she is a woman minister educated at a state school, but the prime minister is acutely aware of the need to promote female Tory MPs.
"I think Maria has done the right thing by repaying the money, making an apology and now getting on with the job," Mr Cameron said, refererring to Ms Miller's 32-second mea culpa to the Commons last week.
The public appear not to agree. A Survation poll for the Mail on Sunday said 78 per cent believe Ms Miller should resign from the cabinet and almost the same percentage think the prime minister is wrong to stand by her.
Ms Miller's case sparked particular anger because the independent parliamentary standards watchdog had ordered her to repay £45,000 in excess mortgage interest claims, but a committee of MPs later cut the penalty to little over a tenth of that. She was also censured for her failure to co-operate with the inquiry.
Mr Cameron's dogged defence of Ms Miller comes amid sharp criticism of her by leading newspapers, some of which are still hostile towards her over her handling of the Leveson inquiry into phone hacking.
Some Tory MPs and grassroots members are furious with her for pushing through legislation on gay marriage ; the resurrection of the MPs' expenses scandal six weeks before local and European elections has inflamed matters.
"I don't know anyone in the party who thinks she should stay," said one Tory MP. "The only ones who do are in Number 10."
Mr Cameron has long made it a principle not to yield to media pressure to sack ministers, although he yielded to Tory backbench pressure to replace Andrew Mitchell, former chief whip, over the Plebgate affair.
The loss of Ms Miller, the only mother running a government department, would be a blow for a prime minister who was taunted in February by Ed Miliband over the lack of women on his front bench.
He wants to keep Ms Miller in post at least until an expected summer reshuffle; indeed Mr Cameron may decide to keep her in the cabinet as he attempts to redesign the "face" of the Tory party before the next election.
Mr Cameron promised in opposition that a third of government posts would be given to women in a Conservative-led government. But the prime minister is far from fulfilling that pledge.
Downing Street said yesterday that a fifth of all government posts were held by women. "We're not at a third, but we have made some progress," said a spokesman. Nearly half of Mr Miliband's front bench is drawn from his clutch of women MPs.
The pledge has also left Mr Cameron open to criticism from many of his male backbenchers, fed up that less talented women are being promoted over their heads in order to fulfil what they see as an ill-thought-through pledge.
Five women to watch
David Cameron is acutely aware that his party is seen as too white and too male. He wants to promote promising women. Conservative MPs predict at least one more woman will be promoted to the cabinet in the summer reshuffle. Here is a selection of some of the high-fliers from the 2010 intake:
Anna Soubry
Defence
An ex--journalist turned criminal barrister, Ms Soubry was elected with a majority of only 389. She is outspoken and feisty, provoking a row when she was public health minister by saying "you can almost tell somebody's background by their weight". The first female minister in the defence
department last year.
Esther McVey
Employment
The state educated Liverpud- lian MP is tipped by colleagues as the next woman for cabinet.
Assured at the dispatch box and in command of her brief, the former TV presenter turned business woman has risen quickly since entering parliament, becoming minister for disabled in 2012.
Promoted to employment minister in 2013.
Elizabeth Truss
Education
A former think-tank director and telecoms executive, Ms Truss is ambitious, intellectually formidable and respected by colleagues for her deep convictions. Has made an impact as a minister although her flagship childcare reforms met resistance from childcare professionals. Her deregulation plans were blocked by Nick Clegg.
Priti Patel
Backbencher
A staunch rightwing euro- sceptic, Ms Patel has been involved in the Tory party for over 20 years. The comprehensive- educated daughter of shopkeeper immigrants, she personifies Tory modernisation. Blotted her copybook by rebelling against the leadership over Europe but was later appointed to the No 10 policy board.
Nicky Morgan
Treasury
The former lawyer was tipped for promotion since entering parliament as MP for Loughborough.
Made assistant whip before being promoted to the Treasury last year.
Popular among her colleagues and considered discreet, reliable and trustworthy.
Words: Elizabeth Rigby
Document FTFT000020140408ea4800007
