{"newspaper":"FT","id:"755"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Review to unveil 'visas for auction' proposal
By Helen Warrell, Public Policy Correspondent   
482 words
24 February 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed3
06
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Proposals due to be unveiled this week would allow UK visas to be auctioned off to the highest bidders, despite criticism from immigration lawyers that this would create an "eBay culture" for permanent residence in Britain.
Under current rules, overseas investors can pay £1m, £5m or £10m to speed up the grant of the right to live permanently in Britain.
Depending on the amount paid, the process takes from two to five years. Applicants who cannot afford investor visas must comply with strict requirements depending on what job they are seeking, how much they will be paid, or whether they have a family member who can support them.
But the Migration Advisory Committee has been scrutinising these arrangements following Home Office concerns that the investments - usually made in Gilts, or as a loan to the applicant's own business - are not sufficiently beneficial to the UK economy .
Sir David Metcalf, who chairs the committee, will publish options tomorrow, such as auctioning off a set number of visas each year or recasting the million-pound investments as "end-o-w-ments" to universities.
The auction proposal is understood to have met significant scepticism from within the Home Office and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills.
The idea comes at a sensitive time, given that Maltese proposals to sell off passports for €650,000 each were slammed by EU members concerned the scheme would turn citizenship into a "tradeable commodity" .
The number of UK investor visas rose from 423 in 2011-12 to 530 in 2012-13, according to figures obtained under the Freedom of Information Act. The majority went to Chinese, with Russians and Americans not far behind.
Immigration lawyers representing wealthy foreign clients have universally criticised the auction proposal. Nick Rollason, head of business immigration at Kingsley Napley, warned that this would create an "eBay culture" for handing out visas. "It will also leave a bad taste in the mouths of the British public," he said.
Julia Onslow-Cole, head of global immigration at PwC Legal, says the current system of a set investment threshold, maintained for the duration of the visa, was more beneficial to the economy than a one-off payment. "Selling visas to the highest bidder, thereby treating them as a commodity, does not guarantee that they will continue to invest in the UK," she said.
Kamal Rahman, head of immigration at Mishcon de Reya, a law firm, said the important thing was to find an efficient way of channelling money to boost growth.
"Philosophically, the idea of directing investors into areas of public services where finance is most needed is not controversial, but the system has got to be clear and simple for clients and there is also the question of who would manage and monitor any new fund," Ms Rahman said.
Document FTFT000020140224ea2o0001z
