{"newspaper":"FT","id:"754"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Merkel urges Britain to remain in EU
By Stefan Wagstyl   
658 words
24 February 2014
Financial Times
FTFT
London Ed1
04
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Speech unlikely to outline concessions
Leader will get red carpet treatment
German chancellor Angela Merkel will urge Britain to ignore the eurosceptics and stay at the heart of the EU in a speech to both houses of parliament on Thursday.
But during her one-day working visit to Britain, she is unlikely to make significant concessions to David Cameron on his main concerns, including immigration curbs and changes to EU treaties to return powers from Brussels.
"Germany and the UK are, for each other, important partners - not only bilaterally but in Europe," said Steffen Seibert, Ms Merkel's spokesman. "That will be a theme of the visit . . . we want an active, strong UK in the EU."
Ms Merkel will highlight this in her speech, the first by a German leader to both houses since 1986. She will then have lunch with Mr Cameron before taking tea with the Queen at Buckingham Palace, returning to Berlin in the evening.
Ms Merkel will be getting "the reddest of red carpets", in the words of one British official. London hopes the lavish welcome could encourage Berlin to be more accommodating to Mr Cameron's demands for EU reforms , including his hopes of diluting its powers and curbing migration to appease eurosceptics.
William Hague, foreign secretary, said yesterday the government planned to use Ms Merkel's visit to try to persuade Berlin to support measures discouraging people from moving within the EU to access other nations' welfare systems.
Mr Hague said yesterday he believed the Germans and British shared "common ground" over concerns about benefit tourism within the EU.
"We support free movement . . . but we don't support people moving from one country to another because of the incentives of different benefit systems," Mr Hague told BBC1's Andrew Marr Show . "I think we have common ground on that."
Officials in Berlin hope Ms Merkel will press Mr Cameron to spell out exactly what concessions he wants from the EU as the price for staying in. A German foreign policy expert said: "The UK lacks a consensus on what it wants from the EU. Outsiders like Germany cannot get a clear idea of what the UK actually wants."
Ms Merkel shares some of Mr Cameron's views on the EU. Like him, she wants to trim Brussels' powers and defends the market economy against criticism from countries with a state-led approach, notably France.
Britain sees Berlin as a possible ally in its bid to change EU treaties because Germany has also spoken of treaty change, albeit in the opposite direction - to boost institutions of the eurozone.
But German officials are wary about starting treaty change talks for fear of opening a Pandora's box of demands from 28 countries.
They also say Berlin's plans for closer integration in the eurozone and London's proposals for a looser union outside the eurozone could be incompatible.
Ms Merkel may give Mr Cameron comfort on combating welfare abuse by EU migrants: members of her conservative CDU and its CSU have called for action. But, unlike Mr Cameron, the chancellor supports intra-EU migration.
German officials say reimposing migration controls on the bloc's newest members, Romania and Bulgaria, is out of the question. Mr Cameron has threatened to veto the entry of future new member states, such as Serbia and Albania, unless new migrant curbs are agreed but there is little interest in Berlin in discussing this.
Berlin is worried Britain is moving down a road that could, with a planned referendum on membership, result in it leaving the EU.
Thomas Matussek, a former ambassador to the UK, says: "We would like to help to keep Britain inside. But we can only keep the door open. Walking through the door must be done by the British themselves."
Ms Merkel is likely to make the same point.
Additional reporting by Elizabeth Rigby
Document FTFT000020140224ea2o00014
