{"newspaper":"FT","id:"855"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Cameron can skip treaty change, says lawyer
By George Parker, Political Editor   
1,307 words
6 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
03
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Ex-Brussels counsel claims new EU law not required
Piris sees other ways to meet premier's demands
David Cameron's demands to renegotiate British membership of the EU would not necessarily require a treaty change, according to the top Brussels lawyer who helped to draft every EU treaty from Maastricht to Lisbon.
Jean-Claude Piris, former legal counsel of the European Council and the Council of Ministers, said that Mr Cameron's seven key demands could be met with some deft legal drafting, provided there was political will and a mood for compromise on both sides of the negotiations.
Mr Piris's legal analysis of Mr Cameron's EU strategy for the Financial Times is likely to reinforce a view among Tory MPs that the prime minister's European strategy is too timid and open to a political fudge.
The prime minister set out some of his "key" demands in a Sunday Telegraph article in March, the closest he has come to explaining the deal he is seeking before his planned 2017 referendum on continued British membership of the EU.
Mr Cameron's list was calibrated to avoid any obvious deal-breakers, such as a demand for a limit on migration between existing EU members. Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, has ruled out any unpicking of EU treaties .
Although he said his list was not comprehensive, Mr Cameron said he wanted power to "flow away" from Brussels, a greater role for national parliaments in blocking EU legislation and a cut in red tape.
His plan also called for less EU intrusion in the British justice system, restrictions on benefit claims by migrants, restrictions on "vast migrations" from new member states and "dealing properly with the concept of 'ever closer union'".
Mr Cameron wants a treaty change to underpin his planned reforms but Mr Piris, head of the European Council's legal service for more than 20 years until 2010, said British demands could be accommodated in other ways.
The French lawyer said that was important because "in the medium term I don't think we will agree to a treaty at 28 member states" and even a limited treaty affecting the eurozone could be hard to agree before Mr Cameron's 2017 deadline.
"If we don't change the treaty for the eurozone, there is no way we will change the treaty just for the UK," he said. Many member states fear a new treaty, since it might trigger national referendums.
Mr Piris says much depends on whether Mr Cameron takes a tough approach and insists on enshrining his reforms in treaty change.
He said the Lisbon treaty already allowed for powers to flow from Brussels back to member states, although putting that into practice would require widespread EU agreement.
Mr Piris said a political commitment could reinforce the existing role of national parliaments in scrutinising new EU laws, although that would not allow them to block new proposals.
Reducing red tape would require political will rather than a treaty change, while Mr Cameron's criticisms of the European Court of Human Rights refer to a body that works under the framework of the Council of Europe, not the EU. Britain already enjoys extensive opt-outs from EU justice and police co-operation.
The EU could toughen rules on benefit claims by migrants without treaty change, while accession treaties for new member states could apply longer "transitional" rules on free movement of workers.
Even on the commitment to "ever closer union among the peoples of Europe", Mr Piris said a political declaration might be drafted recalling that the current treaty obliges the EU to respect the history, national identities and political and constitutional structures of member states.
"If the current mood among most EU governments continues to try to improve the functioning of the EU while absolutely avoiding a revision of the treaties, most of Mr Cameron's demands as presented in his Telegraph article could nevertheless be given adequate answers," Mr Piris said.
"However, the hardest would be to get the political will from others to "repatriate" powers from Brussels."
David Lidington, Europe minister, said: "A large amount can be achieved without treaty change but we think some treaty change will be required."
Mats Persson, head of the Open Europe think-tank, said Mr Cameron and Tory MPs wanted to enshrine some of the changes in treaty to prove they would "stand the test of time".
Piris's proposals The expert verdict on No 10's wish list
1 Powers flowing from Brussels, not always to it
Since the Lisbon treaty, there is no legal impediment to that.
A revision of the treaties is possible either to increase or to reduce the competencies conferred on the union in the treaties. Member states may request the commission to submit proposals to repeal a legislative act.
The ﬂow of powers in the case of shared powers with the member states is limited.
2 National parliaments able to block EU legislation
Under Lisbon, either one-third or one-quarter of national parliaments, according to the area concerned, may oblige the commission to review a piece of legislation.
This has rarely been used: the delays imposed on national parliaments are too short, and their opinions are not binding.
System could be improved: political commitment to follow national parliament conclusions?
3 Prevention of further EU red tape
Firstly, by construction, one EU legislation replaces 28 national laws and allows the single market to function better.
Secondly, preventing EU legislation from creating red tape is day-to-day work, which is taken more seriously today by the member states and the EU institutions.
However, there is no simple legal option available to avoid red tape: this cannot be decided by a treaty.
4 European human rights court
The European Court of Human Rights works in the framework of the Council of Europe: it is not part of the EU.
As for the EU, the UK has already obtained several opt-outs from policies in that domain, including Schengen and the area of freedom, security and justice. It has a special position on the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
5 Freedom of movement to take up work, not benefits
This is an issue on which several EU states agree.
There were some limited abuses and a stricter interpretation, or even legislative improvement, has been asked for. This does not need any treaty change.
The principle of free movement of EU citizens is a cornerstone of the treaty: its questioning would be a non- starter for most EU states.
6 Continuing enlargement without vast migrations
A treaty of accession has to be negotiated, signed and ratiﬁed by each EU state.
The past two treaties included an option for member states to suspend immigration from new members for seven years.
Future treaties of accession could include longer periods of adaptation and safeguard measures. But questioning the very principle of free movement of persons would be a non-starter.
7 Ever closer union among the people of Europe
The process of creating an ever closer union is enshrined in the treaty. But the political concept does not have the aim of establishing a federal union.
The treaty obliges the EU to respect the history, culture and traditions of the peoples of Europe and to respect national identities of states and their fundamental structures.
Maybe a political declaration recalling that, would help.
8 Protecting the rights of non-euro countries
Not mentioned in Mr Cameron's Telegraph article.
Non-eurozone members fear the eurozone will integrate further and adopt decisions that have a negative impact on them.
In the medium term the eurozone could reassure them in a new treaty of their legal obligation to guarantee the rights of non eurozone countries.
Document FTFTA00020140506ea5600009
