{"newspaper":"FT","id:"839"}
____
  
COMPANIES
Stemcor buys time on $1.3bn debt pile; INDUSTRIAL METALS
By Duncan Robinson, Andrew Bolger in London and James Crabtree in Mumbai   
1,189 words
27 February 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
25
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
News analysis
Deal will enable restructuring, write Duncan Robinson , Andrew Bolger and James Crabtree
Stemcor, one of the world's largest steel traders, which is majority-owned by the Oppenheimer family, will restructure its $1.3bn debt after a high court judge overruled an objection from one of its creditors.
The restructuring brings to an end a 10-month showdown involving one of the UK's largest privately owned companies, 80 banks, a prominent British MP and two sparring Indian billionaire brothers.
The trading group, which had revenues of more than £5bn in 2013 defaulted on a $850m loan last year. Falling steel prices had damaged the profitability of the low-margin business, which is still majority owned by descendants of founder Hans Oppenheimer, including his daughter Margaret Hodge , who, as head of the parliamentary public accounts committee, is the scourge of wasteful public spending.
Under the deal, Stemcor will repay its $1.3bn credit facility over the next two years by selling or winding down 13 of its businesses. Creditors will also stump up $1.15bn for a new committed trade finance facility.
In return, creditors get more orthodox corporate governance at the steel trader, which has been dominated by the family of its founder, Hans Oppenheimer.
Mr Oppenheimer's son, Ralph, had been chairman or executive chairman of the business since 1982 before he retired as the restructuring got under way last summer.
But while the Oppenheimer family retain their 71 per cent stake in the business, they have in effect lost control of the board. The new independent board will include senior executives and have a majority over family representatives, all of whom will be non-executives.
Simon Freakley, chief executive of Zolfo Cooper, who led the restructuring, said a debt-for-equity swap was never discussed because there was a clear path to resolution through disposals and future trading.
The restructuring is the latest chapter in the - until recently - determinedly low-key history of the 63-year-old steel trader.
Stemcor originated in 1951 when it was founded by German immigrant Hans Oppenheimer - a "loveable but fearsome, chain-smoking patriarch with a heavy accent", according to one of his grandchildren.
The Oppenheimer family gained full control of the business in 1987 after it bought out a stake from US construction group McDermott International.
Under the younger Oppenheimer, the group grew rapidly. Turnover quadrupled from £1bn in 2000 to £4bn in 2007 and hit £5.1bn in 2012. But the good times did not last.
The expansion was fuelled by debt and its short-term credit facility ballooned to $1.3bn. Matters came to a head last summer, when Stemcor defaulted on a $850m loan. Ten months of negotiating followed, which resulted in the deal with lenders.
The deal guarantees the medium-term future of the group, according to Julian Verden, Stemcor's chief executive. "What it does is give real stability to the business."
The new $1.15bn committed trade facility - which means that the banks cannot opt out of certain trades - will also help the group return to normal trading after its bumpy recent history. Mr Verden adds: "When trading with an uncommitted facility, you don't know whether you can do a deal: you have to ask the bank." Although the company declined to reveal its terms, the new credit facility is more expensive than its previous arrangement. In recompense, Stemcor will receive something more valuable: time. To pay down its $1.3bn debt, the company has to sell off some of its businesses.
But these disposals can now take place at a more leisurely place - rather than the fire sale that some people had feared would occur. The sale of its Indian assets - which have attracted admiring glances from two of India's most prominent billionaire industrialists - Naveen Jindal and his elder brother Sajjan Jindal, the heirs to one of the country's most high profile business dynasties - has also been explored.
The bidding process for Stemcor's assets quickly became a contest between the two brothers.
Two formal offers were tabled in early January for the assets - which include an iron ore pellet plant and iron ore mine in the eastern Indian state of Orissa - following an indicative bidding process that concluded in late 2013.
However, disagreements between Stemcor and two bidders have now stalled the process, according to people familiar with the situation.
One person involved in the process, who asked not be named, said: "The final bids came in below what they [Stemcor] had hoped, and so now they are saying they aren't in any great hurry, because they have now sorted out their own financing issues, and are looking for both sides to put in improved bids."
Profile
John Soden
John Soden did not expect to be quite so busy when he became chairman of Stemcor last summer. "I wasn't looking for anything full time - but it has turned out to be more than full time," said Mr Soden, who has overseen a 10-month to and fro between the privately owned steel trader and its eight banks.
It has been far from an easy ride. "It's been extraordinarily tough," he said. "The group has been through enormous trauma."
Mr Soden was brought in to add independence to the steel traders board, which had been run by Ralph Oppenheimer, son of the founder, for the past 30 years.
With a background in private equity, Mr Soden had plenty of board experience thanks to a decade at Citigroup Capital. Before that he spent 25 years, 13 as a partner, at PwC. In a twist of fate, he advised the banks in negotiations with Stemcor.
Although Mr Soden was brought in primarily to oversee the restructuring, he will continue at the business as it attempts to dispose of its Indian assets, stepping away from his executive role in due course.
Profile
Julian Verden
Julian Verden, chief executive of Stemcor, is a steel man through and through.
Mr Verden, 55, has been involved in the steel industry since 1978 and is a former chairman of the International Steel and Trade Association. Before Stemcor, Mr Verden spent two decades at Samac - the independent distributor that was bought out by Stemcor in 1998.
At the start of 2013, he took over the day-to-day running of the group from Ralph Oppenheimer. It was the first time someone not directly related to the group's founder had his hands on the reins.
Mr Verden knew it would be tough. "My remit, which I set out before this process, was to take the successful parts of the business, of which there were many, and secure those going forward."
During Stemcor's troubled recent history, he needed every contact built up over 30 years in the industry. Luckily, suppliers were - in the main - unperturbed by Stemcor's problems. "I have been really pleased with the support from the suppliers and customers," said Mr Verden "We have had unanimous support."
Document FTFTA00020140227ea2r0001i
