{"newspaper":"FT","id:"800"}
____
  
WORLD NEWS
UK proposes £2.5m 'premium' visas
By Helen Warrell in London   
418 words
26 February 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
04
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
A proposal that the UK government should hold an annual auction of 100 "premium" visas for wealthy foreigners has been met with furious warnings that Britain will be accused of "trading" citizenship to the highest bidder.
The Home Office's independent immigration advisers yesterday suggested scrapping the current system - under which foreigners can buy Gilts worth £1m to £10m in return for fast-tracked settlement in Britain - because it provides little or no economic benefit to the UK.
Instead, the Migration Advisory Committee of economists advocates a sealed bidding process, comprising a minimum £2m investment plus a £500,000 donation to a "good causes fund" to be distributed among schools, hospitals and charities. Any excess raised over the £2.5m auction reserve price would automatically be channelled into the good causes fund as a philanthropic gift. The plan is now under consideration by Theresa May, the UK home secretary.
The existing investor visa has proved particularly popular with Chinese, Russian and Middle Eastern individuals, with 560 applications made in the year to September 2013.
Charlie Pring, an immigration lawyer at Taylor Wessing in London, warned ministers that accepting the auction proposals would mean "the risk of a perception that [the government] is trading British citizenship to the highest bidders without proper controls".
But Sir David Metcalf, migration committee chairman, dismissed such criticisms. "Some people say: 'Isn't it awful to sell off visas?' Well, it is better than giving them away, which is what we are doing now. At the moment the Brits get very little out of this and the investors get an awful lot."
The committee calculates that the current scheme raises about £500m in Gilts each year, meaning "this would barely fund two days' worth of the national deficit", their report stated.
The economists are also sceptical of suggestions that visa applicants contribute to the economy by buying top-end property or hiring staff, on the basis that there is so much competition for luxury housing and elite services that these would be snapped up by other customers if the investors were not in the UK.
Private education was the only area of the economy identified by the economists as a potential beneficiary of spending by incoming investors.
However, the committee's view of the economic impact of incoming investors runs counter to recent research suggesting London's super-rich spend an estimated £4bn a year on goods and services in Britain.
Document FTFTA00020140226ea2q00021
