{"newspaper":"FT","id:"959"}
____
  
WORLD NEWS
Wilders hails eurosceptics' rise
By James Fontanella-Khan in The Hague   
728 words
20 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
USA Ed1
06
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Parties poised for big election gains
Acceptance brings political influence
Geert Wilders, the leader of the Netherlands' Freedom party, claimed he had already succeeded at reshaping his nation's policies on immigration and other issues of interest to populist voters even before they go to the polls for this week's EU elections.
"My party supported for two years a minority government. We had political power then. Today we are the opposition - we have zero power. Yet we have never been more influential," Mr Wilders told the Financial Times from his office in the Dutch parliament.
Mr Wilders' boast comes as the Freedom party and other eurosceptic groups across the EU are poised to make big gains in the elections, which conclude on Sunday. Analysts have estimated they could capture as much as 30 per cent of the parliament's seats.
Yet even if they fall short, such groups are increasingly wielding influence in the UK, France, Finland, the Netherlands and elsewhere as their growing popularity presses mainstream governments to adopt their policies, including tougher curbs on immigration, restrictions on the free movement of people and limits to Brussels' power.
"[The EU] is a room like this one, where all the windows have been closed for decades," Mr Wilders said, gesturing to his fortresslike office designed to protect against the many security threats he still faces due to his anti-Islam views. "Now somebody [the eurosceptics] has opened the window, there is a fresh wind and you will not be able to close the window any more."
Mr Wilders has vowed to bring together the two other heavyweight eurosceptic leaders - France's Marine Le Pen and the UK's Nigel Farage.
Mr Farage, leader of the UK Independence party, has for months resisted overtures from Ms Le Pen to form a eurosceptic political group in the European Parliament amid concerns about her National Front's anti-Semitic past. Ms Le Pen last week lashed out at Mr Farage for rebuffing her.
Their bickering has raised questions about whether the various eurosceptic groups across the EU can work effectively together even if they make big inroads in the parliament.
"I believe that it is a responsibility to the millions of voters we have that also Le Pen and Farage overstep their difference and work together. If it's not possible, it's not possible, but hey, I'm going to try to bring them together in every possible way," Mr Wilders promised.
Mr Wilders, who labels himself as the biggest friend of Israel in the Netherlands, said that since Ms Le Pen took over the reins of the party from her father, Jean-Marie, its anti-Semitic rhetoric had disappeared.
"I really believe that she is totally different from her father," said Mr Wilders. "I have seen nothing anti-Semitic or anti-Israel in her campaign."
The Freedom party leader is keen to unite Ukip and the FN because - under EU rules - they need at least 25 seats from parties in seven different member states to form a political group, which would allow the eurosceptics to secure greater access to taxpayer funding as well as speaking rights in parliament.
According to Vote Watch polls , FN is expected to be the largest party in France with 23 seats while Ukip is forecast to win the UK race, garnering 24 seats. The Freedom party is running neck and neck with the liberals to emerge as the largest party with five seats.
Other populist parties that have expressed interest in forming a eurosceptic bloc with Ms Le Pen and Mr Wilders include Italy's Lega Nord, Austria's Freedom party, Belgium's Vlaams Belang, Sweden's Democrats and Slovakia's National party.
Mr Wilders argued that the formation of a larger group - including Ukip as well as other anti-EU parties in Hungary and Poland - would serve to further destabilise Brussels and advance his goal of first returning sovereignty to member states and eventually breaking up the EU.
"Imagine Ukip winning more than 30 per cent in the UK, imagine Le Pen winning more than 25 per cent in France, imagine in Austria, the Netherlands similar parties getting those kind of figures. Then the biggest change maybe will be in the national parliaments," he said.
Gideon Rachman, Page 9
Document FTFTA00020140520ea5k0001v
