{"newspaper":"FT","id:"961"}
____
  
NATIONAL NEWS
Ukip success to boost Yes vote in Scotland, says poll
By Mure Dickie in Edinburgh and George Parker in London   
615 words
20 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
02
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Victory for the UK Independence party in this week's European elections could nudge Scottish voters towards independence, according to an opinion poll that also suggests Ukip is likely to fail to win its first seat in Scotland.
The Scottish National party would seize on such a result as evidence of the widening divergence in political attitudes that it says means Scotland can only be sure of getting the kind of government it wants by voting to leave the UK on September 18.
Ukip could be on course to capture the largest share of the UK vote on Thursday, despite being repeatedly forced to deny accusations of xenophobia and racism.
An ICM survey published by the Scotsman newspaper yesterday found that 18 per cent of Scottish respondents were "more likely" to vote Yes to independence if Ukip came first in voting across Britain on Thursday.
John Curtice, a psephologist, said the ICM poll suggested SNP arguments about diverging political sentiment "may have some traction".
Prof Curtice cautioned that a Ukip boost for the Yes campaign could be limited, as only 4 per cent of current No voters said victory for Nigel Farage's party would be more likely to make them vote for independence.
"Still, a few of those who are undecided how to vote in September may be swayed by such an outcome; 19 per cent of them say they would be more likely to vote Yes while just 4 per cent state they would be more likely to vote No," he wrote in a blog post .
Previous polls have suggested that Ukip could be in striking distance of winning its first election in Scotland, helped by collapsing support for the Liberal Democrats.
Under the proportional representation system used for European parliamentary elections, the party could win one of Scotland's six seats with a share of votes in the low teens.
Mr Farage, Ukip leader, said this month his party was on the brink of becoming a "legitimate voice" in Scottish politics for the first time.
However, the ICM poll and a survey by Survation published in the Daily Record newspaper yesterday suggested Ukip would fall short with 9 or 10 per cent of the vote in Scotland.
The polls suggested the most likely winner of the sixth Scottish European seat would be the SNP, a result that would give it a total of three seats; a big morale boost as it works to narrow the pro-union lead ahead of September 18.
The SNP, which previously treated Ukip largely as an irrelevance in Scotland, now regards Thursday's vote as a showdown between its pro-European and immigration-friendly agenda and Mr Farage's call for tighter border controls and an EU exit.
"The intolerant message that Ukip is peddling has no place in Scotland. And the way to keep Ukip agenda out of Scottish politics is by voting SNP," Alex Salmond, party leader and first minister said.
Last week, Ukip's lead candidate, David Coburn, denounced the SNP as "fascists" in a radio interview.
Mr Farage took out a full-page advertisement in the Daily Telegraph yesterday to declare that "Ukip is not a racist party", following his claim last week that people should feel uncomfortable if a group of Romanian men moved in next door . Mr Farage went on to repeat contested claims over the level of crime committed by Romanians in London, but insisted he would be totally relaxed about living next door to Romanian men if they had work permits and were subject to immigration checks.
Document FTFTA00020140520ea5k00005
