{"newspaper":"FT","id:"960"}
____
  
COMPANIES
Mitie wins deal to run immigrant centres; SUPPORT SERVICES
By Gill Plimmer   
414 words
20 May 2014
Financial Times
FTFTA
London Ed1
21
English
Copyright 2014 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.   
Eight-year £180m contract for two sites
Outsourcer's sales rise 8 per cent
Mitie, the FTSE 250 outsourcer, further increased its market share in British government services with a £180m, eight-year deal to run immigration centres near Heathrow for the Home Office.
The company will take over the contract to manage 900 detainees a year at the Colnbrook and Harmondsworth immigration removal centres near Heathrow airport in September from Serco and Geo. The deal will mean it is responsible for a third of the Ministry of Justice's immigration estate.
Deals such as this helped pre-tax profit rise 4.3 per cent to £113.3m for the year to the end of March. Revenues increased 8.2 per cent to £2.1bn.
Mitie already provides facilities management services for Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunal Service in the south of England. But it is now planning bids for the justice department's new facilities management contracts in prisons, which are due to be handed to the private sector later this year.
Although Mitie has largely escaped the opprobrium heaped on rivals G4S and Serco after they were found to have overcharged taxpayers for the electronic monitoring of offenders, its deal to run detention centres will put the company at the heart of one of the most controversial areas in government outsourcing.
Yesterday, Britain's opposition Labour party called for an investigation into the way rival Serco runs Yarls Wood immigration centre in central England following newspaper reports alleging a case of sexual assault. Serco said that there was no case to answer.
Ruby McGregor-Smith, chief executive of Mitie, said she expected outsourcing to grow in the long term, as government departments seek cost savings.
The company is targeting the healthcare market in the UK for expansion and bought Complete Group in January for £9m.
About 64 per cent of group revenue comes from the private sector, with recently won deals including facilities management contracts for the Bank of Ireland, Mitchells & Butlers and Four Seasons Healthcare.
The group has exited weaker-margin businesses such as engineering and construction support and took a £25.4m hit this year. Its order book for the year ahead stood at £8.7bn and it has secured 84 per cent of revenue for the coming year. It raised its total dividend for the year 6.8 per cent to 11p per share.
Document FTFTA00020140520ea5k00012
