{"newspaper":"i","id:"1035"}
____
News
@ Your View
1,065 words
19 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
14
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
India's long, hard road In your letter (17 May, "The largest election in human history") you seem to wonder about the economic and political implications of India's recent election results.
In my view the biggest challenge facing the billion-plus Indian population is how to address the myriad local social issues facing a nation which includes some of the worlds richest and a third of its poorest, some highly educated and many with no education, some free and others shackled by being born into the wrong caste or religion or even the geographic location.
The long and hazardous road to true democracy in India is not one where a privileged and often corrupt elite use their wealth and modern technology to manipulate a largely unsophisticated populous to vote them into power.
Real and meaningful change will not come to India while the majority have no or little access to modern education decent health service or even safe drinking water. SHAHRIYAR SAEB-NOORI TORQUAY Let's work with the Scots Having watched the Better Together campaign and associated rhetoric, I cannot understand why we English cannot treat the Scots as a mature nation which could thrive as part of a revamped United Kingdom, with independence recognised but some mutual interdependence on matters such as border controls, currency, banking and a limited term for the use of Faslane.
If the referendum result is "no" the issue will not go away but sit like a festering sore until the next referendum. Let us take a proactive approach and work with the Scots to create a structure which works for all of us.
RAY STARKEY NORTHAMPTON The rest of Britain is disenfranchised in this referendum and we'll all be disenfranchised permanently if we split, because it would be likely that south of the border we'd have perpetual right-wing governments and north perpetual leftwing ones.
BILL HORNER BRADFORD, WEST YORKSHIRE No sherry for us, Mr Gove As a long-serving state school governor I am horrified at Michael Gove's recent outpouring on the pouring of sherry by school governors I have never been poured sherry, or any other alcohol, at a governors' meeting and wonder which state schools he believes do so.
Regarding slicing of cake, the only slicing I know relates to budgets. His further assumption that governors are touchy-feely rather than tough challengers can be disproved by many Ofsted reports. SUE PROCTOR CHESTER Not forced to avoid tax Simon Read is right in that the "tax experts who spot the loopholes" should take some of the blame for the huge tax gap in this country, but not all of it ("Tax avoidance by the rich is all a matter of scale", 17 May).
No one forces Gary Barlow and his like to avoid paying tax. They know exactly why taxation has to be levied in a civilised country, and choose not to pay their fair share, despite the NHS being badly in need of extra funding, state schools suffering financially and care workers being paid a pittance. That's why honours need to be taken back from all tax avoiders and evaders!
The idea that an Isa is a "tax-avoidance scheme" is ludicrous; it is a tax-free saving scheme, originally devised by government to encourage saving, thereby taking money out of circulation in an attempt to control rising inflation. Those who defend their immoral tax practices by accusing Isa holders of being no better are grasping at straws! BERNIE EVANS LIVERPOOL Giving to the well-offI must thank your columnist Chris Blackhurst (9 May); until his lavish praise of Michael Hintze's generosity to such cash-strapped institutions as the Old Vic, The V&A, Oxford University and Glyndebourne, I had never heard of this billionaire hedgefund manager.
It seems his munifi-cence even extends to such worthy causes as the Conservative Party - his £1.5m being its largest individual donation. Well, thank God for charity like his.
JOHN SUTHERLAND AIRDRIE Don't sneer at Ukip Mark Steel (16 May) can cut his sneering sarcasm - I'm sticking with Ukip.
We are an overcrowded country in an overcrowded world. How big a population are we supposed to sustain - 70, 90, 100 million? Immigration is bad for wildlife, the environment and the quality of life.
MARK TAHA LONDON SE26 Blatter wakes up at last The Fifa President, Sepp Blatter, has woken up to something which was strikingly apparent from when it was first announced, a summer World Cup in Qatar is a "mistake". Can the FA start the ball rolling by declaring that we, the founders of the game, will not disrupt our traditional winter domestic programme to bail him and his cohorts out. It would be hoped that the other European leagues would follow our example, but I suspect the curse of today's world - money - will prevail and continue to destroy all that is good in the great game of football.
MICHAEL RATHE NORTHAMPTON A rugby fan, but no toffTom Peck's article (17 May) puzzled me. While almost ranting in my view about the make up of many rugby people, he missed the vital point, or chose to ignore it.
I am a Saracens season-ticket holder but in no way fill any of his criteria. Overdrawn at the end of the month, no job in the city, I'm just a gardener. The reason why I won't be going to any England games is the point that Tom missed - the price of tickets. HOWARD SMITH BARNET, HERTFORDSHIRE Vote for no one Given the recent spate of letters from discontented voters, is it time to form a party called "none of the above"? This party would have a box on the ballot paper and so x in the box would be counted.
No need to deface papers. It is an easy way to gauge voter intent and satisfaction.
No policies necessary, this option would give the disgruntled electorate the opportunity to show the political parties just how many people are unhappy about the political choices on offer. EUAN MACAUSLAN SURBITON, SURREY Room for equality In these days of sexual equality do you think it acceptable to call the main bedroom "the master bedroom"? If not, what would be a good alternative? MARY LEE WOTTONUNDER-EDGE, GLOUCESTERSHIRE
Document IIND000020140519ea5j0003h
