{"newspaper":"i","id:"1048"}
____
News
Transplant patient overwhelmed by i readers' response to his plight
By Cahal Milmo CHIEF REPORTER   
338 words
8 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
11
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | HEALTH
A kidney transplant patient whose sister was refused a visa to become his donor has spoken of his elation and humility at the public response to his case.
Oliver Cameron, 38, was told last month that his sister Keisha Rushton can travel from her home in Jamaica to donate a kidney after i highlighted his predicament and the Home Office minister, James Brokenshire, overturned the earlier refusal by officials to allow her to enter Britain.
The case made headlines around the world and provoked calls from politicians, religious leaders and campaign groups for the authorities to reconsider, as well as inspiring an online petition which was signed by hundreds demanding a reversal of immigration officials' stance.
Mr Cameron, who must undergo gruelling dialysis three times a day, said that he was grateful for the high-level support but added he had been most affected by the messages and help he received from ordinary people, including the many readers of i and it's sister paper The Independent who made offers of financial help after he found he could no longer afford his sister's air fare.
He said: "The response was simply overwhelming and it filled me with such gratitude and faith that there are plenty of people out there who care, are decent and want to help.
"I cannot express how grateful I am for the manner in which people have responded. It has been genuinely humbling."
Mr Cameron, a father-of-four who learned he needed a kidney transplant after suffering near-fatal renal failure in December 2012, is now entering the final stage of tests at the Royal Free Hospital in north London, ahead of his undergoing the procedure in the coming weeks.
Mr Cameron's sister was initially told she was being refused a temporary visa to allow her to donate a kidney to her brother as officials were not satisfied she would return to Jamaica.
Document IIND000020140508ea580004z
