{"newspaper":"i","id:"125"}
____
News
Clegg and Farage trade insults in second EU debate
By Andrew Grice and Nigel Morris   
574 words
3 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
20
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | EUROPEAN UNION
Nick Clegg branded Nigel Farage the "friend of Vladimir Putin" as the two leaders clashed in the second of their live broadcast debates last night.
But the Liberal Democrat leader's change of strategy appeared not to win over the public. Two snap opinion polls after the hour-long debate gave the UK Independence Party leader victory by a bigger margin than he enjoyed after last week's debate.
An ICM poll for The Guardian found that 69 per cent of people thought Mr Farage performed better, with 31 per cent opting for Mr Clegg. A YouGov survey for The Sun gave Mr Farage victory by a margin of 68 to 27 per cent, with one in three Lib Dem supporters saying Mr Farage had won. Last week, YouGov gave the Ukip leader a win by 57 to 36 per cent.
In a more highly charged debate, Mr Clegg showed more passion while Mr Farage appeared more composed than in last week's showdown. However, the Ukip leader warned dramatically that the EU could break up, with violence on the streets, if member states "trapped" in the eurozone did not decide to leave democratically.
"I want it [the EU] to end democratically. I am afraid it will end very unpleasantly," Mr Farage said. He pointed to a rise in support for a neo-Nazi party in Greece and to violence in Madrid and Athens. "If you take away from people their ability through the ballot box to change, because they have given away control of everything to someone else, then I am afraid they tend to resort to other means," he said. He appealed to voters to "join the people's army" and "topple the establishment".
Mr Clegg accused Ukip of trying to "turn the clock back" to the 19th century, citing its opposition to gay marriage, women's rights and action on climate change. The Deputy PM said he loved modern Britain and rejected Ukip's "dangerous fantasies about a world that no longer exists."
In another heated exchange on the impact of migration from EU countries, Mr Farage said the scale of immigration over recent years had "shocked" the country and increased segregation in towns and cities.
In their own words ...
Farage: "Let's free ourselves up. I know the people are behind this. Come and join the People's Army. Let's topple the establishment that led us into this mess."
Clegg: "We have to work with other countries to protect jobs, to protect trade, to make sure Britain is richer, stronger and safer, and for us as a country to thrive and prosper we should do what we do at our best."
Farage: "I want the EU to end, but I want it to end democratically. If it doesn't end democratically, I'm afraid it will end very unpleasantly."
Clegg: "Nigel Farage doesn't want to work with the Americans, to work with the EU, he only wants to work with Vladimir Putin (inset bottom left)."
Farage: [Immigration] "has left....the white working class effectively as an underclass, and I think that is a disaster for our society".
Clegg: "I wouldn't be surprised if Nigel Farage soon tells us the moon landing was a fake, that Barack Obama (inset above right) is not American, that Elvis isn't dead."
Document IIND000020140403ea430001x
