{"newspaper":"i","id:"1393"}
____
News
'Tiger Mother' author bites back over claims her latest book is racist
By Nick Clark TS CORRESPONDENT   
526 words
3 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
18
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | BATH LITERATURE FESTIVAL
Amy Chua, the author of controversial parenting manual Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother, has hit back at allegations that her new book is racist.
After arguing for the supremacy of strict Chinese parenting over relaxed Western techniques in her earlier book, Ms Chua's latest identifies traits in eight ethnic groups that she claims help them outperform others in the US.
The new work, The Triple Package: How Three Unlikely Traits Explain the Rise and Fall of Cultural Groups in America, has been criticised for playing to racial stereotypes, with the New York Post dismissing it as a "series of shock-arguments wrapped in self-help tropes".
Speaking at The Independent Bath Literature Festival yesterday, Ms Chua said: "I am so surprised and outraged by the racist charge. I think it's a group sensitivity issue. I do think 90 per cent of the people saying this haven't read the book, they've just read a bad review."
Ms Chua, born in Illinois to Chinese parents, wrote The Triple Pack with husband Jed Rubenfeld, a fellow law professor at Yale.
Mr Rubenfeld, also attending the festival, said: "For the last six weeks we've had to watch and listen as thousands of people were vilifying a book that had not yet been published, that they had not read, and we could not recognise as the book we had written."
The book focuses on eight communities considered to be outperforming others in the US: Lebanese, Nigerian, Iranian, Indian, Cuban and Chinese immigrants, as well as Jews and Mormons.
"We got in trouble just bringing up the facts," Mr Rubenfeld said.
"There's a taboo around this, and people don't like talking about it. These facts feel racially charged. But the facts debunk the racial stereotypes."
The Triple Package isolates three qualities shared by the communities outperforming the rest of America: the sense of being exceptional or feeling superior, having insecurity and impulse control.
The theories espoused in The Triple Package proved that the outperformance was "not genetic, not racial and not biological", Mr Rubenfeld said.
Amy Chua's children were not allowed to be in a school play; complain about that; watch TV; play computer games; get less than an A in exams; not be the best student in every subject except PE and drama.
Musical duo rule out literary collaboration
Ben Watt may have spent 18 years producing hits with wife Tracey Thorn as the dance group Everything but the Girl, yet he has ruled out any literary collaboration despite both publishing books in the past year.
Everything but the Girl released 11 albums after forming in 1982 but have not performed live since the turn of the century. Watt, 51, speaking at The Independent Bath Literature Festival, doubted they would write together. "I can't see the idea of a literary collaboration happening; we're very bad collaborators. We've been together since we were 19, publicly and privately, but in all that time we've always worked in isolation."
Document IIND000020140303ea3300031
