{"newspaper":"i","id:"1392"}
____
News
@i Your View TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
1,091 words
3 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
14
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News
War risk in Ukraine
In the face of recent Russian military adventurism it becomes even clearer that, rather than devolving power, we should be drawing closer to our European allies and not playing at Cavaliers with our collective security.
This kind of situation previously led to us sleep-walk into two world wars. It is in no way inconceivable that it could happen again. If we let it? I hope not.
PAUL F MCCARTHY
MANCHESTER
It is possible that we should be grateful for Russia's pre-emptive intervention in Crimea.
Without it the Kiev government and its supporters would have had to attempt to exert control, meeting resistance from the majority Russian population in a situation which would have also involved Ukrainian and Tartar minorities.
Given the Russian bases and military presence it is inconceivable that Russian forces would not have been drawn in if there was, as there almost certainly would have been, violence on the streets.
Probably the best outcome that can be anticipated is that Crimea remains part of Ukraine but as an autonomous region with a recognition of the Russian presence and interests.
GRAHAM PERKINS
BROMYARD, HEREFORDSHIRE
England with no Scotland
The letter headed "Vote the Scots Out" (1 March) is just the kind of nonsense we do not need in the current Scottish independence debate. I am Scottish; I am most definitely not English. The English cannot "vote us out" as if we were just some part of England.
The arguments used by both sides in Scotland, as to whether or not we will be better off financially, do not, in my view, represent the thoughts of many of us. We do not see how, in international matters, a separate Scotland - and an inevitably damaged England, Wales and Northern Ireland can possibly be of advantage to any of us.
Yet it is true that Scottish independence would badly affect the English, who would have no say in protecting themselves from that result. So, my advice to my English fellow-UK citizens is this: don't make foolish anti-Scottish comments which will play into the hands of separatists; just depend on Scottish commonsense for the continuation of our union.
JAMES THOMSON
GLENROTHES
To enlighten some constitutional dark areas which have surfaced recently, Scots pay taxes too so it's not England's money which is spent there, it's our money.
And Scottish MPs are needed in both Scotland and Westminster because there are still many things controlled by Westminster which the Scottish government and people haven't been allowed to decide for themselves (yet) - the majority of finance matters in fact.
It really would be much simpler all round if Scotland had independence, which would lead to a more modern, mature relationship between the countries.
RICHARD ANDERSON
THORNTON, LEICESTERSHIRE
I am disgusted at the editorial bias demonstrated by three recently published letters that only serve to confirm the ignorance and arrogance of some English letter writers. I would like to answer some points raised.
It's Scotland's oil because of international law - it is in Scottish territorial waters.
"Why should we subsidise the Scots?" This is factually wrong. The reality is that the rest of the UK outwith the Home Counties subsidise London and the South East. Where would the UK have been had it not been for oil revenues over the past 40 years?
RON D R WYNTON
FORTROSE, ROSS-SHIRE
House-price madness
In the early 1980s I bought my first house, a small three- bedroom terraced house for £26k. At the time I was earning around £10k a year so the house was 2.6 times my annual salary.
My daughter is now at a similar level in the same organisation, trying to buy a two-bedroom flat near where she works. It seems that she will need to pay somewhere between six and seven times her salary.
This is a madness which affects rents as much as purchase prices. How much further can the discrepancy between salaries and housing costs go before people literally have zero disposable income? What will happen to Osborne's economic recovery then?
JEFF DENT
ISLEWORTH, MIDDLESEX
Most immigrants pay for themselves through their taxes and the services they provide. The main exception is the billionaires who are buying up London, driving house prices to insane levels and using loopholes to contribute as little as possible to the Exchequer.
P J STEWART
OXFORD
Cooking for victory
Keith Longmore (letter, 28 February) criticises a previous letter writer who urged people to save money by doing more cooking at home.
No one is wishing to return to the Victorian era. If we just think about the Second World War years we find that many women worked full-time in factories, schools, hospitals, shops and in transport, not to mention those in the services.
There was rationing so they had to go home after a day's work to cook the family meal. They had quite meagre ingredients and no "mod cons" as modern homes have. They had coal fires which made homes dirty, so there was more cleaning as well. Many grew vegetables or kept chickens to help with the rations.
The poor that Mr Longmore refers to would benefit from cooking the simple, cheap filling meals that were cooked in the war years. They would eat less additives and, I believe, sitting together to share such a hearty meal with the family would lift their spirits.
I agree we live in a very unfair society, but helping people to be helpless is not the way to make it fairer. Helping people to gain skills to improve their chances and build confidence and independence is a start on the right road.
D LEWIS
ANDOVER, HAMPSHIRE
Bus ride into solvency
I would gladly show my pass to the bus driver and give him 50p. That would bring in £5m. I am sure most could pay £1. To take away the freedom to travel from pensioners will have far more costly consequences that to take some interim measures until we get financial stability back.
DOUGLAS BREWER
LEICESTER
i was wrong
Pancake essentials
In our 10 best Pancake Day essentials (i, 27 February), we included the Tala Cook's Measure (available from Lakeland for £7.99 in distinctive silver and blue). However, the picture we used to accompany it was not of the Tala product. The correct picture can be seen at independent.co.uk"
MORE COMMENT on independentvoices.com
Document IIND000020140303ea330002r
