{"newspaper":"i","id:"1303"}
____
Features
@ i Your View
961 words
1 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
16
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
Features | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
Young people deserve better
I welcome Nick Clegg's clearing system to keep young people off the dole. However, having spent 40 years teaching in secondary education, I have lost count of the number of initiatives targeted towards the socalled "non-academics". Our education system continues to be a feeder system for the universities.
Vocational education has always been the preserve of those not suited to A-levels and higher education.
Lip service to parity of esteem has been shown through initiatives such as the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative, Youth Training Scheme etc. All have failed because, unlike many European countries, we have always looked down upon training, rather than academia, as a worthwhile career.
MIKE ANCIL TAVISTOCK, DEVON
Vote the Scots out
It is for the residents of Scotland alone to decide if they wish to remain in the UK. But that does not preclude a referendum for the rest of the UK to vote on expelling the Scots. As an Englishman, I would certainly vote for expulsion. Why should we subsidise the Scots and, above all, why should they be doubly represented, with an MP in London and an MSP in Edinburgh?
EDWARD JEAVONS
Summer-born dilemma
I read with sympathy the article on summer-born children. ("Too much, too young?", 27 February). A child not quite ready for school being punished by having to miss a whole stage of early education when she does start... the distress of her mother, Ms McLoughlin, speaks volumes.
The article, like many I have read on summerborn children, misses a salient point of comparison. In Scotland the cut-off point for entry at the end of February is at a different time of year from the term start date. The youngest a child can be at the start of Primary 1 is fourand-a-half. Furthermore January- and Februaryborn children (and sometimes Novemberand December-born) can have their entry to nursery and P1 deferred to the following session.
A different system on the doorstep has been in practice for years - separating age boundaries from the start of the school session, and allowing parents to select deferment at the younger end of the cohort - thereby possibly transforming a "youngest" child to an "oldest".
We have many concerns to deal with in Scottish education, but summer-born fouryear-olds missing reception is not one of them.
HARRIET NEVILL DUNBLANE
I have just read the article on summer-born children and disagree. Our daughter was born in early July (11 weeks prematurely). She started school (parttime) when she was four and two months. She loved it and was raring to read. She scored highly in Richmond tests, but on moving to Gloucestershire from Cornwall, she trod water for a year. On starting grammar school, she was bullied, but the school dealt with it brilliantly. This held her back a little but she achieved average Sats results at 13 and then achieved above-expected at GCSE and A-level and finally with her degree. If she had waited another year to start school, she would have been bored silly attending playgroup.
L SMITH GLOUCESTERSHIRE
I would like to correct a common misconception that school is compulsory and the education of our children is the responsibility of the state. Sarah Cassidy wrote "children do not have to be in education until the term after their fifth birthday. But if they delay, they forfeit the right to a place in reception." She is confusing "education" with "school".
The Education Act 1996 places the duty of a child's education on the parents, not the state.
I have much sympathy for Ms McLoughlin when she describes having "no choice at all" regarding her daughter's education. The McLoughlins could look into the choices available through Elective Home Education.
FLEUR ATKINS
Immigration increases
What further proof do we need that the people running the country are insane than Vince Cable exulting over immigration rising?
We live in a tiny country, short on housing and with services overrun, are £1.2trn in debt yet are paying benefits to people who have never contributed.
We are paying to keep millions of people on the dole and benefits, while importing more cheap labour. It's a lose-lose situation for those of us picking up the tab.
PHIL GRANGER WEST MALLING, KENT
Low marks for Lloyd Webber
Natalie Haynes ("Why can't we do musicals any more?", 28 February) comments that it comes "as little surprise to anyone" that Andrew Lloyd Webber's latest musical is closing early; and ALW himself says that he is resigned to the fact that anything he does probably nobody is going to like. As a professional musician, it is no surprise at all to me that the public have tired of his musicals; nothing new, tunes that you've heard in some shape or form before, and harmonies that might struggle to gain an E grade in GCSE music.
RICHARD LESTER CIRENCESTER
Merkel victorious
Angela Merkel's speech to Parliament on Britain's future in Europe merely confirms the opinion that, while Britain won the war, Germany certainly won the peace.
MIKE BAKER BROMSGROVE
More signs of madness
Two names that made me laugh:
A sandwich bar in Winchester: Baguetti Junction; and a bric-a-brac shop in Totton, Hampshire: Junk & Disorderly.
ANTHONY R YOUNG ASHURST, HAMPSHIRE
In Blackpool there's a carpet store called Walter Wall Carpets. DAVID DEWHURST WREA GREEN, LANCASHIRE
Seen in the shop window of a professional dyer in Stratford, London, during the Second World War: a large sign stating: "We dye to live."
DAVID BURGOYNE BOSTON, LINCOLNSHIRE There is a hairdresser in Lanvollon, Brittany, called Hair Force One. MARTIN HALLAM
Document IIND000020140301ea3100019
