{"newspaper":"i","id:"1475"}
____
News
How a Skins graduate shot to Hollywood
Kaleem Aftab   
1,259 words
14 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
33,34
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | He made his name in a television teen drama, but Jack O'Connell is now working with Angelina Jolie and the Coen brothers. He talks to Kaleem Aftab
Jack O'Connell is moving up in the world. A graduate of the hit Channel 4 drama Skins, the rising star from Derby has just finished shooting his first Hollywood role as a leading man.
The 23-year-old plays Louis Zamperini, an Olympic runner who was taken prisoner by Japanese forces during the Second World War. The film, Unbroken, is co-written by the Coen brothers and directed by Angelina Jolie.
Meanwhile, Starred Up, a prison drama, is out this month. O'Connell plays Eric, a troubled and violent teenager who is transferred to adult prison. ("Starred up" is prison slang for prematurely moving an aggressive young criminal from a juvenile institution into prison because they are uncontrollable.) In the film, which is partly based on the experiences of the film's debut screenwriter, Jonathan Asser, Eric is sent to a discussion group run by Oliver (Rupert Friend), a volunteer who believes that he can help inmates through discussion groups.
O'Connell reflects on how he played Eric: "I talked a lot with previous convicts. And Jonathan was on set the whole time. He had contacts from before when he was working, trying to rehabilitate through the medium of therapy and discussion. Mere discussion."
O'Connell adds: "There were a couple of lads who have since been released, since the script has been put together so we were able to talk to them. They gave us priceless information. I think the main detail that I found through my conversation was that anyone who is particularly violent or proven in that sense doesn't have to vocalise it. There isn't any uncertainty about them."
The actor speaks slowly with a broad Derbyshire accent. He sounds almost punch-drunk at times. He has no obvious airs and graces and is remarkably polite. This impression was reinforced during the recent Berlin Film Festival at a press conference for '71, for which O'Connell gives another acclaimed performance as a British soldier caught up in a riot during the Troubles. He asked the fellow members of the film team if they would mind him answering a question that was aimed at the team of actors.
Yet life for O'Connell could easily have been more like those of the on-screen characters he is Continued overleaf Continued from page 33 depicting than the one that sees him hobnobbing at festivals and working with Jolie. "What is a bit concerning is that I find Eric a character that is very easy to relate to," he says. "I just think growing up where I grew up, me and Eric are only accents apart ... I've been quite lucky from time to time not to be behind bars myself. Fortunately that is all behind me now, but I have a general understanding of what sort of attitude these people who are genuinely violent have."
O'Connell doesn't go into details. He is not proud of his past and doesn't want to glamorise it. Yet he feels the "run-ins" and life experience have helped him to play Eric and give him qualities that a lot of directors have found useful.
His first job was playing a National Front supporter in Shane Meadows's This Is England. With Skins, he came to prominence playing drug-dealing womaniser James. In the film Eden Lake, he plays a thug terrorising a couple on a romantic break. "Thankfully, I have other experiences now," he says. "Eric is my most front-of-centre character; it's his story and is told through his narrative. My past experiences mean that I'm not approaching it naively; that would be dangerous, I think, but I have a better understanding of what is requisite in order to play a lead role."
Mackenzie, Starred Up's director, says it wasn't O'Connell's previous performances that got him the role: "I hadn't even seen Skins. I just saw his casting tape and thought: that guy is amazing. He's street, but he has star quality, too. I met him and we did a little sort of casting workshop together and almost immediately that cemented the bond. On set he was very instinctive."
What O'Connell finds more challenging is roles in films such as the First World War drama Private Peaceful, in which his character's sensitivity to his brother leads to his execution; or playing Bobby Charlton in the retelling of the Busby Babes air disaster, United. "I guess playing Charlie Peaceful was harder ... there is a lot more bravery in that than playing another delinquent. I would definitely like to move on from that."
He's happy with the direction his career is heading in now: "The idea now is that more doors are open to me - before it was a case of availability. I wasn't being offered a great deal of roles outside of this bracket and because beggars can't be choosers; but thankfully now I don't have to beg any more. I'm able to choose more. The idea now is to make conscious decisions and show a range, because they are more the attributes of the actors that I respect."
Looking back there are many occasions when his career could have taken a different path. He landed one big job that was to film in America, but he couldn't take on the role because of visa issues. As a child he imagined that he would be a footballer - he's a Derby County fan. His father was a bombardier and he also considered joining the army: "Not because I was a murderous freak, but because I didn't have any other options."
O'Connell remains based in Derby: "It's home to me." He tried to move to London, staying in Hounslow, which he didn't find too dissimilar to home. He even tries to convince me that the curries are better in the Midlands than in nearby Southall, but his argument falls flat when he adds, without any apparent hint of irony, "Even Asda does nice curries in Derby."
Of growing up, he says: "I find the education I got from living in Derby and being streetwise, the lessons that I had to learn growing up, have set me in good stead for this kind of working life. I feel equipped. I definitely haven't had a sheltered upbringing, and when I'm on set I have a real conviction that I deserve to be there. I love going home and I'll continue to do that. It's becoming different now because the publicity has sort of expanded a bit. The roles that I get now are a bit more global."
That global interest is only going to expand when Jolie's directorial effort Unknown is released later in the year. O'Connell calls Jolie an "actor's director". For him, the film is the next step up the ladder. "I play this Second World War veteran, Louis Zamperini, an Italian immigrant. It's a lot of work but I have youth on my side and I'm in the prime of my life."
'Starred Up' opens on 21 March and
Living in Derby and being streetwise have set me in good stead for this kind of working life
Document IIND000020140314ea3e0005a
