{"newspaper":"i","id:"1568"}
____
News
Clegg and Farage clash in battle of 'the facts' about immigration
By Andrew Grice POLITICAL EDITOR   
850 words
27 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
4
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | COVER STORY
Nick Clegg tried to counter the UK Independence Party's trump card of immigration last night as he went head-to-head with Nigel Farage on whether Britain should remain in the European Union.
In the first of two live debates, the Liberal Democrat leader said the British people deserved "the facts" on immigration and accused Ukip of trying to "scare people". He brandished a Ukip leaflet claiming that 29 million people could come to Britain from Romania and Bulgaria, more than the total number of people living in those two countries. A YouGov survey of 1,003 people found 57 per cent believed that Mr Farage had performed best, while 36 per cent thought Mr Clegg had won.
Neither leader landed a killer blow in the hour-long debate. Mr Farage won louder applause from the audience but Mr Clegg, using his experience of Britain's first TV leaders' debates at the 2010 election, looked more relaxed. Inevitably, both the Liberal Democrats and Ukip claimed victory. The Lib Dems said their man had won "hands down" the battle of the facts, while Ukip hailed a "great breakthrough", claiming it had taken over the leadership of Britain's Eurosceptic majority.
The leaders clashed over immigration, as the Deputy Prime Minister tackled the issue which is believed to have boosted Ukip's appeal much more than its desire to leave the EU. Mr Clegg argued that migrants made a net contribution of £22bn between 2001 and 2011 to the country through taxes, saying the NHS would collapse if the UK "pulled up the drawbridge". He insisted that nine out of 10 new jobs being created in the UK went to British people. But Mr Farage accused him of evading the crucial question: that EU membership meant Britain having an "open door" to 480 million people.
Mr Clegg repeatedly warned that leaving the EU would cost jobs, with more than three million linked to trade with the EU. "I am not prepared to see anyone lose their job on the altar of Nigel Farage's anti-EU dogma," he declared. The Ukip leader retorted that the only "dogma" he believed in was the British people deciding their own fate. He claimed that 75 per cent of the UK's laws were now made in Brussels, while Mr Clegg put the figure at 7 per cent.
Although some exchanges were heated, the debate did not descend into personal insults. Mr Farage did say that Mr Clegg had never had a "real job," in contrast to his own 20 years in the private sector. Mr Clegg retorted that the two men became MEPs on the same day, that he had left the European Parliament after five years while Mr Farage was still a member 15 years on.
Lib Dem and Ukip officials believe both parties could emerge as winners, as they both have the capacity to prise some voters away from Labour and the Tories. Although they were never going to agree on who won, they did agree that the Tories and Labour were the losers.
Clegg's words
Investment Of course companies move operations, but they will exit the UK, leaving thousands and thousands of families distressed in their wake because they will not have a breadwinner in those families, able to pay their bills, because the investment has gone, the jobs are gone.
Immigration People who come to our country, they create wealth, they pay taxes, they help sustain our NHS. To pull up our drawbridge, we would destroy jobs for everybody in this country - and that is something I am not prepared to see happen.
Referendum It's really important to remember this is a decision which would have a huge effect, which would have massive consequences for our country for generations to come, for decades to come.
Ukraine It was very moving to see those people demonstrating for their freedom, demonstrating for their rights, dying for it [in Ukraine].
Europe The world has changed dramatically. It's not the 1950s, you can't turn the clock back. I want us to be Great Britain, not Little England.
Farage's words
Investment I remember, Nick, you and all your gang - all the big corporates - all telling us 12 years ago that if we didn't join the euro, all inward investment would cease, the City of London would disappear. All I can say is thank God we didn't listen to you.
Immigration We have had a massive oversupply of labour and you've seen your wages go down over the last 10 years as the cost of living has gone up.
Referendum Why don't we trust the British people to make their minds up on what I think is the most important constitutional question we have faced in this country for 300 years?
Ukraine I think the European Union frankly does have blood on its hands in the Ukraine.
Europe By the way, I don't agree with Nick.
Document IIND000020140327ea3r0003p
