{"newspaper":"i","id:"1612"}
____
Features
PAPERBACKS
846 words
28 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
44
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
Features
FIVE DAYS
BY DOUGLAS KENNEDY (Arrow, £6.99)
Self-entrapment has long been one of Kennedy's favoured themes, and here he explores what it takes for a middle-aged woman to escape a prison of her own making.
Laura is a radiographer in a small hospital in Maine. An expert at spotting terminal illness in her patients, back home she's monitoring the death throes of her own marriage, and her two children are set to fly the nest. In short, Laura is struggling to halt a fast metastasising situation.
But she is also a woman who travels hopefully. It's while at a weekend conference in Boston that she meets Richard Copeland, an insurance salesman. Against the backdrop of a pristine autumn day, the bookish couple retire for 24 hours of "wild kissing" and passion.
Less densely plotted than previous novels, this modern-day Brief Encounter cuts straight to the chase, asking what it is that stops most of us from rebooting our lives. It becomes apparent that Kennedy's protagonists are no less at sea than Noël Coward's convention-bound paramours. Sexual mores may have changed, but Laura and Richard are also victims of their time, boxed in by economics rather than societal disapproval. We wait in exquisite suspense to see whether these casualties of the squeezed American middle will surrender to the freewheeling demands of romance.
Emma Hagestadt
THE DOUBLE SILENCE
BY MARI JUNGSTEDT (Corgi, £7.99)
The Swedish island of Faro is the atmospheric setting for Jungstedt's latest whodunnit. Holidaying on this windswept spot is a group of firm friends, keen attendees of the island's annual Ingrid Bergman festival. But this year their trip is interrupted by a series of tragedies - seemingly random events which the reader is left to fathom. This is Jungstedt's seventh novel featuring DS Anders Knutas and his side-kick Inspector Karin Jacobsson, a woman on a mission of her own. This isn't topdrawer Nordic crime, but it will do for those in need of a Scandi fix. EH
THE FORGIVEN
BY LAWRENCE OSBORNE (Vintage, £8.99)
Journalist and travel writer Lawrence Osborne brings together all his authorial talents in this gripping thriller. A British couple, David and Jo Henniger, are on their way to a friend's party deep in the Moroccan desert. But as a hot-headed David takes the wheel he accidentally runs over and kills a young man selling fossils by the roadside. Getting inside the heads of a cast of hedonistic expats and watchful locals, Osborne fleshes out a Tom Wolfestyle tale of guilt and restitution. The landscape of rural Morocco provides a memorable backdrop. EH
THE GOLEM AND THE DJINNI
BY HELENE WECKER (Blue Door, £7.99)
Chava is a golem, a creature made of clay, brought to life by a disgraced rabbi. When her master dies en route from Poland to New York, she finds herself cast adrift in an alien city. Ahmad is a djinni, born in Syria, but accidentally released by a Manhattan tinsmith. In this bold debut, Wecker explores 19th-century immigrant life in the Lower East Side through the eyes of this folkloric couple. An inventive storyteller, Wecker makes us care about the fate of these two outsiders more than you might expect. Shades of Isaac Bashevis Singer and Cynthia Ozick. EH
BENJAMIN BRITTEN: A LIFE
IN THE 20TH CENTURY
BY PAUL KILDEA (Penguin, £10.99)
With its bold links between the man, the music and the history that haunted him, Paul Kildea's centenary biography harmonises Britten right across the staves. He lays bare not just the paradoxical rebel-conformist who made from his own and his era's darkness the War Requiem and other masterworks, but the stern musical tycoon - "a composer-executantentrepreneur of ferocious talent and achievement". With learning and flair, Kildea unites Aldeburgh and Auschwitz.
Boyd Tonkin
FRANCES & BERNARD
BY CARLENE BAUER (Vintage, £8.99)
A writer's colony in 1957 provides the backdrop for the life-changing meeting of two young writers. Frances is a devout Catholic at work on her first novel, while Bernard, a Harvard-educated Wasp, writes poetry in the vein of John Donne. This epistolary novel records the first year of their relationship as these cerebral correspondents navigate questions of faith and commitment. The articulate pair seem ill-matched from the start. Frances compares herself to the majestic Hudson River, while Bernard is "New England's blustering surf". EH
A WOMAN'S STORY BY ANNIE ERNAUX (Quartet, £10)
Ernaux's republished modern classic is a slim, staggering account of her mother's death, begun a few weeks after it occurred in a nursing home. What could have been a morbid read turns out to be an honest, unflinching anatomy of remembrance. Her mother is captured in images and anecdotes, and accepted both for her sudden rages and her life of giving. Born into poverty, she brought Ernaux up with all opportunities she missed. Ernaux says now "it is my turn to bring her into the world".
Arifa Akbar
Document IIND000020140328ea3s00032
