{"newspaper":"i","id:"1796"}
____
News
'Ten years ago you would know everyone. Now Boston is a town full of strangers'
By Emily Dugan   
1,225 words
23 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
25
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | IMMIGRATION A decade after Eastern European states joined the EU, tensions are on the rise. By Emily Dugan The 28-year-old, who runs Sezam Polish shop, had not noticed any problems with community tensions until the protests started. Speaking about the most recent one, he recalls: "They didn't touch us but people were scared. On that day the foreign shops took 30 per cent of the profit they normally take. People were scared to go out." Sebastian Jagielo
If there is a single road that sums up how dramatically Britain has changed over the last decade, it is probably West Street in the Lincolnshire market town of Boston. Once home to sleepy shoe shops and hair salons, the street now boasts a bustling Lithuanian supermarket, a Polish restaurant, a Lithuanian cake shop and a Polish pub.
There is even an information centre offering translation, travel bookings and benefits advice to new arrivals from around Europe.
Next week marks 10 years since Poland and seven other relatively poor Eastern European countries joined the European Union.
An abundance of agricultural and factory work in Boston attracted migrants in droves. Now the small town has the highest proportion of Eastern European residents of any in Britain, with more than one in 10 coming from countries which joined the EU in 2004. In the decade from 2001, the number of Polish residents recorded in Boston jumped from 40 to 3,000, and the number of Eastern Europeans went from less than 1,500 to more than 8,000.
Daiva Razguniene, 34, opened Diva's Cakes on West Street last September. In her home city of Vilnius, Lithuania, she had been a project manager for an advertising firm. "The main reason we left Lithuania was because we wanted to earn quickly," she recalls. "Our idea was to go here for a couple of years and earn money and go back, but we're still here. I came from a small village originally and my parents were farmers so I don't mind hard work."
A five-minute walk away in the town's Central Park, Bogoslav Grzyb, 56, is sitting on a bench with two friends drinking lager. It is lunchtime but the three are already drunk. "My woman tells me to f*** off," Mr Grzyb says when asked how he came to be homeless. Originally from Poland, he says he struggles to find regular work now and has been sleeping on the street for a week.
He is one of dozens of homeless migrant workers in the town. Centrepoint, a homeless charity, is currently helping 57 homeless people, more than 80 per cent of whom are migrants.
Viktor, 41, warms his hands on a cup of tea. He says he has been homeless on and off for about four years now after coming to Britain from Latvia almost nine years ago to work in flower factories.
"Now in England it's very difficult to find work. Many agencies only take people at busy times for one or two weeks and then that's it. I won't go back to Latvia. Here it's better because you can live if you can't find work," says Viktor.
The high number of homeless men drinking in the park is stoking tensions in the town. One of its sideeffects is a rise in human excrement being found in public places, an issue that has provoked the ire of residents. Gary Joynes, a neighbourhood beat sergeant for Lincolnshire Police, says it is a constant source of complaint. Gesturing down a side street, he says: "The biggest issue that gets people most is people peeing and defecating in the street. I think it's a complication of homelessness and a lack of toilet facilities."
There are also signs of more serious tensions. The town has now become notorious for its strained relations with migrants.
Dean Everitt (pictured) has now organised three anti-immigration protests in the town and is planning more. Mr Everitt, who works in recycling, says: "The town is a horrible place to live now. Ten years ago you'd know everyone and now the town is a strangers' town and you don't hear English."
He adds: "It's supposed to be integration but there's no integration. We have Latvian shops, Polish and Lithuanian shops and it's all in their own language. They don't shop in our shops and we don't shop in theirs."
Speaking about violence between English and Eastern European residents, Mr Everitt says: "It's a tit-for-tat thing.
We know about English lads beaten up by foreigners and we know about foreigners beaten up by English lads."
Sebastian Jagielo, 28, who runs Sezam Polish shop, said of the most recent demonstration: "They didn't touch us but people were scared." Race-related crimes in Lincolnshire jumped by 38 per cent last year, though police say this may be down to better reporting of incidents. "It's very rare to get hate crime," says Sgt Joynes. "People moan but it's not a tinder box."
The town is rapidly threatening to become a Ukip stronghold. Boston and Skegness, currently a Conservative seat, was so attractive to the party that at one stage Nigel Farage was rumoured to be considering it for the next election.
Off the road between Boston and Skegness is Staples Vegetables, one of the biggest employers of migrants in the area. The 10,000-acre farm and packing site has up to 1,000 workers on its books at any time and most come from overseas.
In one field, a group of Eastern European labourers are harvesting cabbages and loading them onto a conveyor belt which takes them to a lorry where a group of women pack them into boxes. Vernon Read, the company's director, says a supply of labour from the east of the EU is essential.
"Without immigrant workers we wouldn't be able to grow our crops. When we advertise locally we have hardly any applicants in the UK. Those English people who do come here don't stay long because it's hard work."
Sebastian Jagielo The 28-year-old, who runs Sezam Polish shop, had not noticed any problems with community tensions until the protests started. Speaking about the most recent one, he recalls: "They didn't touch us but people were scared. On that day the foreign shops took 30 per cent of the profit they normally take. People were scared to go out."
Bogoslav Grzyb The 56-year-old from Poland (on right) is sitting with two friends in Boston's Central Park. The three are already drunk. "I've been homeless for a week", he says.
Milana Blythe came from Bulgaria in 2008 to work for Staples Vegetables. She says: "In Bulgaria wages were really low. I met my husband Ricky, who's English, working at Staples. When I started I was packing purple sprouting broccoli but now I'm a welfare officer. I'll never move back; I like it here."
It's supposed to be integration but there is no integration. We have Latvian, Polish and Lithuanian shops, and it's all in their own language
Document IIND000020140423ea4n0002j
