{"newspaper":"i","id:"1760"}
____
Features
@i Your View
988 words
24 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
14
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
Features | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
Save girls from torture
It is shameful that a government that professes to believe in equality for women, and has condemned female genital mutilation, is planning to deport Afusat Saliu and her two young daughters.
She has built a life for her children in Britain, and has given much to the community, helping at her daughters' school, and volunteering with the Refugee Council to support women in a similar situation to her own.
A truly civilised nation would welcome Afusat and her children. If the family is returned to Nigeria, Afusat will be powerless to protect her daughters from the horrors of female genital mutilation, which should be regarded as a form of torture. All women and girls fleeing from the threat of genital mutilation should be automatically granted asylum.
CATHERINE CROSLAND
HEBDEN BRIDGE, WEST YORKSHIRE
Poverty wages
Oliver Wright reports that the poorest people now face destitution as a result of cuts imposed by this Government (22 April). Their response is that "work is the best route out of poverty".
What planet are they on? Job opportunities are scant even in the most prosperous of areas and are invariably pitched at the minimum wage level, meaning workers must still rely on benefits to pay rent and buy the barest essentials.
Work increasingly does not pay, and this will continue as long as employers pay their workers such derisory wages. They are maximising profits at the expense of the welfare benefit bill, to say nothing of the human cost to the dignity of the workers.
SUE BURLUMI
HASTINGS
Cameron's Christianity: blessed are the poor, for they shall inherit the debt.
P J STEWART OXFORD
Salmond woos the English
I was very pleased to read about Alex Salmond's position towards the North of England.
In the run-up to the referendum there are those who wish to paint the Yes campaign as fostering opposition between Scots and English. In fact it is not a case of England versus Scotland, but of selfdetermination against unjustified control.
The North has suffered at the Tory party's hands as much as Scotland, and I think all decent Scots will welcome a continued relationship with northerners who share more with us than they do with the people currently in government.
THOMAS GASS
GLASGOW
Bearing in mind recent events in Ukraine, I was concerned to read that Alex Salmond pledges to champion the North of England and to hold a series of "borderlands" forums on economic cooperation with councils and business leaders from the North of England.
NEVILLE DENSON
ST BEES, CUMBRIA
Don't run down our town
As a lifelong resident of Boston, I am sick of the negative coverage given to our attractive market town, which has been an important port for over 500 years.
The idyll where "10 years ago you'd know everyone" (23 April) has never existed. We've always had some immigration and always attracted people looking for work, which although poorly paid and often seasonal, does exist in the area.
The town is not a horrible place to live. It has an interesting history, a fabulous church, a twice-weekly market, local businesses including an independent department store and proper butchers, a theatre, a cinema and sports amenities.
Compared with other towns in the area, the number of empty town centre properties is less, because of the number of foreign businesses setting up; so we are bucking the trend of the proliferation of pawnbrokers, betting shops and charity shops.
Our demographic has changed; trying to stir up resentment and hatred in the community serves no useful purpose.
PAM POOLE
BOSTON, LINCOLNSHIRE
Sport in state schools Chloe Hamilton (23 April) appears depressingly keen to perpetuate the myth that state schools are opposed to competitive sport.
Having attended a state school, taught at a state school and sent my children to state schools, I can only say that never once did I encounter this hostility to competitive sport, whilst at the same time being reminded of its alleged existence by certain newspapers.
JOHN MARSH
IPPLEPEN, DEVON
Paying for healthcare
I concur with Frank Field's alarm at the current method of financing the NHS and social care (letter, 23 April). General taxation alone is insufficient to fund these services, some of which are creaking. If raising taxation is seen as a voteloser then compulsory health insurance, based on the ability to pay, has to be looked at.
I hope Frank Field continues to raise these thorny issues, as he is one of the few politicians who speaks his mind without concern for his political standing.
FRANK WILLIAMS
POWYS
If you don't want migrants The contribution of migrant workers in our hospitals and care homes is immense. To enable Nigel Farage and his friends in Ukip to get a better understanding of this, I challenge them to work for a week as a volunteer in a hospital or care home.
The work will involve emptying bedpans, wiping bottoms, clearing up vomit, changing soiled bed linen, cleaning floors and toilets, comforting anxious patients, and consoling bereaved families.
Come on Nigel, are you up for the challenge?
JOHN PHILPOTT
DORKING, SURREY
Definition of a gentleman I agree wholeheartedly with Simon Kelner's views on Prince Philip (23 April). However I believe Oscar Wilde said that "a gentleman is someone who is never unintentionally rude".
I think that description fits the Duke.
STEWART HARVEY YORK
Back to normal Now that the admirable David Moyes has been sacked, we can all start hating Man Utd again.
JOHN STOPFORD
PRESTON, LANCASHIRE
i was wrong
Fergie's record In a letter published yesterday on the subject of David Moyes, it was stated that Sir Alex Ferguson did not win "anything at all" as Manchester United manager for eight years. In fact, he won the FA Cup in 1990, four years after taking charge.
Document IIND000020140424ea4o00016
