{"newspaper":"i","id:"1761"}
____
News
The Poles who brought prosperity and jobs to Britain
Emily Dugan   
832 words
24 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
25
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | IMMIGRATION How the economy has been boosted by Polish migrants. By Emily Dugan
When Radomir Szwed first left Gdansk in northern Poland for a new life in Britain he worked from a small rented flat in Neasden, a scruffy corner of northwest London. In that first year the turnover of his food import business was a modest £100,000.
Fast forward 12 years and now the projected turnover for his Best Foods group is between £50m and £60m. He has offices in both London and Poland and owns property in Chiswick, one of west London's most expensive suburbs.
Next week marks 10 years since Poland joined the EU. Since then, the prevailing stereotype of migration from the country has been of Polish plumbers, construction workers and cleaners. But Mr Szwed, 37, is one of a burgeoning group of Polish whitecollar workers who bring prosperity - and jobs - to Britain.
"I know many Polish people who are working for big banks, universities, hedge funds and other reputable jobs," Mr Szwed says. "But people just talk about Polish people being builders." His company, Best Foods, now supplies most of Britain's major supermarkets, including Iceland, Morrisons and Asda with meat and vegetables for ready meals.
He employs 12 people in Britain, four of whom are British, and a second office in Poland employs 20 people. There are also hundreds of workers indirectly employed by him in factories in Poland.
Mr Szwed doesn't like the label "millionaire" , but he admits his lifestyle is "comfortable" and that he "pays hundreds of thousands of pounds in tax" every year. He grew up in northern Poland near Gdansk in a middle-class family; his father was a dentist and his mother was a bank chairman.
He thinks xenophobia in Britain could deter Poles from working here if it gets any worse. "In the news, you find people trying to blame immigrants from eastern Europe for most of the problems in the UK," he says.
"If this escalates and continues I think some people will be put off staying. I think there are lots of good, hard-working people with good work ethics who can find jobs or run businesses somewhere else like Germany or back in Poland."
The Polish City Club was established in 2004 to cater for the growing number of Polish high-flyers in the City. It now has more than 100 members, all strictly vetted to make sure that they are management-level executives, lawyers and headhunters working in London's financial sector.
Dorota Zimnoch, 39, the club's president, said: "We've been frustrated with being stereotyped as doing only a few professions like builders and babysitters."
She came to Britain with her son Paul, who is now 16. He has gone to English schools since he was seven and wants to go to Cambridge. Now they both have dual nationality and Ms Zimnoch says Paul comes across as increasingly English: "When he's excited or worried he switches into English. He thinks in English and speaks with an English accent."
Piotr Dudek, 37, is a selfemployed civil engineer. He came to London in 2005, the year after Poland joined the EU. Since then he has worked on many of the capital's most significant building projects, including Heathrow's Terminal Five and the Olympic Village.
"I like the challenges of big construction sites with big budgets. I'm a chartered engineer but when I came here I had only Polish certifi-cates and I had to start from the beginning again and get all my certificates... Now I'm site manager. When not working, he is chairman of the Association of Polish Engineers in Great Britain, which now has more than 200 members. He lives in London with his wife Monika, and daughter Hanna, 5. "The economic conditions brought me over here but I'm a British citizen now; this is my home," he says.
Ukip ads benefit from racism, claims
A controversial Ukip campaign - by the ad agency that once branded Tony Blair a "Bliar" - has benefited from claims it is racist, an industry insider has said.
Posters by Edinburgh-based firm Family, which previously worked for the Scottish National Party and the Conservatives, feature slogans such as "Who really runs this country?", "75 per cent of our laws are now made in Brussels" and "Take back control of our country".
The Labour MP Mike Gapes has condemned the posters as part of a "racist, xenophobic campaign designed to win votes by whipping up animosity against foreigners living and working and contributing to this country".
But an unnamed senior advertising industry executive said the "rather good" ads had benefited from the publicity. "It's almost essential that the ads are controversial so you get the social echo," he told the Financial Times.
However, Toby Hoare of ad agency JWT said the posters were "clear, but not particularly elegant".
Document IIND000020140424ea4o0000e
