{"newspaper":"i","id:"1797"}
____
News
Deportee mother fears mutilation of her daughters
By Sarah Morrison and Rosie Collington   
413 words
23 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
9
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | IMMIGRATION
An asylum-seeker is to be sent back to Nigeria in a matter of days despite fears that her two young daughters will be forcibly circumcised by members of her family.
Almost 20,000 people have signed a petition calling on the Home Office to reconsider its decision to deport Afusat Saliu, herself a victim of female genital mutilation (FGM), and her daughters, Bassy, three, and one-year-old Rashidat. The family live in Leeds but have been asked to leave the country by Friday.
Ben Davison, head of immigration advice at legal firm Ison Harrison, said he wrote to the Home Office yesterday "setting out why we believe their decision to remove Afusat and her daughters is wrong in law".
The Leeds MP Greg Mulholland and FGM campaigner Leyla Hussein are supporting the campaign.
Ms Saliu, 31, whose youngest daughter was born in England, said she wants to protect her children from going through what she experienced. "It has affected me my whole life. There is no feeling there," she told i. "I don't have a boyfriend and I don't intend to. It was really difficult for me to have my daughters. The pain was very strong."
She said she never enjoyed her teenage years - feeling pain when her period started - and is fighting for her children. "It's so scary," she said. "I don't want them going through the same pain I went through."
Ms Saliu fled from Nigeria in 2011 after her stepmother told her she would have to cut her oldest daughter, Bassy. She added that her parents were forcing her to marry a man 40 years her senior, who would also pose a threat to her and her daughters if she returned. "I don't feel I'll have the opportunity to protect them from the pain or trauma over there," she said. "I don't want circumcision to be done on them, but it's [the will of ] my family. I can't control that."
She first applied for asylum in 2012 but was refused and a subsequent appeal was dismissed. The Government has told her that she will now only be able to appeal from outside the UK.
Greg Mulholland said he was "very concerned" to hear about the treatment Ms Saliu has received. The MP has asked the UK Border Agency to investigate her case urgently.
Document IIND000020140423ea4n00015
