{"newspaper":"i","id:"1894"}
____
News
'My attacks on Theresa May are nothing personal'
By Andrew Grice POLITICAL EDITOR   
331 words
7 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
8
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | INTERVIEW
Mr Cable doesn't normally smile much but he has reason to feel happy about life. After much heat in his running battle with the Conservatives over the impact of immigration, some light has finally been shone.
Yesterday, the Government published a study concluding that when the economy is strong, there is "relatively little evidence" that migrants take the jobs of British workers.
The Business Secretary, who extols the economic benefits of immigration, has frequently locked horns with Theresa May, the Home Secretary. But he insisted this is not a "party political issue" between the Coalition partners as he lifted the lid on the Cabinet's discussions.
"I am well aware, from the battles we have fought in government, that most of my Conservative colleagues agree with me," he said. "They are reluctant to say so publicly - for obvious reasons of solidarity with the Home Secretary."
Mr Cable explained: "Theresa May is doing her job. I am not attacking her personally. I have quite a high regard for her as an individual. I don't criticise her professionalism.
"I am doing my job - encouraging growth in the economy. That means getting access to highly qualified people, tapping into the world's talent, encouraging overseas students." He hoped yesterday's report would undermine the Conservatives' target of reducing annual net migration to fewer than 100,000 by next year's general election.
He emphasised that politicians must address people's concerns, that he does not favour unlimited immigration and that abuse of the system must be tackled.
But he argued that benefit tourism from the European Union "is not a major problem" and is "exaggerated" by the Conservatives.
He added: "Having these arbitrary targets makes very little sense and is in the process of being discredited. Let's look at the evidence, the facts. That is why it is important that this document is out there."
Document IIND000020140307ea370005l
