{"newspaper":"i","id:"1984"}
____
News
More than third of Conservative Party members 'likely to vote Ukip'
By Andrew Grice political editor   
418 words
30 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
7
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | POLITICS
Ukip will be encouraged by new research showing more than one in three Conservative Party members are seriously considering voting for them.
But last night it faced fresh embarrassment after it emerged one of its candidates had questioned how Mo Farah, "an African", could win a gold medal for Great Britain.
The revelation that David Wycherley, who is standing for Ukip in the Rushall-Shelfield ward in Walsall, had challenged Farah's Britishness, even though the Olympic champion grew up in Hounslow, London, came as another candidate, William Henwood, resigned from the party after saying Lenny Henry should emigrate to a "black country" and compared Islam to the Third Reich.
Yet, despite the controversies, an academic study shows alienated Conservative activists are attracted to Ukip because of its stance on Europe and immigration. It also noted that they are motivated by a dislike of David Cameron because they see him as "centrist" and "liberal".
The authors warn that this group may not vote Ukip in the Euro elections simply as a one-off protest, as the Conservatives hope. Instead, it may be a first step towards leaving the Tories and joining Nigel Farage's party - boosting Ukip's prospects at next year's general election.
The research found that the grassroots Tories most tempted by Ukip lean a little more to the left than their fellow members when asked about the economy and public services. But they are significantly more conservative "culturally and socially".
Tim Bale, professor of politics at Queen Mary, University of London, a co-author of the study, said yesterday: "Voting for Ukip could be the first step on a road that sees some Tory members eventually joining Nigel Farage's party. That might provide Ukip with a stream of experienced activists. If that happens, the next general election is going to be very difficult for David Cameron."
Professor Bale said: "Members may be more ideological than most voters; but if they don't feel they're getting what they want from leaders who they can't identify with, then - just like more and more voters these days - they are prepared to take a punt on what they see as a more attractive alternative."
The study was based on a YouGov survey of 850 Tory members and found those most likely to vote Ukip are significantly to the left of those Tories least likely to switch.
Document IIND000020140430ea4u0003h
