{"newspaper":"i","id:"192"}
____
Features
If you make a contribution, you're just asking to be deported
Another View Mark Steel   
459 words
4 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
29
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
Features
That's got rid of her then. That student we deported a few weeks before her maths A-levels has been flown back to Mauritius, that's how to deal with immigrants who come over here trying to solve our equations. Otherwise we'll end up with millions of them coming here, squaring x after x until there are none left. Because the truth is there simply aren't enough equilateral triangles to go around.
As well as studying for exams, it appears Yashika Bageerathi spent much of her free time teaching maths to younger students, and fundraising for the school. But thankfully we've sent her away now, so we won't have to put up with her sponging off the rest of us like that again.
Some people might suggest Yashika was making a positive contribution, as she would have gone into work in a specialised field and paid taxes and made the country better off. But what if the exam over-ran, by 45 years? Then she'd be entitled to a pension paid for by you and me, the longsuffering taxpayer. Or what if, during the exam, she had an accident with a logarithm that broke her legs and left her lying in hospital for ever? The cost of looking after her for eternity would be an infinite sum, which is an amount we simply can't afford in these difficult times.
There's another argument for such strict rules on deporting people, which seems to be, "If we allowed her to stay, other foreigners might spot we're a soft touch and copy her. And we simply don't have the resources to cope with that amount of help and fundraising. Our services are at breaking point already; more people helping them out would finally make them snap."
Somehow a climate has been created in which it's seen as vote-winning to deport a popular, generous young woman, with her mother screaming in anguish. Maybe the Home Office will issue a statement that goes, "Any other punk like to try their chances with the Home Secretary. Eh? EH? Then shut up and do what I say or the 90-year-old Bengali man who runs the chemist with his daughters gets it next."
In their defence it may be that they haven't worked out that if someone arrives, and contributes more than they take, that means there is more than there was before they came. If only there was a way of finding more people who understood maths, to help clear this matter up.
There simply aren't enough equilateral triangles to go around
Document IIND000020140404ea4400017
