{"newspaper":"i","id:"2287"}
____
News
@ i Your View
1,021 words
21 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
14
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
Clegg grasps the nettle
For the first time in my life I will be voting Liberal in the forthcoming elections. And here is why: Nick Clegg is the only party leader to have publicly and openly grasped the Ukip nettle.
Voters often ask why politicians never apologise when they have done or said something that turns out to be wrong. Nick Clegg has apologised. A brave thing to do.
The Liberals have taken the edge off Tory policies and helped turn around our economy.
Best of all, Nick Clegg has publicly stated that he wants church and state separated. Again, a brave thing to say and one which I support wholeheartedly. PAUL WHITE LISKEARD, CORNWALL
Farage, creature of the media
Farage mania has been created by the media. On television and in newspapers he has had more publicity than any other person. If someone is presented often enough, people remember.
As to him being in the European Parliament, this is nothing but fraud when he does not believe in it. Please give more attention to the real political parties, not this upstart.
MARGARET SCOTT SCARBOROUGH
Frank Lane says that the UK housing shortage is caused by too many people (letter, 20 May). This may well be so and this problem is increased by the further admission of some 200,000 immigrants.
Ukip is not about racism; it is about UK limited housing space etc. As for the EU, it is far too expensive.
JACK DUCKWORTH HARROGATE
I have always thought it would be interesting to learn Romanian. Now I am actually doing it. Thank you, Ukip!
P J STEWART BOARS HILL, OXFORD
Could I advertise for a non-Ukip voting neighbour?
MIKE BOR LONDON W2
Deflate that housing bubble
Oliver Duff is right to say that the Government needs to take action to stop the latest undesirable rise in house prices (Letter from the Editor, 20 May). However, rather than doing so by making it harder for first-time buyers to obtain a mortgage, the Government should instead restrict the buy-to-let sector.
UK investors and foreign wealth funds are outbidding potential first-time buyers and forcing up prices. Those who are priced out may then end up as reluctant tenants of the very people who outbid them.
We need to stop non-UK residents (or at least non-EU residents) from buying UK property, and make buy-to-let less attractive by no longer allowing landlords to count mortgage interest as an expense to reduce the tax due on their rental income.
RICHARD MOUNTFORD HILDENBOROUGH, KENT
Oliver Duff asks "Honestly, which of us wants a new housing development nearby?" One way of overcoming this nimbyism could be to get assurances that the quality of housing to be developed was good. I have an area of green in front of my house on which a new street could be fitted. Should the housing be of character and promote community participation, I'd welcome new building.
However, getting those assurances and making sure that developers deliver is the difficulty.
S TAYLOR LANCASHIRE Oliver Duff refers to the effect rising interest rates will have on the housing market and homeowners' ability to pay off their mortgages. I suggest the answer lies in taking on board Thomas Piketty's thesis that where the growth of capital outstrips economic growth, the gap between the haves and have-nots grows wider and wider.
The effect is that people who have capital can buy second and third homes and get a nice income from renting them out. Landlords are proliferating whilst at the other end of the ladder more people are struggling to get decent housing JULIA WINTER LETCHWORTH GARDEN CITY, HERTFORDSHIRE
The Attlee policy
After the Second World War, did the people of Britain worry about Clement Attlee's lack of charisma, or did they simply want a fairer society, better homes, improved educational opportunities for their children, and a free health service for all? The political system has not changed, yet now, it appears, the leader's personality is as important as his policies and for some, more so. The news that Ed Miliband "makes four out of ten people less likely to vote Labour" is disappointing.
Voters now seem to care more about politicians' geekiness than their proposals, more about their hairstyles than their principles. Is it any wonder we end up with a government which passes legislation to benefit the rich and to curtail social mobility, and privatises institutions owned by the people at the drop of a hat?
BERNIE EVANS LIVERPOOL
Nurses on the move If there is a nursing exodus to the US - which I doubt - this would be calamitous for health care in sub-Saharan Africa, the Philippines and Eastern Europe. The NHS usually poaches nurses from these countries, when there is a perceived shortage.
FRANK WILLIAMS POWYS
The average nurse would love to earn over £30,000, as Charlie Cooper reports (20 May). I'm not quite sure to what average he is referring, but the majority of staff nurses are on a Band 5 pay scale and earn between £21,478 and £27,901.
I am a senior staff nurse (Band 6) and despite 26 years experience, have not yet reached the heady heights of £30,000.
SARAH HUGHES CHICHESTER, WEST SUSSEX
Uncomfortable position
It seems to be a trend for women to be snapped with legs crossed, looking as though they are busting to go to the loo (Laverne Cox on Monday, Gemma Arterton on Tuesday). Are the photographers keeping them hanging about too long?
MARY FLEET LEEDS
Make an early start Memphis Barker (20 May) is correct in saying Thomas Jefferson initiated the Lewis-Clark expedition but not in 1781. There was no president until 1789, and Jefferson wasn't president until 1801. TERRY GERAGHTY STEVENAGE i was wrong Scattered creatures On page 24 of i yesterday we referred to some unique animal species as being scattered throughout British colonies when in fact we should have said British Overseas Territories. We apologise for the error.
Document IIND000020140521ea5l0001l
