{"newspaper":"i","id:"2960"}
____
News
Cameron backs TV debates with party leaders
By Nigel Morris DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
600 words
10 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
9
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | POLITICS
David Cameron paved the way yesterday for a televised showdown with the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, in the run-up to the general election.
He signalled his support for a fiveway debate with the leaders of all the main parties, as well as a separate head-to-head confrontation with Ed Miliband, the Labour leader.
The other parties have accused Mr Cameron of trying to stall discussions over the format of debates in an attempt to avoid an appearance by the Prime Minister. The Tories have said talks on the issue should not take place until after the party conferences in October.
Many Conservatives are still scarred by the three televised debates of the 2010 campaign, some arguing that Cameron's performance was a factor in failing to secure an overall Commons majority. The party would also be wary of pitting the Prime Minister against Mr Farage, whose populist style has helped Ukip to pick up support from disillusioned Tory voters.
But Mr Cameron insisted yesterday he was not opposed to the principle of pre-election debates as long as the parties and broadcasters could reach agreement on the format. He raised the prospect of one session with him and Mr Miliband, Mr Farage, Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrat leader, and Natalie Bennett, the Green Party leader.
He said: "I have suggested perhaps we should have one debate with all of the parties and so everyone can have their say, and perhaps we need a debate where the two people who could be Prime Minister debate directly with each other. You can have a debate where you have all of the parties. I don't think we could have a party like Ukip without an MP if you don't have a party like the Greens, who have an MP."
He told the BBC he believed some of the debates should take place before the formal election campaign and added: "There are still a number of issues that have to be ironed out. But I helped make the debates happen last time. I'm pro-TV debates." But Mr Farage, who was widely judged to have "won" two recent televised debates with Mr Clegg on the European Union, claimed the Tory leader would ultimately duck the confrontation. He said Mr Cameron would not want to discuss immigration or Europe with him. "They are thinking about it and they won't say anything until after the party conference season in October, and then they will decide it's not a very good idea," he said.
Michael Dugher, shadow Cabinet Office minister, said: "If he is serious about this, he should stop dithering. It's nonsensical for Cameron to say he wants to start the debates early but the negotiations late."
David Cameron was said to favour three debates in a "two-three-five" format, including one between him and Ed Miliband.
Fowl play? In a bid to prove he was a man of the people, David Cameron popped into a branch of Nando's on Thursday night.
Fellow diners took to social media to share their shock as the Prime Minister sat down for dinner at the restaurant in Park Street, Bristol.
Customers quickly reached for their phones to take pictures as Mr Cameron ordered a meal with colleagues at the fast-food chain, famous for its spicy peri-peri chicken.
Among the diners was Becky Smith (above), who persuaded Mr Cameron to take a selfie with her. Accompanying the picture, she tweeted: "snapapolitician lol".
Document IIND000020140510ea5a00015
