{"newspaper":"i","id:"3009"}
____
News
With a year to go, will Labour dare to be different?
Mark Steel VOTING   
586 words
9 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
18
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News
It's a year until the General Election, and there's so little enthusiasm for the main parties that the only way to get more than a handful of people to vote at all may be to change the wording on the ballot paper.
So it should begin, "Which of the following candidates do you find the least repellent?" Then it would continue: "As a guide, imagine having to go on holiday with them all. Now, if there's one that only makes you think 'Oh Jesus please spare me no no no, I'll become a nun and wear a smock smothered in extra hot chilli sauce forever rather than that', but the thought doesn't actually make you physically wretch so that sick comes down your nose and you get a taste of a chipolata you had last Tuesday, place an X by the name of that candidate."
That's why when the opinion polls say Labour are on 35 and the Conservatives on 34, it's not percentage points, it's their total number of supporters in the country.
There's a website that tries to encourage people to vote, called "Who Should I Vote for?" It asks for your views on a range of issues, then tells you which party you're closest to. But it encapsulates the problem, because it makes the mistake of assuming that policies are the same as the reality. For example, the Liberal Democrats' policy, in theory, is still to abolish tuition fees. But if you vote for them on that basis you are clearly insane and aren't allowed to vote anyway.
The overwhelming sentiment of the age is "they're all the same". That can't be true, as for example two of them introduced the bedroom tax, and the other one wants to abolish it. And there can't be many who'd say that "introducing, abolishing, scrapping, trebling - all these words mean the same, adjectives, sod them".
All the parties claim to admire Mandela, or the Suffragettes or Martin Luther King, but they'd all have been instantly expelled from any modern party. Whereas I doubt the Suffragettes ever had a meeting in which they said: "This policy of setting fire to a castle and wrecking the Derby, how do focus groups suggest it will play in key marginals in Leicestershire?" This may in part explain why so many are attracted to Ukip, because they look as if they mean it. So they're even forgiven when their councillors are caught making statements such as: "I honestly believe spiders are Romanians that have been reincarnated", or "Max Clifford was sent by God as punishment to humans for the Lisbon Treaty."
So maybe the answer is for Labour's manifesto to just say: "Don't blame immigrants and Europe and people on benefits for everything, they're not the ones thieving billions in bonuses and doubling rents for living in a dump. Look, I know we screwed up last time but we all make idiots of ourselves."
And when Cameron makes one of those pathetic put-downs such as: "Look at Labour, not so much an opposition as a flopposition," Ed Miliband might do better to reply: "Do you want some? And furthermore, I know where you live."
Maybe this is why I didn't receive a reply when I applied to be Labour's chief electoral strategist.
Document IIND000020140509ea590004b
