{"newspaper":"i","id:"3010"}
____
News
It's the economy, stupid: the corner of Cardiff caught between Labour and the Conservatives
Paul Gallagher   
756 words
9 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
29
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | POLITICS Most marginal of seats set to be a key battleground. By Paul Gallagher
Spiro and Naomi Gropetis are a Cardiff North success story. Their Miss Jones bar and restaurant in the middle of "Whitchurch Village", a vibrant aspirational area three miles from the Welsh capital's city centre, is a recent addition to a region where cosmopolitan cafés nestle happily alongside high-street chains and local butchers.
Yet the couple speak of having reached "a ceiling". They feel that rising taxes in the years they have spent building up a business that now employs 85 people, combined with difficulties in securing loans or finding new retail space, is halting their ambitions.
"A lot of what governments have done, like the minimum wage or pension reform, has been good but costs are rising," Naomi says when we meet for a chat at their Top Gun Fish Bar, one of three they own in Cardiff.
"When VAT and the minimum wage go up we take the hit. It's not a level playing field either. Gregg's is just one example where big business has found a loophole so their customers don't have to pay tax on a hot coffee and hot pasty, but ours do if they want hot food. Independents are struggling to grow."
Who secures a large chunk of the business vote at next year's election will be vital in a constituency that returned Conservative Jonathan Evans in 2010 with a majority of just 194 - the 13th smallest winning margin in the UK - over then Labour incumbent Julie Morgan.
Until the New Labour landslide of 1997 the seat has been held by the Tories at every election bar 1966, but with Mr Evans standing down and Mrs Morgan, wife of former minister Rhodri, now sitting in the Welsh Assembly, the battle for Cardiff North is on between two bright young things of British politics.
The Lib Dem vote is expected to plummet and it is obvious that locals are not looking much beyond Labour's Mari Williams and her unrelated counterpart Craig Williams, a Conservative city councillor.
"People want to have a go and take risks," says Ms Williams, much like she did when cycling around the world in 2012 while on leave from her deputy head teacher role in London.
"It's about having a culture where it's OK to take risks and fail, much like in America. That's what I learned from being there. If you have small, local thriving businesses like you do here, that has to be key to the recovery."
Ms Williams, who went to school in Whitchurch, advocates a sliding scale of business rates citing supermarket giant Tesco's ability to pay the same rates for its shops as their independent counterparts as being "not quite right".
Unemployment in the UK is growing fastest in Wales, as David Cameron pointed out in Prime Minister's Questions. Wales was also singled out in yet another Conservative attack on Labour's "cutting" of the NHS. Mr Cameron even recently said the country is a scandal waiting to happen.
Ms Williams admits the NHS frequently comes up on the doorstep: "People are passionate - they don't want the NHS to be privatised."
Cardiff North is a strongly middle-class area with 87 per cent owner-occupied homes. Crime rates are some of the lowest in the UK and pensioners feel safe in the area, while young professionals are keen to move in. Yet for an area largely untouched by immigration it is extraordinary how many people cite this as a top three voting issue.
High Class Butchers owner Martin Player says: "It has not changed around here, but we have got to get it under control."
It is a familiar refrain, but, as one local said: "Everyone here reads the Daily Mail or the Daily Express. If you read those newspapers every day for 10 years you'd be worried about immigration too."
Mr Williams acknowledges the importance to the area of business leaders like Spiro and Naomi. "They are the engine room of the economy because they slog their guts out," he says. "Miss Jones has completely reinvigorated the high street. People like them are at the forefront of economic growth."
Spiro and Naomi, typical of local traders, remained uncommitted. Perhaps the only certainty in Cardiff North is a Williams will win come 2015, but which one?
Document IIND000020140509ea590001t
