{"newspaper":"i","id:"3102"}
____
News
Ukip suspends 'poster boy' council candidate over racist tweets
By Oliver Wright WHITEHALL EDITOR   
337 words
25 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
7
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | POLITICS
Ukip has been forced to suspend the "poster boy" of its European party election broadcast, after it was revealed he had posted a series of vile racist comments on Twitter.
Andre Lampitt, a builder, was one of the principal characters in a promotional film that was aired on the BBC and ITV on Tuesday night.
Party sources described the latest embarrassment as "demoralising", coming so soon after it emerged that a glamorous woman posing as a voter in the Ukip manifesto actually works for the party's leader, Nigel Farage.
Mr Lampitt, who is on the Ukip candidate list for Merton council, was shown walking across a building site describing the difficulty he had finding work as a result of unrestricted immigration from Europe. "Since the lads from Eastern Europe are prepared to work for a lot less than anybody else, I've found it a real struggle," he lamented. "It's getting hard to provide for my family."
In a series of tweets going back over more than a year, he reveals his thoughts on everything from Muslims to Aids, Syria and forced sterilisation. They do not make pretty reading.
He wrote: "Muslims are animals their faith is disgusting their prophet is [a] pedophile" [sic].
Other topics he addressed include Ed Miliband ("He is Polish and not British so how'd he know what's good for Britain?") and Africa ("I was born and grew up in Africa please leave Africa for the Africans let them kill themselves off ").
Mr Farage told ITV News that Mr Lampitt "should not have got through" the party's candidate selection process, but added that his party did not have "a monopoly on stupid people".
Ukip's friends from Poland, page 29 The Liberal Democrat president, Tim Farron, suggested that it showed the true nature of some Ukip supporters. "These staggeringly racist views might even make the BNP wince with embarrassment," he said.
Document IIND000020140425ea4p0003y
