{"newspaper":"i","id:"3163"}
____
News
Books we would send prisoners - if we could
By Arifa Akbar   
1,801 words
11 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
30,31
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | Leading UK authors explain why they oppose the ban on books for prisoners. By Arifa Akbar
Forty of the nation's leading writers have sent protest postcards to the Secretary of State for Justice, Chris Grayling, each with the name of the book they would most like to send to a prisoner - if they still could - as part of a campaign against government restrictions on inmates receiving books.
Novelists, poets and dramatists including the Poet Laureate Carol Ann Duffy, Martin Amis, Ian McEwan, Margaret Drabble, Andrew Motion, David Hare and Jeffrey Archer - a former prisoner himself - wrote their recommendations for prison reading on scores of postcards which were posted to the Justice Secretary by English PEN and the Howard League for Penal Reform last night, together with postcards written by visitors to this week's London Book Fair.
The titles ranged from weighty classics - Aldous Huxley's dystopian Brave New World and Franz Kafka's short stories - to lighter entertainments such as Stephen Fry's Moab is My Washpot.
Several of the suggested books were written by political prisoners including Nelson Mandela and Malcolm X, and many addressed both the gruelling impact of prison life and its redemptive effects, such as Jimmy Boyle's autobiography A sense of Freedom, which takes the reader through his criminal early years to remorse and rehabilitation.
Jo Glanville, director of English PEN, said these titles reflected what a lifeline books could be. "The continuing ban deprives prisoners of access to all the possibilities of learning and literature that these choices represent," she said.
Restrictions on sending books to prisoners were introduced in November last year as part of a crackdown on what ministers have described as prisoners' "perks and privileges". But campaigners argue that far from being "perks", books are a key part of rehabilitation.
A Ministry of Justice study earlier this year found a link between prisoners who read or receive an education inside, and reduced rates of reoffending.
What authors would send to inmates... and why Brave New World by Aldous Huxley, about an imagined, super-controlled state. Could happen. We should be careful.
YASMIN ALIBHAI-BROWN I would recommend Primo Levi's If This is a Man. It is a masterly evocation of something much worse than prison: murderous enslavement for the crime of being born. MARTIN AMIS Maya Angelou - I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. Because of the beautiful language, the incredible heart, the pain and bravery and the way her - everyone's - basic human resilience shines through. That's a lesson for everyone. (Chris Grayling more than anyone!) BIDISHA As an editor and contributor to Inside Time, the national newspaper for prisoners (www.insidetime.org), I know just how important books are to prisoners and how difficult it can be to get into prison libraries. We're publishing a poem on the subject in our next issue.
I would nominate Empire of the Sun by JG Ballard. It tells the story of young Jim, who is separated from his parents after the fall of Shanghai and taken to a Japanese internment camp. The novel is totally gripping from start to finish so that the reader would feel far removed for at least a few hours from the confines of his cell.
Jim's survival in a terrifying, indeed nightmarish, situation would, I think, appeal to many prisoners who find themselves locked up and facing very difficult times. Because a brilliant film was made of it, I suspect some may have missed the excitement and satisfaction of reading the book.
RACHEL BILLINGTON I would recommend giving prisoners Touching the Void by Joe Simpson. It's a true account of a disastrous climb in the South American Andes in which the two climbers face terrible choices, hit rock bottom, facing death, yet manage to survive. I can imagine prisoners would find a lot to relate to in the story of finding a way up and out from the worst moment of your life. TRACY CHEVALIER Brewers' Rogues, Villains and Eccentrics: An A-Z of Roguish Britons through the Ages by Willie Donaldson. Outrageously funny and beautifully written, it provides an excellent view of the underbelly of British society in the second half of the 20th century. Not precisely a moral book, it's intelligent, pleasantly shocking and, above all, life-affirming.
TERENCE BLACKER I'd send the Prison Trilogy by Pramoedya Ananta Toer - written in the head and remembered while on Buru prison island, but denied pen, paper and books.
JIM CRACE I'd send John Lanchester's Capital, because it's a cracking good read, accessible, diverting and very funny about money, football, parking attendants, bankers, immigrants and old folk like me. It's a satiric view of how we live now and reminds you how entertaining and informative fiction can be.
I'd also send Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, to remind us all that some of our greatest classics were written in prison, in the Slough of Despond. MARGARET DRABBLE Moby Dick - for the width of vision, both the horizonless sea and a vast understanding of the multiple nature of humanity. Also Bartleby, The Scrivener - the great refuser might give some pleasure to prisoners. Catch 22 - describes the impossible craziness of human beings and their institutions; could find its perfect audience among inmates. Alice Through the Looking Glass - obviously.
The Beckett Trilogy - to pass the time. (And for grim humour) JENNY DISKI I would send Jimmy Boyle's visceral autobiography, A Sense of Freedom. It describes his journey from a violent, criminal youth to the degradation, shame and remorse he experienced in Scotland's most draconian prisons - and the redemption eventually delivered by literature and art in the special unit at Barlinnie. It is a book everyone concerned with this current debate should read when the most wretched of our fellow citizens, who have nothing, are now being told they have less than nothing.
CAROL ANN DUFFY The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain. For excitement, comedy, decency and hope. ADAM FOULDS Waste by Hasan Ali Toptas Evokes a world as seen by the powerless, beautifully. MAUREEN FREELY I did send this to a prisoner in a US prison. It was a large coffee-table book, a comprehensive history of art. Prisons are soulless places; there is little beauty in them. The art book became a great hit with other inmates for it opened windows into Florentine landscapes, vases of sunflowers, battle scenes, blocks of colour and an enigmatic smile. The prisoner I sent it to left it behind for the prison library when he was released. LINDA GRANT The Secret Agent by Joseph Conrad.
Shows the danger and treachery and fear in English public life.
HERMIONE LEE Speaking as an Aussie of convict stock, whose ancestors were guilty of one thing - not running fast enough - my book recommendation for prisoners would be, obviously, The Great Escape by Paul Brickhill. KATHY LETTE The Diary of Anne Frank - because it's a story of courage in captivity. SOPHIE MAYER The Grass Arena by John Healy. It's a long and brilliant postcard from hell. A brutal childhood, alcoholism, a London underworld - this is what it's like to touch bottom, then find your way up through the game of chess. IAN MCEWAN Great Expectations, Charles Dickens.
Because people are not what they seem at first sight - and because of second chances. ANDREW MOTION I'd give a prisoner Moab Is My Washpot by Stephen Fry. The memoir opens with the information that he is to be arrested and sent to prison, and from there on is a cracking autobiography of Fry's early life including what led him to such a crisis. If a prisoner read that Stephen Fry had done time inside in the context of much else besides, perhaps that might help counter the simplistic image that convicted criminals feel society imposes upon all of them. Plus they would have a good laugh along the way, enjoying 100,000 words of really great writing (apart from the first four, which make up its off-putting title). JOHN O'FARRELL Annie Proulx, The Shipping News.
This is the story of an ungainly misfit who redeems his shattered life. Feisty, comic, without piety.
COLIN THUBRON I'd like to send Jeanette Winterson's Why Be Happy When You Could Be Normal? It shows that despite very difficult beginnings, a tough adolescence and even very rough patches, life can be meaningful and satisfying, and turning things around is enormously satisfying. SUSIE ORBACH My Books for Prisoners recommendation would be Rumi's Masnavi. It is composed of six books of poetry. The style is extraordinary. The themes Rumi deals with (such as ego/ nafs, death, body, love, birth, beauty) are both universal and timeless. His peaceful voice speaks to our hearts and minds across all national and religious borders, and challenges head-on the teachings that promote bigotry, xenophobia and discrimination. ELIF SHAFAK Galapagos - Kurt Vonnegut This book is so imaginative it changes the way you think about humanity. It's an amazing book.
DEGNA STONE Ludmila Ulitskaya, Daniel Stein, Interpreter. The true story of a man who survived Nazi imprisonment and became a Catholic priest. ARCH TAIT Alan Johnson's This Boy, his straightforward account of growing up in real poverty in London in the 1950s. Father scarpered, brilliant Scouser mother dies young, teenage sister brings him up - an amazing and inspiring story.
CLAIRE TOMALIN To Kill A Mockingbird by Harper Lee, The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time by Mark Haddon, and The Shock of the Fall by Nathan Filer. JOANNA TROLLOPE I would like to send them The Complete Short Stories of Franz Kafka edited by Nahum Glazer. Kafka is the brilliant storyteller about fear, justice and the law. He is illuminating and often very funny. His insights are startling and his baffling scenarios oddly familiar, even banal. We all recognise something of ourselves in his characters and situations. MARINA WARNER The book I would recommend is Tolstoy's Anna Karenina. It's long, leisurely, but absolutely gripping: a novel in which to lose yourself for hours at a time. It's also hugely compassionate, with richly realised characters who are - like all of us - full of flaws.
SARAH WATERS The Autobiography of Malcolm X. The reason why is because Malcolm X himself was sentenced to quite a long stint in prison but while there he educated himself by reading many books, and when he emerged from prison he wanted to do good for his community. He also lived an incredibly fascinating life.
ALEX WHEATLE The Narrow Road to the Deep North, Richard Flanagan. Because it's life-changing.
EVIE WYLD
Document IIND000020140411ea4b0001m
