{"newspaper":"i","id:"3214"}
____
News
Teens made to go back should 'finish studies'
By Emily Dugan SOCIAL AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT   
339 words
10 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
20
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Unaccompanied child asylum-seekers who are currently ordered to leave Britain when they turn 18 should be allowed to complete their education first, the Children's Commissioner for England has said. A report published today by the Office of the Children's Commissioner calls for a "fundamental change" to the way children are treated in the asylum system.
The disruption to the education of those children whose immigration status means they are made to leave at 18 is particularly highlighted.
Instead of being automatically deported at 18, young people who come to Britain alone and claim asylum should be supported until they finish their studies, Maggie Atkinson, Children's Commissioner for England argues. This would bring immigration law in line with legislation for British children leaving care.
Ms Atkinson said: "None of us at the Office of the Children's Commissioner believes in open or unguarded borders. But these are children when they arrive here, often traumatised and in the cases of these we worked with for this study, unaccompanied and unsupported." She added: "It makes sense to ensure that young people required to leave the UK have the best chance of integrating into and becoming active members of their future communities. Allowing them to complete their education in the UK provides the best chance for a sustainable return."
Matthew Reed, chief executive of The Children's Society, said: "By denying them support after they turn 18, the Government is forcing many of these young people into destitution. Many are being left homeless, without money, food or access to medical care."
A Home Office spokeswoman said: "Extending leave further risks children being sent to the UK to try to benefit from our education system rather than for legitimate humanitarian protection."
The findings come after the furore over an A-level student, Yashika Bageerathi, who was sent back to Mauritius before she completed her studies because she had passed her 18th birthday.
Document IIND000020140410ea4a0001o
