{"newspaper":"i","id:"3280"}
____
News
Vote for this parliament? No chance
Andreas Whittam-Smith   
418 words
15 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
16
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | NOTEBOOK
Iam not going to vote in next week's elections for the European Parliament. This abstention would be a first for me. Until now, I have voted in every election for which I am eligible, national, European or local. The main reason why I won't make the short walk to the polling station round the corner this time is a basic one.
I have little idea who the candidates are. Only the Conservative Party has communicated with me thus far and told me the names of the people it is putting forward to represent London. But they are not boldly announced or presented. They are merely identified in the caption to a group photograph. That is all. There is no information about what they have done in life.
To discover just the bare names of the Labour, Liberal Democrat and Ukip candidates, I would have to search the internet. I detect here the habitual arrogance of professional politicians. They assume we would cast our ballots without even wanting to know what sort of people we are being asked to support.
In fact, the Conservative election pamphlet is an example of using one election to fight another. The front sheet is dominated by a picture of David Cameron, who isn't standing next Thursday, together with three statements, two of which have nothing to do with the work of the European Parliament. "A stronger economy at home" - yes, but irrelevant. "Renewed respect abroad" - even if true, also beside the point. "Real change in Europe" - at last, a reference to the matter in hand.
I shall also abstain because the European Parliament is not actually a fully functioning parliament at all. It does not represent a single "people" and cannot therefore claim legitimacy for its acts. Indeed the latest estimates show that populist anti-EU, anti-austerity, anti-immigrant and anti-establishment parties could win as much as 31 per cent of the votes and 218 out of 751 seats. In other words it is likely that a third of the members of the new "parliament" will be hostile to its purposes.
Nor does it have the prerogatives of a parliament. It does not supply the executive, since the European Council takes the principal decisions. What it mainly does is to revise proposals for new European laws. It is like a House of Lords without a House of Commons. I cannot vote for that.
News, page 21
Document IIND000020140515ea5f00057
