{"newspaper":"i","id:"3283"}
____
News
Not coming over here, not stealing our jobs: fewer Romanians in UK
By Nigel Morris DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
540 words
15 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
6
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | IMMIGRATION
The numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians working in Britain have fallen since visa restrictions were scrapped on 1 January, confounding predictions that the move would trigger a dramatic surge in new arrivals from the two countries. The UK Independence Party (Ukip), which has campaigned on forecasts of a rush of Romanians and Bulgarians heading to Britain, faced accusations of scaremongering following the publication of the statistics. Ukip predicted the "floodgates will open" and produced posters saying 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians would be allowed to come to Britain, while the pressure group Migration Watch forecast 50,000 arrivals a year from the two nations. However, the Office for National Statistics reported yesterday that 140,000 Romanians and Bulgarians were in employment in the first three months of the year - a fall of 4,000 on the previous quarter when controls were still in place. The number marked an increase of 28,000 in the Romanian and Bulgarian workforce over the last 12 months.
Analysts suggested the drop could have been caused by negative headlines in Britain last year about the countries, with workers deciding to head to other EU nations.
Keith Vaz, the chairman of the Commons Home Affairs Select Committee, demanded an apology from Ukip. Ukip played down the quarterly fall, pointing out that the statistics did not include dependants or non-workers.
Damian Green, the Home Office minister, said: "They started scaremongering in the run-up to 1 January. They were proved wrong and they have decided to go for broke and continue scaremongering."
Dr Tommy Tomescu, a Romanian dentist and London MEP candidate for the Europeans Party, which campaigns against anti-migrant prejudice, said he was not surprised. "A lot of people from my country weren't coming here because of what was happening in the press."
Case studies: 'Life is very good here' Larisa Stanciu, 24, moved to the UK in September, before the EU restrictions were lifted. Stela Ciobanu, 24, moved to the UK on 1 January.
Both are from Craiova in southern Romania and were attending an event for the Europeans Party yesterday, which was established by immigrants and is putting candidates forward for the EU elections next week, campaigning against discrimination.
The pair trained as nurses in Romania but now work as cleaners at the Hilton hotel at Heathrow. Reacting to news that the number of her compatriots working in the UK had fallen, Ms Ciobanu said it was possible others were being put off from coming to Britain by negative press coverage here.
"There are people making a bad image about us," she said. Asked whether any other friends were planning on coming here, Ciobanu said: "Yes, but not very many."
Speaking through a translator, Ms Stanciu said the most difficult thing about her move had been obtaining a national insurance number. And although she now believes it will be easier to get one, she is yet to receive hers.
However, Ms Ciobanu's impression of the British people she has met is that they are "very nice". She said: "It's a very good life in this country."
Natalie Gil
Document IIND000020140515ea5f0001g
