{"newspaper":"i","id:"3362"}
____
News
@ Your View
992 words
17 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
16
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
I'm anti-EU - and anti Ukip I want us out of the EU, but I won't be voting Ukip in next week's European elections: why vote to elect a person to an institution they don't believe in and, in the process, help get them a generous salary? Even if successful, the decision for Britain to leave the EU will be made here in the UK, where Ukip has no parliamentary presence at all.
Beyond withdrawal from the EU, what other policies do Ukip have for running the country should they ever hold political power? Love them, or loathe them, political change can only realistically come about by working through the existing major parties, so I will be voting for the one party that has, at least, promised us a referendum (albeit a lot later than I would prefer), and in the meanwhile, bombard my local political representatives with my opinions on those issues I think deserve comment. RC JAMES OXFORD Andreas Whittam-Smith makes a compelling case (15 May) for the demolition of the whole artifice of the undemocratic and wasteful European Parliament. And for the dismantling of the even less democratic EU bureaucracy. I shall probably vote for the first time in more than a decade, if only to register my dissatisfaction with the EU and with the current crop of national and local politicians. JOHN CLEGG CHADDERTON Immigration perversities Surely the case study by Natalie Gil quoted in Nigel Morris's article on immigration (15 May) misses the point. The overall balance is that humanity as a whole has lost the services of two nurses, doubtless trained at considerable expense by the Romanian state, and the UK has gained two cleaners.
The role of a hotel cleaner is an important one, but even so the system that provides a financial incentive for someone to leave so valuable a job as a nurse and come to work in another state as a cleaner must merit some degree of critical scrutiny. RICHARD GRANT BARNWOOD So, there was no flood of Romanians and Bulgarians in January.
Maybe that's because 140,000 were working here already, as your figures showed. ROBB WALTERS CARDIFF I suspect that those who complain so loudly about immigrants coming to Britain and "taking" jobs, would be most indignant if they themselves, or their children, were denied the opportunity to work or study abroad. CATHERINE CROSLAND HEBDEN BRIDGE In the interest of public safety I must respond to Mark Steel's lament (16 May) that "we're not even allowed to move him (putative Bulgarian immigrant) to the upper shelf with the bacon" (in the fridge). As my wife has been drumming into me for many a long and thus far unsuccessful year, bacon (uncooked meat) goes on the bottom shelf. This information should be accompanied by a withering and exasperated glare. MICHAEL CASEY PLYMPTON Stephen Sutton inspirational I am well into my 80s, and consider myself to have had a fair innings, but should I be diagnosed with a terminal illness tomorrow, I don't think I could face the - very limited - future with the courage shown by Stephen Sutton, a truly inspirational young man.
The difference he has made will benefit hundreds, and although his family will mourn his passing, they should be very proud, and the rest of us humbled. BRIAN DAVIES BURY ST EDMONDS Scotland: the lost third option David Cameron is now pledging new powers for Scotland if it stays in the Union. Ed Miliband made a similar promise earlier this week.
I wonder if those people charged with the wording on the ballot paper now regret their intransigence in completely ruling out a third question - the preferred option of many, groups and individuals here in Scotland - viz. "devo max"? Even the SNP wanted this third option. It would most probably have satisfied a majority of voters, but the architects of the ballot paper, in their utter arrogance, obviously assumed that there was not a cat in hell's chance of a Yes vote. They must be sweating now as they see the steady increase in the Yes vote.
This could turn out to be one of the most significant errors of judgement made by a party in power. JULIA BUTLER PAISLEY With the amazing generosity of the National Lottery winners Colin and Chris Weir in giving the SNP party £5.5m for their war chest in the battle for Scottish independence, it could be on record as the first political referendum to be won by courtesy of the National Lottery. DENNIS FORBES GRATTAN ABERDEEN Three hundred years on and nothing has changed. Economic bullying and bribery enforced the Union and now economic bullying is being attempted to hold a fraying Union together. If we are such a burden, why the strong-arm tactics to hold us in? CHAS A MILNE SCOTTISH BORDERS Crossing road to flee factory farm While your article (15 May) on the chickens thrown on to the M62 tried to be light-hearted judging by its heading, it is appalling to learn that, even if they were in the largest of lorries, it was possible to cram in 6,800 live chickens.
Simple arithmetic easily indicates the cramped conditions in which the chickens were being transported. This is factory farming at its worst.
ANTHONY & PATRICIA NELSON TV fare unlike any other Unlike Alice Jones (15 May) I love A Question of Sport. It does not pretend to be led by comedians but by two people who have a sense of humour which is enjoyed by the audience and us at home, while hugely appreciating their vast knowledge on various sports.
So refreshing to see a programme which has no swearing or violence - a light-hearted change from most others. Sorry Alice, but you can always change the channel! SUSAN BOLDRINI BLACKFIELD MORE COMMENT on independentvoices.com
Document IIND000020140517ea5h0003v
