{"newspaper":"i","id:"3363"}
____
Editorial
A tax rise for the NHS is coming - so who'll jump first?
Andrew Grice   
777 words
17 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
18
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
Editorial | Inside Westminster
It is an open secret in Whitehall, yet the politicians don't want to talk about it: the National Health Service is going to run out of money after next year's general election. "Everyone knows there is a huge crisis coming, and that taxes will have to go up to bail it out," says one senior civil servant.
It is left to respected think-tanks such as the King's Fund to tell the truth. This month it warned that the NHS is heading for a "major crisis," saying the 2015-16 financial year could be a "cliff edge" as some providers cut emergency and other elective work to divert £1.8bn of NHS money to the Better Care Fund, which promotes joinedup health and social care. Fully integrated care is the only way to keep the rapidly rising number of elderly people out of hospital but the experts think the money is simply not there to make it happen. There are real fears of a £30bn-ayear "black hole" by 2020.
The idea of an "NHS tax" - perhaps a 1 per cent rise in national insurance contributions to raise £4bn - is being considered during Labour's marathon policy review. But it seems that Ed Miliband is not yet convinced: an acrossthe-board tax rise could undermine the "costof-living" election pitch to which he is wedded.
A lowerkey debate is taking place in Conservative circles. Some Tory modernisers believe the party is vulnerable on the NHS. With hindsight, they think David Cameron should have gone even further in 2010 than ring-fencing the health budget, by proposing an "NHS tax" at the same time.
For a party associated with tax cuts, it would have been a dramatic "Clause IV" moment to show voters Mr Cameron really meant it when he listed his three priorities as "NHS".
Now the idea of an earmarked tax rise has resurfaced. But Tory modernisers hoping to see it included in next year's party manifesto are likely to be disappointed. George Osborne is adamant that nothing must get in the way of his pledge to clear the deficit without further tax rises. The Chancellor wants to run a 1992-style "tax bombshell" campaign against Labour, and has no desire to muddy the waters. If the NHS runs out of cash and the Tories are still in power, they will cross that bridge when they come to it.
Yet the Tories may be missing a trick: what better way to spike Labour's guns on health - and its attempt to brand Cameron and Osborne as "two posh boys" who look after their rich friends -than by safeguarding the future of our universal health service, free at the point of use? After all, as the former Chancellor Lord (Nigel) Lawson noted, the NHS is the "nearest thing the English have to religion". A tax rise for health could be balanced by the carrot of eventual tax cuts in other areas.
The Tories have lost ground on health, breaking their promise of no "top-down reorganisation" with the reforms introduced by Andrew Lansley, the former Health Secretary. Jeremy Hunt, his successor, is quietly impressive as a patients' champion. His unwritten brief is to keep a lid on the NHS until after the election. It avoided a muchpredicted "winter crisis" but was close to the edge.
It would not take much to propel health to the top of the political agenda. According to YouGov, when people are asked about the most important issues facing them and their family, the economy is cited by 48 per cent, health is second (37 per cent), followed by pensions (27 per cent) and immigration (18 per cent). The Treasury has never liked earmarked taxes but there is a precedent. In 2002 Gordon Brown, the then Chancellor, raised national insurance to enable Labour to bring UK spending on health up to the European average. It was that very rare beast - a popular tax rise. However, the proposal was not in Labour's manifesto at the 2001 election.
Health could be a big votewinner for Labour, which will warn us that the NHS would not survive another five years of Tory-led government. "We will have a big offer on the NHS," a senior Labour source promises. But how big? David Axelrod, Mr Miliband's star signing from America, believes that "the biggest risk is taking no risk at all".
In one form or another, a tax rise for the NHS is coming. Who will have the courage to jump first?
Document IIND000020140517ea5h0003t
