{"newspaper":"i","id:"3487"}
____
News
The wave of immigration is over: Poles shun Britain in favour of jobs at home, says envoy
By Emily Dugan SOCIAL AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT   
706 words
22 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
6
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | SOCIETY
The "wave" of migration from Poland to Britain and other European countries is over, according to the country's ambassador to the UK, Witold Sobkow.
Speaking to i ahead of next week's 10-year anniversary of joining the European Union, Mr Sobkow said that increasing numbers are shunning a life in Britain in favour of Poland's own burgeoning economy. "This huge wave of people who came to EU countries trying to get well-paid jobs is over now," he said. "There are more opportunities in Poland, we have had huge economic success, wages are higher in Poland now and there are more jobs in many parts of Poland, so I think this is over.
"Of course people would like to stay in Poland and not live abroad. They love the UK but if you are at home there is no place like home. They would rather stay at home if there is a well-paid job."
Almost evangelical in his praise for this country, Mr Sobkow, 53, believes that the numbers who emigrate here should be celebrated as a reflection of its success.
"I love Britain," he says, sitting in the opulence of the Polish embassy, a Georgian town house in London's Portland Place. "I love the monarchy, the castles, the palaces and the landscapes. I don't even mind the weather... it is a perfect place to live.
"I often say you are a victim of your success. People concentrate on [immigration] and numbers but they don't ask why people come here. Why don't they go to other countries? Because they feel at home here. The measure of success is the numbers."
Next week marks 10 years since Poland joined the EU, along with seven other new members from Eastern Europe. The last Labour government predicted that just 13,000 people would move to Britain from Poland and the other new EU countries after 2004 but in the end more than a million came in one of the biggest waves of immigration seen in this country. Two-thirds of those immigrants were Polish.
"I've spent 10 years in Britain altogether so I've always wanted to be here," he says. "I have a very special relationship with the UK. My first time in Britain was in '79 when my family remained here in the Midlands after the Second World War. They took me to a small town called Grantham, they said we have a new Prime Minister, her name is Margaret Thatcher so we want to show you Grantham where she was born.
"I know a lot of people who came just after 2004. Those that didn't speak good English started off with simple jobs like washing up dishes, working as security guards, working night shifts, or picking fruit, because they wanted to learn English. They started going to English schools to learn the language and they got promoted and they took other courses... and now they have much better jobs."
He says that as Poles become more settled they are now more likely to be working in the City or as doctors or in other professional roles.
As well as putting money in their pockets, Mr Sobkow believes that some Polish migrants take home tolerance after living in Britain. "You are a multicultural society but in Poland we are not so much."
Witold Sobkow was a lecturer at Warsaw University­ before becoming a diplomat after the revolution in 1989. His has also been an ambassador to Ireland.
Polish migration 579,000 Polish people live in Britain, according to the latest census figures from 2011, making them the single largest group of foreign nationals.
11,000 Polish nationals returned home in 2012.
13,000 Labour government's prediction of how many­ people from Poland and the other new EU countries would come to Britain after 2004.
1,000,000 How many­ people actually­ came to the UK.
£5bn How much they­ have contributed to the economy­ since 2004, according to a 2011 report by­ The National Institute for Economic and Social Research.
Document IIND000020140422ea4m00017
