{"newspaper":"i","id:"3713"}
____
News
Charles stirs diplomatic row over Putin slur
By Cahal Milmo   
487 words
22 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
7
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | ROYALTY
Prince Charles yesterday faced a call to abdicate after his apparent comparison of Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler over the Russian leader's annexation of Crimea.
The heir to the throne found himself in political and diplomatic hot water after a former Polish wartime refugee who met him in Canada said that during a private conversation he had likened the Russian president's actions in Ukraine to the expansionist actions of Hitler's Germany.
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg came to the prince's aid by saying he believed he was entitled to express his own views and that members of the Royal Family should not be expected to enter into a "Trappist vow of silence". Speaking on his LBC Radio phone-in, Mr Clegg said: "Prince Charles should be perfectly entitled to express views in the confidence that he's expressing them privately."
The prince made the comments while speaking with Marienne Ferguson at the Novia Scotia immigration museum. Asked about their discussion, Mrs Ferguson said Charles, who is due to meet the Russian president for the D-Day commemorations in France next month, had suggested Hitler's actions were "not unlike... what Putin is doing" in annexing Crimea.
Mike Gapes of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, said: "If Prince Charles wants to make controversial statements on national or international issues, he should abdicate and stand for election... monarchy should be seen and not heard."
A spokesman for Mr Putin declined A senior Labour MP said it was incumbent on the heir to the throne, who is assuming more of his mother's duties, to steer clear of issues that are the domain of elected politicians.
Princely views
On British architecture
"You have to give this much to the Luftwaffe - when it knocked down our buildings, it didn't replace them with anything more offensive than rubble. "
On the monarchy
"I always feel that unless I rush about doing things and trying to help furiously I will not (and the monarchy will not) be seen to be relevant and I will be considered a mere playboy!"
On politicians
"I don't see why politicians and others should think they have the monopoly of wisdom."
On Islam
"Islam is part of our past and our present, in all fields of human endeavour. It has helped to create modern Europe."
On the value of alternative medicine
"One of the less attractive traits of professional bodies is the deeply ingrained suspicion and outright hostility which can exist towards anything unorthodox... I would suggest that the whole imposing edifice of modern medicine is like the celebrated Tower of Pisa, slightly off balance."
A senior Labour MP said it was incumbent on the heir to the throne, who is assuming more of his mother's duties, to steer clear of issues that are the domain of elected politicians.
Document IIND000020140522ea5m0003e
