{"newspaper":"i","id:"38"}
____
News
@i Your View
1,111 words
25 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
14
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
Not all will use pension wisely
I am concerned about the forthcoming liberalisation of pension-pot access. I hear the words that people are not daft and will be sensible with their pension-pot money. But it reminds one of the similar argument for the use of alcohol. Yes, most people are sensible, but there's a significant number who get it wrong and fall by the wayside. Inevitably, there will be temptations to spend the available money, either in weakness or under outside pressures such as family demands, unexpected problems etc.
Also, cynically, I wonder how much the thought has occurred in the Treasury that there could be an unexpected surge of spending in the economy with shortterm benefits to the finances of the country.
It also raises the question: is the Chancellor suggesting that there are better ways of investing one's pension pot and, if so, what are they? The real problem is the poor rate of return offered by annuities and this would be a better and more secure area for the Government to tackle.
DERRY GRAHAM SHEFFIELD
I never thought I would say it, but thanks, Mr Osborne, for an - albeit rare - piece of inspired legislation.
I just received an annual pension statement and was struggling to equate the amount in the pot with what they expected it to generate for me to live on in my retirement. The only way it made sense is if I live to 95 in relative poverty. Then I might get full value. At least now I can make my own choices: 35 more years of cheap soup and daytime television, or fishing in Australia?
NIGEL FRY NORTHAMPTON
All that matters now is profit
Paul McGann is right to say that accountants have taken over the BBC - but it doesn't stop there. Accountants have taken over our entire economy. Nothing has any value any more unless it can create money, and if something does not create a profit then it must be axed. Take the example of education: a course cannot run unless enough people sign up to make it "profitable" - despite other courses making an excess which could support it.
Nothing is spared from this relentless onslaught. If people's lives get in the way then so be it - throw them on the scrapheap so the shareholders will be happy. I don't believe there ever was a recession, just a confidence trick to redistribute the wealth of our nation away from the poor to fill up the coffers of the rich, and they will use any excuse to achieve this.
Rationalisation, quantitative easing, privatisation, restructuring - wake up, Britain, it's not the benefit claimants or the immigrants who are sucking the money from us; it's the rich and powerful.
ROBERT GRAEME CONWY
Football needs video reviews
Sam Wallace is right (Talking football, 24 March). Video reviews would change the game for ever, for the better. Football is the only professional ball game in the UK which does not employ them. As a fan, I am more interested in getting the right decision than who makes it. Its use in both codes of rugby, cricket and, to a lesser extent, tennis, has resulted in a vast improvement in the quality of decisions made, at no detriment to the sports in question or the public's enjoyment of them.
I would like it to be employed to assess whether a penalty should be awarded, or whether an offence had been committed in the lead-up to the scoring, or prevention, of a "goal".
M TWIDDY ALTON
Life in the modern church
In terms of "life satisfaction" you report that the "perfect job" is being a member of the "clergy", with "chief executive" coming second (24 March).
Inanity notwithstanding, how interesting: in the contemporary outcomes-driven managerial church, being a minister is becoming indistinguishable from being a CEO, which - trust me - for a lot of us is anything but satisfying; rather it is cause for hilarity, despair, or probably both.
THE REV KIM FABRICIUS SWANSEA
Tragedy of Malaysian flight
The agony the relatives of the passengers of Flight MH370 are going through must be unbearable.
But a lot of the flak taken by the Malaysian officials has been very hard - most experts have had the same information and have not been able to come up with any more answers, including the talking heads on the news channels.
Things can always be done better with hindsight, but no one has been in this situation before - the French knew fairly soon after where Flight 447 went down.
RICHARD SPENCER HEREFORD
Fraudsters in the NHS
Why is it made clear that those committing fraud area "dishonest minority" (front page, 24 March) when in reports of benefit fraud it is implied this applies to all people claiming benefits?
JILL MARTIN
The purpose of stop-and-search The reason "stop-andsearch" is carried out on young adults is to prevent needless deaths such as that of Shereka Fab-Ann Marsh (24 March).
Perhaps if the police had carried out more extensive searches in Hackney, Shereka's death could have been avoided . Instead they are subjected to continual malignity and badgering from various humanrights groups, politicalcorrectness-obsessives and liberal do-gooders who seem to find it unjust and unreasonable for police to carry out these searches. The one and only reason the police carry out stopand-search is to save young people's lives.
MARTIN LAWRENCE SOUTH CROYDON
Student-loan dodgers
I know of one ex-student - and expect there are lots more - who deliberately earns less than £21,000 per annum so as not to have to repay their student "loan".
ADRIAN DADDOW BRISTOL
Scottish independence
I was fascinated by the letter from Eric Finch (24 March) requesting full elections in Ukraine. The situation in Crimea is almost identical to what will take place in Scotland this year, with just one region being allowed to decide the future of the existing union. I wonder if he agrees that all UK citizens should be allowed to vote in the matter of Scottish independence?
DAVID DIPROSE LONG CRENDON
Follow the lead of the French
I agree with KJ Oatley (letters, 24 March). If the UK Government had taken a lead from the French then maybe today we would have a credible railway system, a credible health service, and also real working man-size aircraft carriers. Successive UK governments' sole raison d'être has been to reduce the country to a developing-nation status. As for TV licences, I think we are due a refund.
IOANNIS LEMOS
Document IIND000020140325ea3p00027
