{"newspaper":"i","id:"393"}
____
News
Farage feels heat over party backer but support for Ukip keeps growing
By Nigel Morris DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
360 words
1 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
8
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | POLITICS
The UK Independence Party faced renewed embarrassment over its links to a wealthy retired businessman last night after leader Nigel Farage was forced to abandon a campaign trip due to protests despite a new poll showing the party had surged to record levels of support.
Hours after Nigel Farage announced his decision not to stand in the Newark parliamentary byelection, the anti-EU party received a new morale boost from a ComRes survey for ITV News showing its backing reaching 38 per cent for this month's Euro elections.
Yet Mr Farage was forced to drop a walkabout in Swansea town centre yesterday reportedly due to "security concerns" as opponents of the party's immigration policies took to the streets.
Later came the disclosure that the party had recently received cash from Demetri Marchessini despite previously attacking his views as "eccentric and unpalatable". The Greekborn tycoon gave the party £10,000 early last year before falling out with the Ukip leadership over his views on homosexuality and women's rights. However, Channel 4 News disclosed that Ukip received a further £5,000 from him four months ago.
In an interview with the programme last night, Mr Marchessini created fresh headache for the party with his bizarre views - saying there was no such thing as marital rape.
"If you make love on Friday and make love Sunday, you can't say Saturday is rape," he argued.
Renewing his criticism of gay lifestyles, he said: "They go out at night and they pick up five, 10, 15 different partners in one night. Is that love? There is no such thing as fidelity in homosexual relationships."
Last night Mr Farage said: "I am sure he gave the money in good faith and it was taken in faith." Asked whether Ukip should be taking cash from a donor with such views, he replied: "Possibly not."
Mr Farage argued his candidature in Newark to replace Patrick Mercer would be a distraction from the EU elections. Its candidate will be selected in the next week.
Document IIND000020140501ea510000h
