{"newspaper":"i","id:"536"}
____
News
Ukip 'rising star' refuses to campaign for party
By Emily Dugan   
425 words
8 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
9
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | POLITICS
A woman who was heralded as the "future face" of the UK Independence Party says she is no longer prepared to campaign for it because of their illiberal stance on immigration.
Alexandra Swann was supposed to represent the party's new, younger membership when she publicly defected from the Conservatives at Ukip's spring conference in 2012. Nigel Farage boasted: "I'm very pleased to say that the Swann has migrated to Ukip."
However, it seems the Swann has migrated again. She told i: "I can't bring myself to campaign for them."
The party's increasingly incendiary rhetoric on immigration has disillusioned Ms Swann, 25. She said: "It was difficult with the anti-gay marriage stuff. Now so much of their argument is anti-immigration which didn't sit well with me. I think we should be discriminating on the skill level [of immigrants] as opposed to what country they're from."
Speaking of her decision not to represent the party, she said: "I haven't officially left or fallen out with anyone but I can't bring myself to campaign for them. I'll probably still vote for them... [but] I don't want to be identi-fied as that Ukip girl."
Her shift in allegiance emerged as she was about to appear on the London Live show, Headline London, yesterday lunchtime. Ms Swann insisted that she did not want to be introduced as a member of Ukip.
Her move was seen as a major scalp for Ukip and she was frequently invited to speak on behalf of the party on television and radio. Newspapers described her as "the future face of Ukip".
Despite this, she tried to play down her departure from active campaigning yesterday: "I don't want to make a song and dance about it," she said, adding: "I'm technically still a member."
Her current unease at the party's immigration policy is in contrast to her speech at the Ukip spring conference in March 2012.
She said then: "We need to tell people that Ukip is probably the only party that can be trusted to defend its people... We put the human rights of British people over the apparent rights of convicted terrorists and illegal immigrants."
A Ukip spokesman said the party would not comment.
Ms Swann had been prominent in the Tory youth movement. She stood as a Ukip candidate in the Surrey County Council elections last May but lost to a Conservative.
Document IIND000020140408ea480001l
