{"newspaper":"i","id:"637"}
____
News
Identity fraud rife among passengers - but usually to save money
By Simon Calder TRAVEL CORRESPONDENT   
338 words
10 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
7
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | AIR TRAVEL
Identity misrepresentation is rife among air travellers - yet is often carried out just to save cash by otherwise law-abiding citizens.
Suppose Traveller A has booked a Gatwick-Glasgow flight weeks ahead for £40, but can no longer fly. Traveller B needs to make the same trip at short notice and faces a far higher fare. They may make a deal, at the expense of the airline.
In the last century, B would simply masquerade as A. Today, it's only slightly more complicated to defraud the airline.
For many flights within the UK, airline staff do not insist on ID. Even when they do, flimsy proof such as a railcard may suffice - so long as the name corresponds to the booking and the photo looks like you. So the passenger in the next seat may not be the person named on the ticket.
Rules for international travel are tighter, making identity theft more the preserve of organised crime.
Stolen passports are at the heart of ID fraud, with voracious demand from drug-traffickers and peoplesmugglers. Criminal craftsmen are adept at replacing photographs beneath the laminate on the personal details page - which is why increased security measures now include a second, embedded, image.
As the Malaysian Airlines tragedy has shown, intelligence on fake identities is not routinely shared internationally. When I renewed a passport some years ago, the document was "lost" in the post. It later turned up in the possession of an American villain. Ever since, when I arrive at US Immigration I am hauled off for hours of further investigation.
The pair who departed Kuala Lumpur for Beijing on Saturday morning using stolen passports took advantage of the lack of international cooperation on ID fraud. But that doesn't mean they were to blame for downing the plane. They may simply have been illegal economic migrants, flying to Amsterdam via China simply to get a cheap fare.
Document IIND000020140310ea3a00016
