{"newspaper":"i","id:"735"}
____
News
@ i Your View
1,045 words
5 April 2014
i
IIND
1ST
16
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
What would Farage do?
Chris Blackhurst (4 April) shows commendable insight into the causes for Ukip's rise in popularity. Many people feel totally disenfranchised by the apparent detachment of the ruling political elite from the real world. By talking the talk of a classless British "everyman", Nigel Farage eloquently voices the concerns so prevalent within our society. In every golf and workingman's club in the land, the most casual political conversation will typically reveal a speaker's personal candidates for hostility: immigration, the EU, gay marriage, women's rights, Government by "toffs", untrustworthy politicians, bankers and the City, the loss of national values, welfare scroungers, cuts et cetera. Farage, in his role as an articulate Mr. Angry, embodies the indignant, white British male who fears that no main party politician cares about any of the things that he despises.
But apart from quitting the EU, Mr. Farage, what else would you actually do? About the NHS, tax and austerity, the unfairness in our society, HS2, caring for an ageing population, unemployment, education standards, tuition fees, welfare reform, rising energy bills? We know what you're against - but what are you for?
PAUL METHVEN
Chris Blackhurst is correct to say that when Labour became New Labour, they sold out their traditional support base. But if there is such a thing as an underclass (and that is open to debate) then it is all of us who do not have much money, whether black, brown, indigenous white or EU migrant.
Farage has taken this pro-working-class stance as a cynical way of gaining votes. When it suits him, he will cosy up to big business again. The main worry for me is that Ukip will con people into the sort of populist racism we see currently in France and Holland.
MITCH MITCHELL
Thank you Chris Blackhurst! Nigel Farage is giving the UK population a simple and easy way to voice its opinions and hopefully have them listened to by its government, and that is all it is asking for.
BOB SHEPHERD POOLE, DORSET
Housing crisis will worsen
Vince Cable bemoans the fact that enough houses are not being built for the burgeoning UK population. He has previously been reported as saying that the thought of a population of 80 millionplus by the 2030s is no problem. Has he not thought of the problems that will be encountered in housing a further 15 million or so residents?
BOB ELLIS
MANCHESTER
Vince Cable is dead right about the housing crisis. We need a government prepared to enable a substantial housebuilding programme combined with properly regulated legislation for landlords with a cap on rents. I have two grandsons who are on less than the average wage and paying nearly half of their income in rent. No chance to save for a deposit or put anything away for a pension and they are at the mercy of escalating rents far higher than they would pay for a mortgage. Come on politicians - do something!
GERALD HAMILTON
CASTLE CARY
Maria Miller's 'apology'
If the Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards recommended that Maria Miller pay back £45,000 why is she now only repaying £5,800? She should be treated the same as any member of the public. She was insulting in her grudging, and extremely brief, apology-that-wasn't-one.
This confirms that MPs' expense entitlements should never be decided by MPs.
PEGGY REEVES
BOURNEMOUTH
NHS must remain free
I was horrified by Oliver Wright's article (3 April) "NHS must charge for GP and hospital treatment". If charges are introduced I fear that the health of the nation will suffer greatly. People will go undiagnosed and untreated simply because of cost.
MARK BRIMBLE
NEWPORT, GWENT
Young children need play
At two years old, young children need to play and to learn about themselves and relationships (front page, 3 April). Brain development is achieved by the young having opportunities for ageappropriate experiences mediated through the warmth and care of their main carers. Teaching children numeracy at two should not be prioritised over the early neuro-developmental task of learning to relate.
Poor behaviour in our schools is a major issue, indicating that a focus on very early schooling can de-value the vital tasks of learning to manage being alone, change, anger, excitement etc.
PIP SMITH
SURREY
School for two-year-olds, from 7.30am to 6pm? Why not provide overnight care too? Oh and while you are at it, why not also arrange for someone else to have children for you? They are obviously not wanted if they can be passed over for someone else to enjoy all those once-ina-lifetime moments.
JANE E BURKE
The Great War remembered
What an excellent start to the series "The Great War in 100 moments". Just honest-to-goodness narrative without any sensationalism.
During the early Sixties, when I was a child, my grandfather lived with us. In those days the only live football was the FA Cup Final which was a family event from the community singing onwards. When it came to "Abide With Me" my grandfather could always be seen wiping away the tears; to our eternal shame my brother and I found this amusing. Years later, my brother asked about the tears. The answer came, "During the Great War I spent time in France, our regimental hymn was "Abide With Me" and if you had stood beside as many graves as I have singing it, then you would cry as well."
CHRIS PITT
ACCRINGTON
Prisoners need books "Lessons for Chris Grayling - by i readers in prison" (4 April) and Mark Steel - this is why I buy i every day. I work in the Probation service and see the impact of illiteracy daily; this is a ridiculous policy which is the antithesis of a caring society. Please keep up the good work.
STEF ELIOT
MORE COMMENT on independentvoices.com
i Quiz ANSWERS
Questions on page 2
1 Gianni Versace
2 The CIA's 3 The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
4 Snooker
5 Lolita by Vladimir Nabokov
6 Kermit the Frog
7 Leicestershire
8 O2
9 The Usual Suspects ("Round up the usual suspects!")
10 Margaret Thatcher
Document IIND000020140405ea450003s
