{"newspaper":"i","id:"74"}
____
News
Tonight millions will hear debate on Britain in the EU
Nigel Farage EUROPE   
603 words
26 March 2014
i
IIND
1ST
16
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News
There was no way I was going to turn down the opportunity to debate with the Deputy Prime Minister ahead of the European elections. Tonight's event is something I've been wanting to happen for years; the bigger surprise is that Mr Clegg took up the challenge. But then his party is facing electoral wipe-out at these elections unless it does something drastic. For the Liberal Democrats, it's about survival. There is no reason why any Establishment party would otherwise want to highlight the huge number of competences Brussels now has over our lives - especially on a live broadcast and televised debate.
This evening will be the first time since the 1970s that our membership of the EU has been debated in front of an audience of millions, and I am excited. For years I have toured the UK addressing public meetings, taking questions from people keen to find out more about Ukip and about Europe. It wasn't so long ago that newspaper articles on EU directives which directly affected domestic policy were confined to the foreignnews sections.
I have been told that the Liberal Democrats are briefing that the debate will go beyond the subject of Europe. Well, if you define "Europe" as directives and regulations and turgid clauses debated by committees, then I can't imagine that much of the debate will be about that. To suggest that what we will be debating - immigration, the EU, housing, primary-school places, the right to trial by jury and our own sovereign defence and foreign policy - does not come under the heading of a debate on our EU membership is disingenuous.
Even back in 1974, the referendum was about whether we wanted to join the then Common Market and be part of a trading bloc. What Nick Clegg (pictured) and I will be debating in the first round on LBC is whether we want to be either part of a political union or a free, self-governing nation. Because at the heart of this debate is the question of identity: are we "European" or "British"? One of the reasons the Liberal Democrats have been sinking in the polls is that many people don't know what they stand for. They were a protest vote, telling people what they thought they wanted to hear. But on the issue of the EU, even though they have positioned themselves as the party of "In", there is still a huge amount for them to clear up.
For there can be no doubt in the minds of anyone but the most ardent Europhiles that there are huge problems in the institutions which have failed to sign off their accounts for two decades and which have seen riots in Southern European countries as the effects of the disastrous policy of the Eurozone is felt by everyone but those who dreamt it up.
My position is clear, and we have the pragmatic business argument on our side. A few multinationals love the EU because it drives out competition with the costs of compliance and regulation. But the backbone of this country - small and mediumsized businesses - are the ones who are looking towards Ukip's policy.
But what does Nick Clegg want? And will he tell the country what reforms he thinks are needed? Or will we still be left guessing what his party's policy is aside from a desire to cling to an undemocratic and inef-ficient mode of government? The writer is the leader of the UK Independence Party
Document IIND000020140326ea3q00011
