{"newspaper":"i","id:"803"}
____
Features
@ i Your View
1,036 words
26 February 2014
i
IIND
1ST
14
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
Features | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
Scots' choice affects us all I really don't agree with R Wilkins ("Let the Scots decide", letter, 25 February). Are we not allowed to express an opinion on how an independent Scotland would affect the rest of the UK?
We are talking about countries that have been joined in every way for over 300 years. Why would any sensible person not be concerned about such a divorce? Is it democratic that five million voters in Scotland have the right to affect the destiny of the other 60 million UK citizens?
GERARD MCCABE
COLNE, LANCASHIRE
I am surprised by how little attention has been paid to the probable effect of a Scottish vote for independence on the political future of the rest of the UK.
If Scottish MPs were removed from the equation, the rest of the UK could find itself with a more or less permanent Conservative government.
For the people of Scotland, the removal of any risk of a Conservative government is likely to be one of the strongest of the many arguments for independence. But those of us in the rest of the UK who do not relish the prospect of a Conservative government that would be virtually impossible to remove should be seriously worried.
I suspect that David Cameron is secretly longing for a Scottish "Yes" vote, despite going through the motions of support for the Union. CATHERINE CROSLAND HEBDEN BRIDGE, WEST YORKSHIRE As a Scot I am intrigued by David Cameron's references to me as part of his UK "family". Most family members hold important meetings in the home of their loved ones a little more often than every 90 years.
I will vote Yes to independence in the certainty that Scotland would not have another Tory government in my lifetime at least. I would happily invite Oliver Duff, Owen Jones and all other like-minded English people to come north and help us create the just and caring society we intend for an independent Scotland.
MARGARET BYRNE
Mr Cameron and the Cabinet have travelled to Aberdeen at taxpayers' expense to hold a routine meeting which they could have easily held in London. If Mr Cameron wishes to perform political public relations stunts, he should do so at his own, or Conservative central office, expense.
GODFREY HOLDCROFT
FELIXSTOWE, SUFFOLK On what basis is North Sea oil Scottish? Surely it is a resource belonging to the people of Great Britain. We have all (as taxpayers) invested in and profited from the oil.
Instead of thinking England versus Scotland in a confrontational way, we should be thinking about what is best for all the people of Britain. Far from the English Tories trying to plunder Scotland's "black gold" is it not the case that an independent Scotland would be trying to deprive the rest of the country of what is rightfully theirs?
There are about 60 million people in these isles; only five million of them are Scots. If Scotland chooses independence would it not be reasonable to expect them to have a proportion of the resources? Would a 12th seem fair?
ROB HERON
SWANSEA
I am one of 700,000 Scots living in England. In the event of a "yes" vote in the independence referendum it appears that we would automatically become "Scottish citizens". If Scotland should find itself outside the EU would we be regarded as third-country immigrants living in England? Could we all be repatriated to Scotland? Should we not have a say in this by having a vote in the referendum?
HECTOR MACDUFF
DUNSTABLE, BEDFORDSHIRE
Eurosceptic victories As usual, Steve Richards' piece "The Eurosceptics have won" (25 February) was thoughtful and thought-provoking. However he doesn't explain the reason for the Eurosceptics' continuing "neurosis" . He is right: following the problems with the euro, we are all Eurosceptics now. But in my view, the continuing agony of those he calls Eurosceptics arises from the fact that many are not Eurosceptics but Europhobes who will only be content when Britain withdraws.
That is what is so dangerous and why Angela Merkel needs to be very cautious indeed about to whom she offers political support. Knowing her, I suspect she will get it right and will thus offer little succour to Mr Cameron who, as Steve Richards says, is, once again, attempting to face in two directions at once.
IAN MAYFIELD STROUD, GLOUCESTERSHIRE Dredging on the Levels Further to your article on 25 February, "Dredging planned without advice of top engineers", I would like to make clear the Environment Agency's position. We have always said that dredging is an effective part of the solution in reducing flood risk on the Somerset Levels, undertaken as part of a broader package of work to protect people, property and land.
This is why we undertook dredging of key parts on the Rivers Tone and Parrett at the end of last year. The Environment Agency is fully committed to dredging on the Somerset Levels, and the work will commence when it is safe and practical to do so.
DAVID ROOKE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF FLOOD AND COASTAL RISK MANAGEMENT, ENVIRONMENT AGENCY
Keep this man away How depressing that Piers Morgan may return to the UK after CNN announced it is pulling the plug on his American chat show because of plummeting ratings. I'm surprised that it has take Americans three years to become tired of him.
Is there nothing that can be done to persuade CNN to change its mind? Offer him another show - anything that will keep him on that side of the Atlantic?
ROBERT READMAN
BOURNEMOUTH
Cameron's new image It seems that hardly a day goes by without David Cameron or George Osborne appearing on television wearing hard hats and hi-visibility jackets. Do they imagine that posing as construction workers will boost their appeal with the working class?
DAVE TAYLOR
PURBROOK, HAMPSHIRE
Usual protest suspects Nice bit of stereotyping ("Anti-frack druids safe for a spell", 25 February). I would have expected better from i.
EMMA ANDREWS
CUMBRIA
A roaring success In Warwickshire we have a company that empties septic tanks called "Suckcess Ltd".
JOHN PAYTON
WARWICK
Document IIND000020140226ea2q0003n
