{"newspaper":"i","id:"850"}
____
News
Ethnic minorities on course to make up 20% of Britons
By Andy McSmith   
621 words
6 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
5
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | POPULATION
Britain's five largest ethnic minorities are growing so fast that by 2050 they could constitute more than a fifth of the total population, a report concludes today.
The conjecture is not meant as a warning to white Britain that its identity is under threat.
The authors, both from ethnic minorities, have compiled their report, entitled A Portrait of Modern Britain, to celebrate 'melting pot' Britain.
They argue that politicians should stop treating ethnic minorities as one homogeneous group and start appealing to the varied political views and concerns of non-white Britons.
The report argues that immigration since the Second World War has resulted in diverse groups with widely differing opinions and traditions. It says politicians have failed to address these groups individually and says there are "clear and meaningful differences between each of these communities, which need to be fully understood" by policymakers.
Rishi Sunak, the co-author and the head of Policy Exchange's BME Research Unit, said: "These communities will continue to become an ever more significant part of Britain, especially in future elections."
The report draws on survey, census, academic and polling data to build a detailed picture of the five largest minority groups: Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi, Black African and Black Caribbean. It says currently eight million people, or 14 per cent of the UK population, are from ethnic minorities.
It claims that with the exception of those with an African heritage, a majority of non-white Britons describe themselves as "British-only".
The right-leaning think tank says that currently voters in black and minority ethnic communities overwhelmingly identify with and vote for the Labour Party "regardless of class or association with Conservative policies", with 68 per cent voting for Gordon Brown's party at the 2010 General Election, compared with 16 per cent for the Conservatives and 14 per cent for the Liberal Democrats.
The report cites work based on the 2001 census by Professor Philip Rees, of Leeds University, who calculated that the size of the ethnic minority population will double to 16 million, and will make up 20 per cent of the population by 2051.
The authors suggest that when the figures are revised to take in the 2010 census, that 20 per cent figure will be higher.
Around 21 per cent of Team GB's gold medals at the 2012 London Olympics - including individual and team sports - were won by immigrants or those with immigrant parents.
Drinking from the one cup The Rev Rose Hudson-Wilkin (pictured), a parish priest in east London and chaplain to the Speaker of the House of Commons, was born in Jamaica and believes that immigration has helped to warm up the "cold" British.
"The majority of those from the Caribbean who came to Britain in the late 50s and throughout the 60s and 70s were Christians... Sadly, they discovered that the church was not waiting with arms outstretched to welcome them," she said.
"Today in our inner cities, up and down the country, our churches are filled with significant numbers of those from the minority ethnic community.
"Their children fill the Sunday schools and our schools. The reality is that we are looking at second, third and fourth generations now.
"The majority of the minority ethnic population cannot be referred to as a migrant community.
"They are British; they belong here; this is their home. They do not want to be tolerated and they do not want to be treated as visitors. It is important to note that church is the one place where we have people from different cultures and class meeting and 'drinking from the one cup'."
Document IIND000020140506ea5600006
