{"newspaper":"i","id:"878"}
____
News
@ i Your View
1,089 words
5 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
14
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS Your View
There are good care homes, too I agree wholeheartedly with Janet Street-Porter (3 May) that there are terrible shortcomings in the care industry. I have a concern, however, that the Panorama programme and subsequent journalistic responses may generate even more damage.
The current publicity will give some urgency to what is already known to be desperately needed: sound staff training, recognised national standards, more thorough inspection than received now, fair pay rather than the abysmal wages now offered, but most of all a recognition that care staff do vitally important and difficult work. There will be no chance of recruiting good, conscientious staff with the care "industry" treated as anathema, as it is now. Twelve years ago my 86-year-old mother had two serious operations but went on to enjoy five more years of good-quality life. Not only did she have excellent medical and nursing care in two London hospitals, for which the whole family is grateful, but she had two stays in a high-quality care home.
She enjoyed those stays and made rapid recovery there. We should recognise the good practice that does exist and that many staff are dedicated and caring. MARIANNE LEDERMAN HITCHIN, HERTFORDSHIRE For all of the bad press about bad carers and homes, there are also good ones. My wife has Alzheimer's, and has been in a home since 2010. She is very happy, thanks to the wonderful staff. So there are good stories out there, write about them too.
BARNABY JOHNSON We all know how badly the elderly are treated in some "care homes". I have, for the last year, taken my mother into my home. She has dementia so I am well aware of the many problems care staff have to deal with.
However the answer to care for the elderly is simple. Instead of the state paying £700 or more a week, offer the family half of this to enable them to give their parent the care they need. At present I am penalised for having my mother. I now have to pay full council tax. Before she came to me, Mum lived in sheltered accommodation costing the local authority over £800 per week.
I am sure many people have sleepless nights worrying about their relatives but cannot afford to give up work to take care of them.
ANN CRAIG RAMSGATE, KENT Look carefully at Ukip policies Andrew Grice makes a good point about Ukip ("Cameron must not insult Ukip voters", 3 May). If you want to take on Ukip, insulting its supporters is not the way to go about it. If anything, it emboldens them.
At one point I thought I might end up voting for Ukip but I decided not to after thinking about their policies for a while. If people spent more time actually criticising the party's policies instead of making racism claims and character assassinations, it could influence many undecided voters.
Ukip's policies don't seem to have been scrutinised as much as they should, and the scrutiny they get tends to focus on the EU and immigration. Their poor environment policies, such as their denial of man-made climate change and wrongly blaming green taxes for energy price rises, was the main thing which stopped me supporting them. But this is just one area of Ukip policy which doesn't get as much attention as it should. All of Ukip's policies need to be put under the spotlight. REECE FOWLER MIDDLESBROUGH Worse things than the N-word Most black people are not worried about the N-word, whether Jeremy Clarkson said it or not; there are bigger problems to deal with.
Racism is still strong. I am 61 and it still happens to me. Some people won't rent to blacks. We are searched more at the airport for drugs and guns. My children are now experiencing racism.
D SIMPSON Loss of the 'Lusitania' David Usborne perhaps lets his imagination do the writing when he writes of "trepidation in the hearts" of all aboard the Lusitania as it left New York the last time (The Great War in 100 Moments, 2 May).
My father-in-law, William Jones, was one of the ship's engineers and survived the sinking. Years later he told my late husband that its sinking by a U-boat came as a complete surprise. As to whether the atrocity hastened the USA's entry into the Great War, a further passage of two years before it did so suggests otherwise. DAPHNE JONES MILTON KEYNES Paxman bested In his eulogy of Jeremy Paxman, Simon Kelner (2 May) was wrong to claim that "only Russell Brand got the better of him".
In April 2010 Eurfyl ap Gwilym, economic adviser to Plaid Cymru, clearly got the better of Paxman on public expenditure figures, telling him "to do your homework". Within a few days a recording of the interview on YouTube (tinyurl.com/n2u3drw) received more than 50,000 hits . PETER RANDALL DINAS POWYS, VALE OF GLAMORGAN Shocking Shakespeare I accept that sometimes distressing photographs appear in your paper. However, it was completely unnecessary to publish the photo of a scene from Titus Andronicus (3 May) It came as a nasty shock to me, let alone the children who are encouraged to browse your otherwise excellent paper.
Please be a little more circumspect in future. CELIA WHITTAKER LEYLAND, LANCASHIRE Warm welcome to the Lakes Wonderful to read you had a great time in our beautiful county (Letter from the Editor, 3 May). We hope that you come back soon.
SUE BLAND CUMBRIA Oliver Duff's Letter states that the Wasdale Head Inn hosts the World's Biggest Liar contest. While the contest originated at Wasdale Head, it is currently held at the Santon Bridge Hotel in Eskdale. WADVERN DAVIES Housing glut? Yes, please If Labour caps rents, let us hope that thousands of landlords follow Steve Holcroft's example (letter, 3 May) and sell, causing a glut of affordable homes. A winwin situation for tenants, with rents capped and thousands of properties for sale.
AILEEN WATT NORTHAMPTON Be careful what you pray for I went to church this morning. Among other fairly substantial requests, the congregation requested that God would "heal the sick". Has anyone given any thought as to how many people would be out of a job if the Almighty actually acceded to their request? RON GELLÉRT-BINNIE WARWICK MORE COMMENT on independentvoices.com
Document IIND000020140505ea550003a
