{"newspaper":"i","id:"879"}
____
News
The town where immigrants get the blame for everything
Oliver Wright   
855 words
5 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
22
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | 2015 ELECTION In the first of a five-part series about Britain's key political battlegrounds for next year's elections, Oliver Wright reports from Crawley in West Sussex
It is always dangerous forming conclusions on the basis of a small snapshot of opinion.
But when you speak to around two dozen people in three different locations and the vast majority - unprompted - say that immigration is the political issue they feel most strongly about, it is hard not to form some certainties. And when those people live in one of the more marginal constituencies you begin to understand why politicians of all parties are, in different ways, struggling to address the problem. Voters in Crawley - a new town built in the shadow of Gatwick Airport - are not racist. They just feel successive governments have got it wrong. Take Joan - a woman in her early sixties: "People round here can't get jobs; can't get housing and they're living on benefits because they can't do anything but," she says. "Then you've got loads of people coming over here because they think the streets are paved with gold."
Then there is Patsy whose son left for Australia because, she says, London was too expensive for him to get on the property ladder.
"Those people coming from the EU get houses. My children have never been able to get houses. I don't mind so much a few refugees because I hate to think of people really suffering in the world. But it's not right as it is."
If Ed Miliband is to walk into Downing Street next May he will almost certainly have to win in Crawley. It is a key swing constituency - Tory throughout the Eighties to 1997, Labour until 2010 and now again Conservative with a majority for the sitting MP Henry Smith of 5,928. Last time Ukip only got around 1,400 votes.
Where the Liberal Democrat vote goes next year is likely to be crucial. Last time they got 14 per cent of the vote - but the party has no presence on the local council and party headquarters could find nobody to talk about their campaign.
Labour's candidate is Chris Oxlade, a former local radio DJ who lost in 2010 after the sitting MP, Laura Moffatt, stood down. The party has made steady gains in the local borough council elections and could take control when voters go to the polls later this month.
If the swings of last year's council elections were reproduced in 2015 it would see the Tories winning just 31.1 per cent of the vote and Labour taking the seat with 40.7 per cent. And that is before factoring in Ukip.
Mr Oxley says the key to a Labour victory is getting the party's core vote out.
"If we get in it won't be on the back of Lib Dem votes - it will be on the back of voters returning to Labour."
As for immigration, Mr Oxley says: "There is a concern from people we speak to on the doorstep. It's in the top five worries for people definitely. But Crawley has always had immigration... We've got the highest BME (black and minority ethnic) population of any new town.
Outside a school in Langley Green, which is a poorer part of town that should be a Labour stronghold, immigration was also the dominant issue.
Those parents meeting children were mainly first-generation immigrants both from eastern Europe and further afield, many of whom spoke little English.
White parents outside the school gates were angry and resentful.
"I don't want to sound racist, that's the thing," said Nikayla before admitting that immigration is the one thing that really riles her.
"I'm white English but really this should be a Muslim school because of all the Muslims here. It's not really an English school."
So how does Mr Smith address these concerns and prevent the Tory vote haemorrhaging to Ukip? "It would be wrong for any candidate to say immigration is not an issue on the doorstep because it is," he says. "But I do think the overwhelming concern among voters is the economy. And here things are really improving.
He may well be right. But it is hard not to think that Ukip's current support will have to collapse pretty spectacularly not to increase a lot on their 2010 vote.
And when there are only a few thousand votes in the contest it is really too close to call.
The floating vote Crawley 2010 election results Henry Smith (Con) 21,264 Chris Oxlade (Lab) 15,336 John Vincent (Lib Dem) 6,844 Richard Trower (BNP) 1,672 Chris French (Ukip) 1,382 Phil Smith (Green) 598 How the ethnic make-up has changed since 2001 White - UK: 76,888 in 2011 (-8.7%) White - other European: 7,248 in 2011 (+166%) Asian Indian: 5,530 (+25%) Pakistani: 4,548 (+52%) Black African: 2,164 (+198%)
Document IIND000020140505ea550001h
