{"newspaper":"i","id:"945"}
____
Features
Line up - for a great British welcome
Simon Calder   
743 words
3 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
45
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
Features | = THE MAN WHO PAYS HIS WAY =
Ajourney home begins with a single nudge, backwards. As the tug pushes the aircraft away from the gate, you feel a gentle bump. And relax: the airport stress is behind you. The tug uncouples, the engines surge and the plane moves forward.
Or not, in the case of British Airways Flight 2038 from Orlando to Gatwick on Tuesday night. What BA describes as a "minor technical issue", could not be fixed as quickly as hoped. After four hours on the ground the flight crew could not complete the journey within the stipulated time limit. Shortly after midnight, passengers were offloaded and bussed to hotels in the Walt Disney World area. They had been due back on Wednesday morning in the United Kingdom, but instead woke up in the Magic Kingdom and finally touched down in Sussex on Thursday afternoon.
In fact, they were extremely lucky, and had a better Mickey Mouse experience than those whose flights made it back on schedule on Wednesday - particularly the 150,000 who flew into London's airports. At the leading gateway, Heathrow, the Underground strike was compounded by separate industrial action which led to more than half the Express Rail Link trains being cancelled. Welcome to Britain.
Worse was to come. Had BA been able to fix that problem just before the pilots went "out of hours", the flight would have landed at Gatwick on Wednesday afternoon, leaving passengers at the end of a queue longer than the line for Disney's Mission: Space.
An unspecified IT fault meant that passport readers and "e-gates" stopped working. Manual processing led to "longer queues for some passengers" according to the Immigration and Security minister, James Brokenshire. For passengers at Gatwick, Heathrow and many other airports, that translated as "mayhem". As airport rage rippled through the queues and scuffles reportedly broke out at Luton and Gatwick, Mr Brokenshire insisted: "Security must remain our priority at all times." What he meant was: the illusion of security must be maintained at all costs.
QUEUE TIPS Despite our weather and unreliable transport, Britain is attractive to villains - from human-traffickers to terrorists - and the UK's frontiers, like those of every other nation, are leaky. So officials plod dutifully on, manually entering the passport details of returning holidaymakers who they know pose no threat and are merely tired, grumpy and keen to get home.
Talking of which: while queuejumping is never to be condoned, on Monday night my Ryanair flight touched down at Stansted behind schedule and we all found ourselves in the last dismal wave of arrivals at the end of the passport queue. So I hopped over a barrier to join a much shorter queue to my left - the queue for non-Europeans, as it turned out.
If you have never joined this thirdclass queue (after flight crew, first, and Europeans, second), here's how it goes. Ahead stands a row of desks with officers deciding if each traveller has the right to proceed. Behind them, Border Force officials scan the queue; profiling passengers using their eyes, training and experience to assess those whose behaviour suggests they require closer investigation.
Conversely, most travellers deserve to be investigated less closely. That was the purpose of the UK's "Smart-Zone" trials in 2011. The Advance Passenger Information (API) that we must all submit was scrutinised while the plane was in the air. Some shortand long-haul flights with a high proportion of British passengers were given the lightest of touches: an officer looked at a passenger and their passport photo, and waved them through - just like the olden days. The average time to process a European flight fell from 18 minutes to eight, freeing Border Force staff to focus on real risks. "Our intention," said the man behind it, Brodie Clark, "is to help low-threat people through quickly, safely and comfortably. Those who do intend harm are sifted out."
NO END OF THE LINE Soon afterwards, Mr Clark resigned as UK Border Force chief after an almighty row with the Home Secretary over the tactical relaxation of controls.
Since then, Border Force officers have had to revert to a box-ticking culture that does no favours to travellers returning to, or visiting, Britain. Standing in absurdly long lines is, it seems, the price we must pay for the freedom to explore the world.
Document IIND000020140503ea530003u
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:24
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
