{"newspaper":"i","id:"954"}
____
News
@ Your View
1,093 words
20 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
14
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | TEXTS, TWEETS AND EMAILS
Drag MPs into the real world I agree with Ian Birrell in his assessment of parliamentary work ethics (19 April). Why do we allow MPs to have a second job? Having other incomes on top of their parliamentary ones means that in any vote concerning personal finance they have a vested interest.
If you don't believe this just look at tax loopholes. Any moral decision would close these tomorrow, but so many MPs, including our Chancellor of the Exchequer, benefit that it never even gets discussed.
All MPs should be banned from other employment and have to attend parliamentary sessions at least 250 days a year. Let's bring our politicians into the real world instead of a subsidised members' club. TOM BAKER GLYN CEIRIOG, WREXHAM MPs will shortly receive a pay rise. Instead they should receive a daily attendance allowance, to be paid only if an MP spends a minimum number of hours in the House. The system used to verify that they were in the House would need to be foolproof, otherwise they would book in and only return in the evening to book out.
They could still wile away their time in the bars and restaurants in the House rather than undergo the bore of attending the chamber, but I cannot think of a way of changing their habits. But they might be encouraged not to take such long holidays. GERRY COWARD HIGH WYCOMBE, BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Ian Birrell's view that MPs don't work hard enough because they are not in Parliament for much of the year is a touch hypocritical. He is being lazy himself: he should at the very least spend some time with MPs researching how exactly they spend their time.
I would rather MPs get out and about understanding properly the concerns of their constituents rather than sitting in Parliament playing with their iPads and then voting as they are told to by the party whips.
RICHARD LOTT CHEPSTOW If we all took the advice of Euan MacAuslan, (letter, 19 May) and voted for a "none of the above" party, who would run the country? Whatever we think of politicians, someone has to run the country, and it has to be someone who is willing to put themselves forward for selection.
When the candidates are selected we need to decide which of them we prefer to represent us in Parliament, one rather than another. If we consider that none of them is suitable then we must be prepared to stand for election ourselves.
If Euan MacAuslan is not prepared to stand then his opinion is not worth considering. HARRY PUNTER YORK The aliens next door In having a grumble at Mark Steel's superb Swiftian send-up of Ukip, Mark Taha insists that "We are an overcrowded country" (letter, 19 May).
But it's not really about numbers, is it? The elephant in the detention centre is colour and ethnicity, isn't it? Otherwise why do we never hear complaints about all the Yanks, Ozzies and Canucks residing in the UK, over 350,000 of them? Oops, the overwhelming majority are white and culturally like "us".
REVD KIM FABRICIUS SWANSEA The reasons given by Mark Taha for his support for Ukip are quite staggering.
He professes to be concerned about wildlife and the environment, yet supports a party which denies climate change.
He says he is opposed to immigration because we are "an overcrowded country in an overcrowded world". It surely hardly needs to be pointed out that immigration makes no difference at all to the total population size of the world.
In practice, it makes little difference to the population size of Britain, as the numbers coming in to Britain are more or less balanced by the number of British people choosing to leave Britain to live abroad. CATHERINE CROSLAND HEBDEN BRIDGE, WEST YORKSHIRE Mark Taha should get out from London more. In parts of East Anglia, Devon, and Scotland he won't see a soul, Romanian or otherwise, unless he thinks sheep have a soul. The answer to world overcrowding is birth control.
As for Ukip it reflects a nasty brand of xenophobia which rears its head periodically in this country. Before Ukip there was the League of Empire Loyalists, and before them the Fascists.
European integration is the future, make no mistake, and I just hope we won't be jeopardising that future by voting in MEPs who are inimical to that institution and who will be operating against the best interests of our children and grandchildren. RAYMOND BERGER EXETER Nigel Farage claims we wouldn't want Romanians as our neighbours, does he? Well our fantastic local vet is Romanian. I know who I'd prefer to have living next door! WENDY BARKER WEST KIRBY, WIRRAL Subsidy for mean bosses I feel that I cannot be the only one who is fed up with paying out benefits to business owners in the form of Working Tax Credits. Every employer who pays a member of his staff below a living wage is being subsidised by taxpayers.
This cannot be right for two reasons. Firstly no employer should be allowed to gain from another's labours to the extent that the employee is unable to provide for themselves. Secondly if an employer is such a poor business person that they have to exploit working people by driving them into penury then one has to query if such a business should be allowed to operate in our free market? The living wage of £7.45 is not excessive and a more progressive taxation regime would easily remedy this draconian state of affairs that our politicians seem quite willing to allow to continue. CHRIS KITCHER ALRESFORD, ESSEX Beyond belief Former Archbishop George Carey is, obviously, correct in pleading that believers should be able to change religions if they so desire without losing their heads. A pity he didn't add that they can give up religion altogether without fear.
To believe that Allah literally dictated the Qu'ran to Mohammed and then to believe that wasn't so and to believe instead that Jesus was the son of God is a big step to take.
Better, I think, to stop believing. The world would be a safer place as a consequence. IAN MACMILLAN CANTERBURY Population conundrum "There are not sufficient houses built in the UK," said Mark Carney.
Too few houses? The real problem is too many people.
FRANK LANE PRESTATYN, DENBYSHIRE MORE COMMENT on independentvoices.com
Document IIND000020140520ea5k00053
