{"newspaper":"i","id:"955"}
____
News
'Labour promises and promises, but never does. All I've got left is Ukip'
By Oliver Wright WHITEHALL EDITOR   
478 words
20 May 2014
i
IIND
1ST
4
English
© 2014 Independent Print Ltd.  All rights reserved   
News | On the campaign trail
The conventional wisdom is simple. When the votes are tallied after this Thursday's local and European elections, the result will broadly be this: Tory voters desert in droves to Ukip, the Liberal Democrats are annihilated across large swathes of the country while Labour do spectacularly poorly - almost by default. Typical of this trend should be Southampton. Run by Labour for the past two years, it has two sitting Labour MPs fighting an election in wards where the LibDem vote has collapsed.
Conventional wisdom should see Ed Miliband's party clean up. But that's not how it feels on the ground. Take Ted and Margaret Harmer. The retired couple have previously supported Labour - but not this time. They'll be voting Ukip. "The country is full up with everybody coming in," says Mr Harmer. "It's not England any more. I've voted Labour in the past, but they promise and promise and never do. All I've got left is Ukip." His wife, Margaret, will also vote Ukip. She's upset because she doesn't get a full pension because she took time off work to look after her children - while immigrants can claim benefits. "It's not right," she adds.
Sarah Everitt's complaint is the 14 foreign children in her daughter's class - some of whom have difficulty with English.
"The teachers spend more time with these children than the rest," she says. "And they get housing straight away unlike the rest of us." Both Ms Everitt and the Harmers should be solid Labour supporters - or at the very worst not vote at all. But, instead, they typify a problem that some Labour strategists are increasingly concerned about - that Ukip may take almost as many working-class votes from Labour in some parts of the country this Thursday as they pick from the Conservatives.
In Southampton, the party is particularly concerned about holding on to council seats in Woolston and Bitterne - traditional strongholds in the city. And certainly an hour on Bitterne high street suggests this is not expectation management. Voter after voter talks up Ukip while is hard to find anyone with much enthusiasm for Labour.
This strength of feeling is not just anecdotal. A survey yesterday for a local paper found Ukip support at 21 per cent in Southampton - compared to 25 per cent for Labour and 19 per cent for the Conservatives. At the last general election Ukip polled just 4.3 per cent.
But what about the immigrants themselves? On the same high street as the others are Jurgita and Tarsem Singh - originally from Lithuania and India. And will they be voting? Yes, they will, they say, "with pride" before adding: "But not for them."
Document IIND000020140520ea5k0002e
