{"newspaper":"Independent Online","id:"2525"}
____
  
matrix
The News Matrix: Thursday 6 March 2014
713 words
6 March 2014
00:01
Independent Online
INDOP
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
Captain Phillips star is 'broke'
Despite receiving an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor, Captain Phillips star Barkhad Abdi is struggling to make ends meet, according to a report. A profile of the actor in the New Yorker claims that Abdi made just $65,000 (£39,000) for his supporting role as Abduwali Muse, the real-life Somali pirate. MORE
Cable to hail free EU movement in speech
Liberal Democrat Business Secretary Vince Cable is set to anger his Tory Coalition colleagues today as he hails free movement in the European Union and attacks immigration "scare stories". He will tell an audience at the Mansion House the economy will be held back if the UK is seen as "closed for business".
Female graduates face bullying at work
Bullying and discrimination are the greatest career challenges faced by graduates of an all-female Cambridge college. Alumnae of Murray Edwards college said gender inequality, non-supportive managers, bullying and undervalued work were the most troubling. MORE
'Stop eating shark butties' campaign
Conservationists have launched a shark-saving campaign in Trinidad & Tobago, trying to stop people from eating a popular delicacy: deep-fried shark sandwiches. The local Papa Bois Conservation group is now pushing for a ban on catching the marine predators to help protect a dwindling population.
WHO backtracks on safe sugar guidance
The World Health Organisation has fudged a decision over its guidelines on how much sugar people should consume. It was widely expected to halve the recommended sugar intake in new draft guidance, but instead Wednesday said it would continue to advise that sugar make up no more than 10 per cent of the energy we consume – or about 50g daily. MORE
Secret recordings embarrass Sarkozy
Recordings by Nicolas Sarkozy's campaign adviser have thrown the ex-president's UMP party into disarray before local elections. Sarkozy can be heard discussing his image before the 2012 presidential election. MORE
'Rev' to take rest after third series
Tom Hollander is taking a break from filming any more episodes of hit comedy Rev. The 46-year-old star and co-creator of the BBC2 programme said the series, also starring Olivia Colman, will end "for the time being" after the third series is screened this spring. The actor says he does not want to see a drop in quality.
Pistorius 'asked friend to take blame'
Oscar Pistorius told a friend to take the blame for him accidentally firing a pistol under the table in a packed Johannesburg restaurant in 2013,his murder trial heard on Wednesday. The charge of firing a gun in a public place is part of prosecution attempts to portray him as a firearms-obsessed hothead. MORE
Hastings pier to be rebuilt for £13m
Work has begun repairing the fire-ravaged Victorian pier in Hastings, which it is hoped will reopen next spring, at a cost of more than £13 million. Forty-five miles of decking, made from sustainably sourced African wood, will be laid, using 4,000 screws, before the old ballroom at the end of the pier is dismantled.
Street clashes as poll date announced
Street clashes erupted after an announcement parliamentary elections will start on 7 April, in a race that pits the Hindu nationalist Narendra Modi against the unpopular ruling Congress party. 814 million people have registered to vote, a world record.
Sylvia Plath daughter training as counsellor
Frieda Hughes, the poet, painter and daughter of Ted Hughes and Sylvia Plath, is training to be a therapist and a bereavement counsellor. At The Independent Bath Literature Festival yesterday, Hughes, 53, said she wanted to draw on her "eclectic rollercoaster ride of a life" to help others. MORE
Councillor rebuked over anti-gay remark
A Ukip councillor has been rebuked by the party's chairman after she said business owners should be able to refuse service to women and gay people. Donna Edmunds, a Lewes district councillor, has apologised after posting the comments on an internet forum.
Arab states recall envoys from Qatar
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain recalled their ambassadors from Qatar, in a move which analysts say centres on their neighbour's support for the Muslim Brotherhood and its perceived aggressive meddling in regional conflicts.
Document INDOP00020140306ea36000xr
