{"newspaper":"Independent Online","id:"2781"}
____
  
Frontpage
David Cameron's migration pledge 'in tatters', as figures reveal net immigration of 200,000; Figure up by 58,000 on the previous year
Nigel Morris   
537 words
27 February 2014
12:44
Independent Online
INDOP
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
Net annual immigration to Britain leaped to more than 200,000, dealing a severe blow to David Cameron’s promise to cut it to “tens of thousands" by the time of next year’s general election.
Downing Street today insisted the Prime Minister remained committed to the target. His official spokesman said: “That is absolutely the objective and we’re going to keep working towards that."
Figures from the Office for National Statistics showed net migration – the difference between the number of people arriving and those leaving – stood at 212,000 in the year to the end of September 2013, a jump of 58,000 on the previous 12 months.
The sharp rise was largely caused by a surge of new arrivals from countries in the south of the European Union, such as Spain, Portugal and Italy, and from Poland.
There was also an increase in numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians coming to Britain, even though the figures cover a period before people from the two countries gained full rights to work in this country.
Levels of immigration from the EU countries are at the highest level since 1964.
However, immigration of non-EU citizens saw a marked decrease to 244,000 in the period, down from 269,000 the previous year.
Statisticians said this was due to fewer New Commonwealth citizens, such as those from India, migrating to the UK for formal study.
The drop in non-EU citizens is likely to fuel fears that Britain is being perceived as “closed for business" by foreign students who are seen by many as valuable to the UK economy.
James Brokenshire, the Immigration minister, said: “Numbers are down across the board in areas where we can control immigration, but arrivals from the EU have doubled in the last year.
“We cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants, so we are focusing on cutting out the abuse of free movement between EU member states and seeking to address the factors that drive European immigration to Britain."
Experts at the Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford said the figures suggest it is now “extremely unlikely" the Government will hit its migration target.
Scott Blinder, its director, said: “This is clearly challenging news for the Government. The key changes in this report are to EU migration - an area over which immigration policy has less direct influence.
“This highlights the fact that the net migration target is not something that can be delivered purely through policy, but relies on other trends as well."
Yvette Cooper, the shadow Home Secretary, said the migration target championed by the Prime Minister and Theresa May, the Home Secretary, was “in tatters".
She said: “David Cameron promised, ‘no ifs, no buts’ to cut net migration to the tens of thousands, yet these figures show net migration has gone up and is now more than twice that figure.
“Only five months ago, Theresa May said that the Government had been 'so successful' they should 'get out there and shout about it.' There will be no shouting from ministers today."
Document INDOP00020140227ea2r003uz
