{"newspaper":"Independent Online","id:"2584"}
____
  
News
Katie Hopkins joins Jim Davidson and Liz Jones for Channel 5's Big Debt Debate; Hour-long debate promises to be a 'vociferous and volatile live event'
Daisy Wyatt   
318 words
17 March 2014
14:22
Independent Online
INDOP
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
Katie Hopkins has been drafted in by Channel 5 to deliver yet more rent-a-gob comments on another ‘Live Debate’, this time about debt.
“The Big ‘Can’t Pay’ Debt Debate: Live", which airs tonight, follows the channel’s Big Benefits Row: Live and Immigration Row: Live, commissioned in the wake of Channel 4’s controversial show Benefits Street.
Hopkins will be joined by a panel of celebrities who have faced financial difficult themselves.
Fresh from their appearance on Channel 5’s Celebrity Big Brother, Jim Davidson and Liz Jones will be among the celebrity panel, which includes Eddie ‘The Eagle’ Edwards and Lee Hendrie.
Davidson was previously declared bankrupt, while Jones often writes about her difficulty with money in her Daily Mail columns, despite reportedly earning £500,000 a year.
Olympic legend ‘The Eagle’ has also previously struggled with debt in the past, while former Premiere League footballer Hendrie faced bankruptcy which led to a suicide attempt.
Hopkins, meanwhile, has no claims to past financial difficulty, but will be on board to pass scorn and judgement on the swathes of Britons who find themselves in debt.
Katie Hopkins' most offensive moments
Hosted by right-of-centre broadcaster Nick Ferrari, the line-up will also include head of the British Bankers Association Anthony Browne, journalist Rosie Millard and Labour MP Paul Blomfield.
The debate promises to be a “vociferous, volatile live event", focussing on the reasons behind the average £54,000 debt that British households find themselves in.
Is it down to the credit card companies and banks which encourage the nation to spend? Or is it the fault of people who get themselves into debt?
There’s no doubting which side Katie Hopkins will be on.
Document INDOP00020140317ea3h00363
