{"newspaper":"liverpoolecho.co.uk","id:"3687"}
____
News
Morning news headlines for Thursday - 'Debris found' in yacht search, main parties braced for UKIP effect
By liverpoolecho Administrator   
1,003 words
22 May 2014
11:17
liverpoolecho.co.uk
LIVEONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
The latest news from around the globe
’DEBRIS FOUND’ IN YACHT SEARCH
Debris has reportedly been found in the Atlantic Ocean in the area where UK yacht the Cheeki Rafiki went missing with four men on board.
The captain of a charter yacht taking part in the search told the BBC that details of what was spotted were passed on to the US Coast Guard.
The 40ft Cheeki Rafiki was sailing back to the UK from an Antigua regatta when it got into trouble and started taking on water 620 miles east of Cape Cod last Thursday.
MAIN PARTIES BRACED FOR UKIP EFFECT
Labour, the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats will await the impact of the Ukip effect as voters go to the polls today following a campaign dominated by Nigel Farage’s Eurosceptics.
The booths will open throughout the UK at 7am for the European Parliament contest to return 73 Euro MPs, while more than 4,000 council seats at 161 English local authorities and those in Northern Ireland are also up for election.
Party chiefs and pundits will scan the results closely as they attempt to assess if the UK Independence Party is developing into a long-lasting force that will sway who holds power at Westminster after next year’s general election - or if people can be tempted back after making a protest vote this year.
RIGBY MOTHER: I WILL NEVER FORGIVE
The mother of murdered soldier Lee Rigby has said she will never forgive the two Islamist fanatics who killed him.
Fusilier Rigby’s murder sparked shock across the country after he was run over with a car and then hacked to death by British Muslim converts Michael Adebolajo and Michael Adebowale in Woolwich, south-east London, on May 22 last year.
Speaking a year after her 25-year-old son’s death, Lyn Rigby told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: “I will never forgive them for what they did to Lee. Never.”
UK SEEKS TO CALM CHARLES-PUTIN ROW
The UK will seek to head off a diplomatic row over the Prince of Wales’s comparison of Russian president Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler in talks with a senior Moscow diplomat.
Russia’s deputy ambassador is expected to meet a senior Foreign Office official to discuss the reported comments on the Ukraine crisis made during a private conversation with a member of the public during a royal tour of Canada.
Charles’s remark came during a tour of the Museum of Immigration in Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he and the Duchess of Cornwall paid tribute to Second World War veterans and their families.
PARCELS BOOST ROYAL MAIL PROFITS
Royal Mail has announced a rise in annual profits after revenues growth from parcel deliveries more than offset a further decline in letter volumes.
In its first set of results since its controversial £3.3 billion stock market flotation in October, the company said operating profits after transformation costs were £430 million in the year to March 30, against £403 million a year earlier.
It said its letters performance was at the better end of expectations, with revenues down 2% to £4.6 billion on a year earlier.
SUICIDE BOMB CARNAGE IN CHINA CITY
Attackers crashed a pair of vehicles and hurled explosives in a suicide attack on a busy street market in the capital of China’s volatile north-western region of Xinjiang, leaving dozens dead and injured.
The official Xinhua News Agency said 31 people were killed and more than 90 injured in the early-morning attack on the open-air market in the the city of Urumqi.
The death toll makes the latest attack the bloodiest in a series of violent incidents blamed on radical separatist Muslims.
WOMAN FOUND DECADE AFTER KIDNAPPING
A woman who was 15 when she disappeared from her home 10 years ago has been reunited with her family after telling police she was kidnapped by her mother’s ex-boyfriend who sexually assaulted her, forced her to marry him and fathered her child.
Police in Santa Ana, California, arrested Isidro Garcia, 41, of Bell Gardens, on suspicion of kidnapping for rape, lewd acts with a minor and false imprisonment.
Police described a decade during which the victim - abused mentally, physically and sexually by her captor - was moved at least four times and given multiple fake identities to hide her from family and authorities.
MARINE MURDER APPEAL RULING DUE
A Royal Marine found guilty of murdering an injured Afghan fighter will find out today if he has won his battle to overturn his conviction.
The decision on the challenge by Sergeant Alexander Blackman will be announced by Lord Chief Justice Lord Thomas, Sir Brian Leveson and Lady Justice Hallett at the Court Martial Appeal Court in London.
After being convicted last November at a court martial in Bulford, Wiltshire, the 39-year-old was sentenced to life with a minimum term of 10 years before he becomes eligible to apply for parole.
MAN IN COURT OVER FARAGE EGG ATTACK
A man is to appear in court today charged with common assault after UK Independence Party leader Nigel Farage was struck by an egg during a campaign visit.
Frederick Glenister, 33, will appear before magistrates in Nottingham in connection with the incident on May 1.
Mr Farage was egged as he arrived in the city to rally support in the East Midlands for Ukip candidates in the European elections.
HOSPITALS ’CHUCK OUT’ 400 A NIGHT
Hundreds of thousands of patients are being sent home from hospital in the middle of the night, despite a promise to cut down on the practice.
More than 300,000 people have been discharged from hospitals between 11pm and 6am since 2012, an average of 400 a night.
Many of them are elderly, giving rise to concerns that vulnerable people may be unsafe or struggle to get home at unsociable hours.
Document LIVEONL020140522ea5m000um
