{"newspaper":"Liverpool Echo","id:"2110"}
____
  
News
A few more for you to sort out here, Mr Farage?
JOSHUA TAYLOR   
676 words
18 May 2014
Liverpool Echo
LIVECH
1; National
5
English
(c) The Liverpool Daily Post & Echo Ltd, 2014.   
4 city UKIP election candidates probed over Facebook posts EXCLUSIVE
A WANNABE UK Independence Party (UKIP) councillor called for Russian militia to be shipped into Britain to "clean up our city centres".
Austin Lucas, who hopes to become a councillor for Cressington in this Thursday's local elections, also heaped praise on Russian president Vladimir Putin, saying: "At least he loves his country."
Mr Lucas's comments are among a series of bizarre statements made on Facebook by UKIP council candidates in Liverpool.
Enid Lindsay, who is standing in Fazakerley, called voters "idiots", while Clubmoor's Paul Forrest claimed "racism is a natural outcome of evolution" and said the Catholic church is "far more dangerous" than the Ku Klux Klan (KKK).
Meanwhile John Halvorsen, a candidate in Everton, lists the Liverpool division of the far-right English Defence League among his "likes" on Facebook. He is also a member of an online group called "Was Enoch Powell Right?".
These Facebook posts were brought to the attention of the Sunday ECHO by ex-UKIP member turned anti-extremism campaigner Colin Cortbus. Mr Lucas wrote on the social networking site in February: "Can we please import some Cossacks to clean up our city centres - say what you will about Vlad Putin, at least he loves his country."
In March he re-published a comment by Mr Forrest that warned of pro-abortion "feminist witches who consider children to be nothing more than pets or fashion accessories". Mr Lucas went on to say Green MP Caroline Lucas is "probably a witch". Meanwhile, in December last year just before border controls between Britain, Romania and Bulgaria were relaxed, Ms Lindsay wrote on Facebook: "What kind of idiots have the British electorate become? "We are faced with a tidal wave of new immigrants from the European Union in less than one week and the public seem to have accepted that there is nothing they can do about it."
She added: "The present British population should be ashamed of themselves."
Mr Forrest, meanwhile, said on Facebook in 2012 that "evolution and racism go hand in hand", before posting a link to an article about biology and eugenics. He went on to say "racism is a natural outcome of evolution, not a misunderstanding of it".
He added: "Genocidal racists are being true to evolution far more than those people who want Darwinism but without its social consequences."
In a separate online debate in 2012, he wrote: "Please stop saying Roman Catholics are part of the Christian church. They've killed more Christians throughout history than all others put together."
He later added: "As imposters go, the Church of Rome is far more dangerous than the KKK." During the same discussion he also laid into Islam, saying its claim to be a "religion of peace" was "downright misinfor mation". The four candidates were invited to speak to the Sunday ECHO about their online activities, but all either declined or failed to respond to our requests for a comment. The Sunday ECHO also visited Mr Lucas's home address - as stated on the election nomination form - but we were told he no longer lived there.
UKIP boss set to investigate THE chairman of the UK Independence Party (UKIP) in Liverpool has vowed to investigate following today's revelations. In a statement, Neil Miney told us: "Whilst some candidates may have expressed unguarded comments, these do not represent party policy or, necessarily, their full opinion in context.
We shall investigate all the allegations and, if appropriate, take action."
The Sunday ECHO's report today will be the latest in a long line of headaches for UKIP leader Nigel Farage, caused by potentially offensive comments made by party members. Mr Miney added: "UKIP is a non-racist, non-sectarian political party.
In Liverpool branch, we welcome people from all backgrounds if they agree with our core values of democracy and free speech. "We believe in freedom, even when this can sometimes be awkward."
Document LIVECH0020140518ea5i0003y
