{"newspaper":"liverpoolecho.co.uk","id:"1006"}
____
News
Merseyside voters go to polls to decide who will represent them in EU elections
By Marc Waddington   
1,416 words
19 May 2014
11:55
liverpoolecho.co.uk
LIVEONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Hopes BNP will lose their Euro seat
MERSEYSIDERS will this week go the polls to decide on who will represent them in Europe for the next five years.
One of the biggest shocks of the 2009 polls was that British National Party leader Nick Griffin won a seat, meaning the North West was the only part of the country represented in Europe by the extremist party.
This year, the main political parties – as well as Ukip, the Greens and the N02EU party – will hope to be able to unseat Mr Griffin and end his five years of extremist representation of the region in the corridors of power in Brussels.
But some argue the proliferation of parties on offer to the voters and the anti-Europe rhetoric of Ukip and the equally anti-European Parliament position of the No2EU Party could see Mr Griffin hold on to his seat.
Unlike a normal, first past the post election, the EU elections are run on a system of proportional representation, which means that the parties put forward candidate lists and how many votes they get will dictate how many of their candidates will win a seat in the European Parliament.
Last time, the Conservatives came in top with three, Labour two, the Liberal Democrats one, with Ukip and the BNP both winning one each as well.
Some, like Merseyside anti-fascist campaigner Alec McFadden, who stood in the last European elections for the No2EU Party, say they believe if too many anti- European options are available to the voters, it will mean the BNP will hold its seat.
Mr McFadden has decided to support the Greens, hoping they will win the eighth seat ahead of the BNP.
But No2EU rejects the claim it is taking votes the Greens would otherwise get – saying the middle class Green vote is not the same as its working class bedrock of support.
But only on Sunday, after all the votes are counted, will it become clear whether the North West faces the five more years of being represented in Europe by the far right.
Theresa Griffin, Labour
“I was involved in economic development in Europe in the 1990s, so I was part of the team that brought in up to £1bn funding into Liverpool.
“I saw at that point that places like Liverpool were being left to rot by the Tory government, and that regeneration we were able to bring in has been very important.
“That investment has put jobs and growth into the city.“
We will make sure we get young people into jobs.“The role is also about promoting Liverpool internationally, and what’s great about Liverpool is that it’s been transformed.
“It’s my hometown but it’s also an international city.
“The role for me is also about promoting business and manufacturing.
“But as well as promoting the city internationally, I want to work locally.
“I will work with Labour leaders across the North West and Merseyside for jobs and growth. I would not have knocked on 10,000 doors in Merseyside as part of this campaign unless I wanted to work locally with the people of Merseyside.”
Paul Nuttall, UKIP
“WE WILL definitely return two MEPs and if the campaign continues the way it is going we will get more re-elected.
“The latest research shows we are the most working class political party in Britain and the most likely to be blue collar of any of the parties.
“We want to control our own borders with a points-based system like Australia.
“This country was let down so badly by Labour’s immigration policies and the Coalition government has done nothing to improve matters.
"They promised they would bring net immigration down to the tens of thousands but the reality is they have overseen this massive increase in numbers arriving on our shores.
“And we don’t want 70% of our laws being made by the EU.
“We want out of the EU but still fight to win seats, and it’s exactly like the Scottish National Party in Westminster.
“They take up their seats, like we do because you bring the thing down from the inside.”
Chris Davies, Liberal Democrat
“FOR 15 years I’ve been the Liberal Democrats’ environment spokesman.
“My actions have helped raise air quality, promote recycling, make chemicals safer, ensure that new cars use less fuel, and reduce CO2 emissions to tackle climate change. 
"By campaigning to reform the Common Fisheries Policy I’ve done my bit to keep fish in the chip shops.
“My goal for the next five years is quite specific. 
"I will take a lead in building a partnership with industry than can help create jobs and improve the environment. 
"Our world is finite, but companies like Unilever in Port Sunlight have a global vision for a sustainable future.
“Car manufacturers in Halewood and Ellesmere Port are showing how to get more out of less.  We need to build an economy that is both low carbon and vigorously competitive.  We need to show the rest of the world how to do it.”
Jaqueline Foster, Conservative
“THE Conservatives have really got the economy back on track over the last five years, and if you haven’t got the economy on track you can’t do anything for anybody.
“If you look at Liverpool, we’ve signed off on funding for the Mersey Gateway, the new Royal Hospital and are putting funding into job creation.“
And there have been a couple of Ministry of Defence projects going to Cammell Laird, and we’ve been able to do that because people have that security now.
“In Europe I specialise in aviation and maritime industries, but also work on the defence sector.
“It’s hard to make people see [what MEPs do locally], but if you look at the cruise  liner terminal, for example, this was part UK and European money. I remember talking to the Chamber of Commerce once and they were saying it couldn’t be expand because of the state aid issue.
“It was basically going to cost something like £17m so I approached (transport minister) Phillip Hammond and said I don’t believe there’s an issue.
"But no-one knows I had anything to do with sorting that out because we don’t have councillors in Liverpool. While I don’t have the representation, there, I do represent Liverpool.
Peter Cranie, Green Party
“CONCERN about High Speed 2 is a main one, because there’s a big chunk of the North West saying why are we spending this money, what’s the benefit to us?
“Fracking is also an issue, as so much of the North West.
“And it’s very distinctive for us because all the other parties are all for it.
“Also, we believe we are an antidote to all the immigration rhetoric coming out of Ukip.
“The campaign was hard for us as we weren’t getting any coverage due to Ofcom (awarding Ukip main party status both not the Green Party).
“But our social media campaigning is way ahead of everyone else’s.
“And although we are excluded in the mainstream media we have been ahead of the Lib Dems in the North for quite a while now.
“It’s a fairly good indication that we are going to be the fourth biggest party."
Roger Bannister NO2EU
“A VOTE for No2EU is a rejection of the  EU in that that’s what’s best for working people.
“The fact is that the EU is primarily big business friendly and responsible for continuing attacks on workers’ rights and living standards through the austerity measures imposed on Portugal, Ireland, Spain and Greece.
“If Ukip get seats it will be because of dissatisfaction with the two main parties.
“From our point of view the Labour Party’s policies are hardly distinctive from the other two main parties.
“Ukip support is about the failure of domestic parties and their nationalistic and xenophobic, Little Englander front hides very right wing policies.
“They were formed by people who believed Margaret Thatcher was too left wing.
“And the Green vote does not come in from traditional working class voters.
“I was at the count last time, in 2009, and the Green vote tended to come from the leafy suburbs around the North West rather than the true, working class urban areas.”
Document LIVEONL020140519ea5j000ul
