{"newspaper":"Liverpool Echo","id:"3738"}
____
  
Features
The Phina Oruche diary
454 words
21 May 2014
Liverpool Echo
LIVECH
1; National
24
English
(c) The Liverpool Daily Post & Echo Ltd, 2014.   
WELL-behaved women rarely make history. The lengths the Suffragettes under Emmeline Pankhurst with her daughter went to in order to get the vote. They chained themselves to railings, burned mail boxes, and set off bombs, when they were jailed they went on hunger strikes. All while wearing floor-length gowns!
Emily Davidson died under the king's horse at the Epsom Derby.
The first vote for women was in New Zealand and when our vote came through it was initially for women aged over 30 or who owned property. In Wyoming, USA, women got to vote as early as 1869, though the American suffragettes managed to intermingle their message with white supremacy - their efforts coincided with the abolition of slavery so racial tension was high.
Racial tensions rise as soon as people have no jobs and there's a lack of housing.
This week I have had flyers from political parties all wanting my vote. The Conservatives with their cobbled together coalition made me say I never want to vote again… but then I remembered the suffragettes.
Two of the political parties in particular I see as Klansman who seek to spread racial hatred. They claim they will strengthen our borders against the immigration flood that is swamping the land.
They would spend foreign aid on local services, house locals first.
I wonder if they mean me should I have the need for housing, which fortunately I don't. It's doubtful though as I was born and raised in Liverpool. But I can't help thinking that these people are not talking about those with any more complex racial history than Saxon.
I was taken to task by one of the elders of my community when I was misquoted as saying that Nick Griffin was the top of my guest list for my talk show. He isn't, but I do want to know "what makes these people tick," Oprah said she thought that she was exposing the white supremacists by having them on her show, but she realised later that she had given them free publicity and it irked her.
Don't operate out of fear or fatigue do a little work and cast your ballot. Google each candidate and find out what they really stand for.
. ? THIS weekend I was in Sefton Park hosting a party for my son's sixth birthday.
The weather was perfect and there were 25 kids, and as I looked up I saw a sea of multicultural faces. All playing football, all sharing, all getting along easily, with not a cross word amongst them. Child's play right? We need to take a lesson from our kids.
God bless you!
Document LIVECH0020140521ea5l0000u
