{"newspaper":"liverpoolecho.co.uk","id:"3763"}
____
News
Joe Riley: Onward militant atheists, marching as to bore
By Joe Riley   
563 words
28 April 2014
12:49
liverpoolecho.co.uk
LIVEONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
"We are still living in some kind of Christian country, albeit surrounded by millions of non-believers"
Last year I attended the  funeral of a long-standing colleague and friend, at which another retired colleague, a once professed atheist,  sitting next to me, sang mightily through every verse of ther hymn, For All the Saints.
Last week, however, it was his turn to join the choir eternal.
Had he experienced a late conversion? Definitely not, said his widow, despite the local vicar giving a eulogy.
What further proof is needed, that, as Superspoon Cameron insists, we are still living in some kind of Christian country, albeit surrounded by millions of non-believers.
Even former home secretary Jack Straw, himself a Jew,  has told British Muslims that they must accept that Britain is built on Christian values.
That's certainly true historically and socially.
Folk may be forsaking congregations in droves, except at cathedrals, where most go for the music, not the prayers or preaching.
But what trendy so-called intellectual atheists, of the type who wrote in protest at David Cameron's comments, too readily forget to consider is the purpose, rather than the facts of life.
Their existence is all statistics and no spirituality. Anything they can't experience or see is false until proven (so much for x-rays, electricity etc).
The church, as an institution, is faltering: abusing priests, dodgy financiers and gay marriage have all conspired to make religion less public.
But most people still believe in “something.”
Liverpool's new Roman Catholic archbishop is installed on Thursday. The announcement on a new Anglican bishop is expected next month.
Tough jobs. They'll need more than The Force to be with them.
Behold, not so much a new heaven, but definitely a new earth.
A planet with lakes, rivers and oceans and an atmosphere.
Kepler-186f – not a very sexy name – is 2,939 trillion miles away. The light we are seeing is from the reign of Henry V111.
Trouble is, given that lots of the Bible events are clearly extra-terrestrial, we have problems even with scientific concepts.
We assume water is necessary for life. We cannot yet master time travel. But we have, metaphorically,  already stuck our heads between our legs and collectively  whistled up our Barcelonas.
As if it isn't preposterous enough that the government is grabbing green belt for homes, not least to accommodate an out of control immigration, communities secretary Eric-in-a-Pickles is  now selling off allotments, despite a massive shortage.
And when the answer for compensation does lie in the soil, it is often of inferior quality.
Allotments, like gardens, are in the British blood. Part of the inherent desire for self-sufficiency.
Pickles needs to redevelop all existing brownfield sites before making compost of government promises to protect plots.
Royal Mail operations director Geoff Brandon has used his workers to deliver propaganda junk mail claiming its service to be far superior to that of rivals TNT Post, who presently only operate in London, Manchester and Liverpool, but hope to cover 40% of British homes and businesses by 2017.
He'll be delighted at reports of TNT's late deliveries and alleged dumping of mail.
TNT has blamed “human nature” for the lapses.
How about poor management?
Document LIVEONL020140428ea4s0015p
