{"newspaper":"liverpoolecho.co.uk","id:"2733"}
____
What's On
Review: A View From The Bridge, Liverpool Playhouse
By Catherine Jones   
366 words
2 April 2014
01:22
liverpoolecho.co.uk
LIVEONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
A powerful journey into New York's immigrant community
A Greek tragedy suffused with Italian passion, and all simmering with conflicted feelings of desire (personal) and betrayal (political) straight from its author.
Arthur Miller’s 1954 New York fable A View From the Bridge – written during the tail end of the McCarthy witch-hunts and as he began to fall in love with Marilyn Monroe, is one of the heavyweights of 20th century American theatre.
And here it’s given a vigorous workout in a city which knows a thing or two about immigration and close-knit waterfront communities.
There are already tensions in the humble home Brooklyn longshoreman Eddie Carbone shares with his fraying wife Beatrice (Julia Ford) and nubile young niece Catherine (Shannon Tarbet) when Beatrice’s impoverished cousins Marco and Rodolpho turn up illicitly from Sicily to make their illegal fortunes in the New World.
While Daniel Coonan’s Marco is a solid and stoic family man of few words, his brother Rodolpho (Andy Apollo) is buoyant and flamboyant, and sets out to win Catherine’s heart, to the dismay of Eddie whose ‘fatherly’ concern becomes increasingly opaque.
And then devastatingly clear.
Fear, jealousy, envy, powerlessness – actor Lloyd Hutchinson gives a masterful and utterly believable performance as the story’s tragic fulcrum, increasingly impotent with rage and visible internal conflict as the two young people fall artlessly in love.
The tension is beautifully and skilfully built as we witness his docker convincing himself minute by minute of his own righteousness until a sort-of madness, fuelled by what Bruce Alexander’s voice-of-reason narrator/lawyer Alfieri describes as a “passion moving into his body”, takes over.
The performance is so strong it could be overwhelming, but it’s nicely balanced by the other characters, particularly Tarbet’s girlish ingenue on the cusp of womanhood.
While there’s a certain lack of sexual frisson between Catherine and her Italian suitor, and some of the accents – both American and Italian – are of variable authenticity, its not enough to detract from the powerful storytelling from director Charlotte Gwinner and her cast.
Document LIVEONL020140401ea42003h1
