{"newspaper":"Liverpool Echo","id:"2946"}
____
  
Features
KEY FIGURES AND WHO THEY ARE
1,987 words
31 March 2014
Liverpool Echo
LIVECH
1; National
4,5
English
(c) The Liverpool Daily Post & Echo Ltd, 2014.   
THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS
Christina Lambert QC - Counsel to the inquests Coroner Lord Justice Goldring appointed counsel to the inquests because of the complexity of the case. Christina Lambert leads the team of five barristers.
She was called to the bar in 1988 and became a QC in 2009.
She specialises in clinical negligence and professional regulation law.
She was leading counsel in the Dame Janet Smith Review - launched in 2012 by the BBC - to establish the cultures and practices while Jimmy Savile worked there. The publication of the review has been postponed until the middle of this year when criminal proceedings against Stuart Hall are concluded.
The other counsel to the inquests include Jon Hough, Matthew Hill, Paul Reynolds, Anthony Jones.
Michael Mansfield QC - Hillsborough Family Suppor t Group Self described "radical lawyer" Michael Mansfield has worked on the inquests of Mark Duggan, Charles de Menezes, Princess Diana and Dodi Al Fayed and Stephen Lawrence.
He also represented the Lawrence family at the judicial public inquiry into matters arising from the teenager's death.
He defended three miners in the Battle of Orgreave - a confrontation between miners and police in South Yorkshire in 1984.
He was called to the bar in 1967 and became a Queen's Counsel in 1989.
He is president of the Haldane Society of Socialist Lawyers and a professor of law at City University.
The dad-of-six is also a patron of animal welfare organisation Vegetarians International Voice for Animals (Viva!).
The Hillsborough Family Support Group is also represented by Jo Delahunty QC, Judy Khan QC, Leslie Thomas, Nick Brown, Patrick Roche, Chris Williams, Rajiv Menon QC, Sean Horsted and Marcia Willis Stewart.
Pete Weatherby - Hillsborough Justice Campaign Human rights lawyer Pete Weatherby represented Liverpool fan Michael Shields, who was wrongly convicted of murder in Bulgaria and in 2009 became the only person ever to receive a UK pardon in respect of a foreign conviction.
Mr Weatherby specialises in international human rights, international and EU law including extradition, cases involving miscarriages of justice and protest cases.
He represented the family of 15-year-old Jessie James, who was shot dead in a Manchester park, at his inquest.
Also on the legal team are Mark George QC, Kate Stone, Henrietta Hill, Andy Fitzpatrick, Elkan Abrahamson, Anna Williams, Sean Mc-Cann, Adam Shawcross and Anthony Higham.
Heather Williams QC - The family of John McBrien Heather Williams, who was called to the bar in 1985, specialises in civil liberties and human rights cases.
She is particularly known for her actions against police and is co-author of textbook Police Misconduct: Legal Remedies.
She also has extensive experience in discrimination cases and represented TV presenter Miriam O'Reilly in her successful age discrimination claim against the BBC. Caolfhionn Gallagher and Lawrence Barker also represent the family.
Terry Munyard - the families of Ar thur Horrocks and Patrick Thompson Terry Munyard acts in areas including terrorist cases, public order and political activist cases.
He was instrumental in decriminalising gay relationships in Scotland and Northern Ireland and was one of the first to publish articles on the employment rights of people with HIV and AIDS.
He has worked on many inquests, including representing the family and fashion house of Alexander McQueen in 2010.
Ruth Bundey is also on the legal team.
Andrew O'Connor - IPCC Andrew O'Connor has previously worked on high profile inquests including the 7/7 bombings.
He represented the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) and Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) in the inquest into the death of spy Gareth Williams.
He has represented the IPCC before at the inquest of Ian Tomlinson, who died after he was pushed by police at the G20 protests in London.
The IPCC is also represented by Dominic Adamson and Helen Wood.
Sam Leek QC - Operation Resolve - criminal investigation into Hillsborough Sam Leek QC regularly appears in high profile inquests and public inquiries on behalf of police forces, the Home Office, the Ministry of Defence and other government departments.
She worked on the inquest of Mark Duggan - whose shooting by police prompted riots in 2012 - representing the Serious Organised Crime Agency, which had provided the intelligence on which the surveillance operation was based.
She represented the Metropolitan Police at the inquest into Ian Tomlinson's death after the G20 protests and their firearms unit at the inquest of Jean Charles De Menezes - shot by police after he was mistaken for a bombing suspect.
David Sandiford and Siobhan Mullins also represent the operation.
Fiona Barton QC - South Yorkshire Police Fiona Barton QC practises exclusively in police law and has represented most of the forces in England and Wales.
She represented the City of London Police in inquests into the 7/7 bombings and Cumbria Police at the inquests into the death of Derrick Bird and his shooting victims.
She also acted for the King Edward Vll Hospital in the inquest into the death of the nurse who was victim of a prank call from an Australian radio station concerning the Duchess of Cambridge.
The legal team also includes Matthew Holdcroft and Naomi McMaster.
Paul Greaney QC - Police Federation Paul Greaney QC practises in areas including serious crime, disciplinary proceedings, inquests and police law. He has previously represented the Football Associ-ation in the case against Luis Suarez, after his alleged racial abuse of Manchester United player Patrice Evra, and in proceedings brought against Everton FC after an unauthorised approach to Nottingham Forest player Jamaal Lascelles, where the club was fined £45,000.
Sam Green, Nick Holroyd and Paul Aspinall also represent the federation.
Guy Gozem QC - DCC Hayes and ACC Anderson Experienced in criminal law and has dealt regularly with murder, gross negligence manslaughter, and serious sexual allegations; he is also instructed by leading Fraud Panel Solicitors in lengthy commercial fraud cases and regulatory work.
Brought up in Wythenshawe, Manchester, he describes his interests as music, travel and football.
Andrew Nuttall, Jonathan Wall and David Hanman are also on the legal team.
James Maxwell Scott - Sheffield City Council His practice covers all forms of legal proceedings arising out of incidents resulting in personal injury or death.
He has been involved in the Hutton Inquiry, the Shipman Inquiry and the BSE Inquiry.
Natalie Barton will also represent the council.
John Beggs QC - Retired superintendents David Duckenfield, Roger Greenwood and Roger Marshall Described in Chambers and Partners 2013 as "indisputably the lead QC to go to if you're a police force in a tight spot", a large part of his work involves representing police forces.
He was called to the Bar in 1989 and became a QC in 2009.
The legal team also includes Ian Lewis and Graham Small.
Jonathan Laidlaw QC - FA His present instructions also include representing former editor of The Sun Rebekah Brooks in her ongoing trial and acting for Norwegian company, Statoil, in the inquest following the terrorist attack at the In Amenas facility in Algeria.
He has represented the FA before in crowd control cases brought against Liverpool FC, Chelsea FC, West Ham FC and others, and in the proceedings brought against Wayne Rooney''s agent Paul Stretford. He also acted for them in their investigation of the racist remarks made by John Terry.
Lee Bennett and Jon Ellis are also on the legal team.
Barnabas Branston - West Midlands Police He practises in the areas of police law, inquests, health and safety, public and administrative law and personal injury law.
He represented the City of London Police in the inquest into the death of Ian Tomlinson at the G20 demonstration in 2009.
Shanaz Anwar and Jeremy Johnson also represent the force.
Alexander Stein - South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Ser vice He practises in crime, coronial law, intellectual property, regulatory and licensing law.
Specialising in criminal fraud and financial offences, he regularly prosecutes and defends health and safety and fire safety cases Rachel Lyne will also represent the service.
Chris Daw QC - Retired chief superintendents Terry Wain and Donald Denton He practises in the fields of serious crime, commercial fraud and professional discipline.
He acted for former England captain John Terry when he was acquitted of racially abusing footballer Anton Ferdinand.
The legal team also includes Ian Lewis and Graham Small.
Jenni Richards QC - Yorkshire Ambulance Ser vice She has represented individuals, public bodies and public interest groups in all areas of public law and regulation.
Her expertise includes local government, human rights, mental health, health and social care, financial services, education, prison law and immigration/asylum.
Caroline Balfour and Steve Page are also on the legal team.
Anne Studd QC - St John Ambulance She has widespread experience of all aspects of police law and has worked on inquests including the hearing into the death of Jean Charles De Menezes, who was killed by police after he was wrongly identified as a bombing suspect.
She describes her interests as gardening and chickens.
The legal team also includes Jonathan Dixey and Sinead Lester.
Michael Mylonas QC - Sheffield Teaching Hospitals He is an expert in clinical negligence, the Court of Protection and discipline and regulatory law.
He holds a pilot's licence and a British Racing Driver's licence. He is a member of the Hurlingham Polo Association and has advised and represented sportsmen before a variety of disciplinary bodies. The hospitals will also be represented by Kiran Bhogal.
Jason Beer QC - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club He practises in public law and police law.
As well as the Hillsborough inquests, his current caseload includes acting for the Metropolitan Police Service in the phone hacking claims.
He acted for the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in the Stephen Lawrence Inquiry and represented a Government department in the Harold Shipman Inquiry.
Kieran Walshe and Jayne Bamford will also represent the club.
¦ THE Director of Public Prosecutions is also registered as an interested party but will not be represented by counsel at the inquests. She will be represented by deputy head of special crime for the Crown Prosecution Service Malcolm McHaffie and special crime lawyer Neil Dalton.
LORD JUSTICE GOLDRING - Coroner LORD Justice John Bernard Goldring is one of the most experienced judges in the country and served as the senior presiding judge of England and Wales from January 2010 until December 2012.
He was formally appointed an assistant deputy coroner in February 2013, specifically for the purpose of conducting the inquests into the deaths of the 96 fans in the Sheffield disaster.
He was appointed by the South Yorkshire (East) coroner to conduct the inquests into the 95 deaths at Hillsborough and by the West Yorkshire (West) Coroner to conduct the inquest into the death of Tony Bland, who later died of injuries he sustained at Hillsborough.
Lord Justice Goldring was called to the Bar in 1969 and became a QC in 1987.
He was appointed a high court judge in December 1999.
Between 2002 and 2005 he was presiding judge of the Midland circuit.
In 2006 he sat on the trial of brothers Ricky and Danny Preddie, who were convicted of the manslaughter of 10-year-old Damilola Taylor.
He was appointed as a judge of the Court of Appeal and deputy senior presiding judge in October 2008 and senior presiding judge in January 2010.
In 2012 he hit the headlines after issuing guidance on blogging to members of judiciary.
He said they should not identify themselves as members of the judiciary and also avoid expressing controversial opinions.
In his opening remarks at the first Hillsborough preliminary hearing he said: "The purpose of these inquests is to examine fully and fairly how each of the victims of this terrible disaster lost his or her life. "The inquests will seek to ensure so far as possible that the full facts are brought to light.
"However it should not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact finding investigation. It is not a method of apportioning guilt."
Document LIVECH0020140331ea3v000a1
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	22/02/2014 to 05/04/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or London Evening Standard Online Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,848
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 16:46
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
