{"newspaper":"liverpoolecho.co.uk","id:"2333"}
____
News
Morning news headlines for Tuesday - M&S profits down for third year, Lib Dems predict 'difficult' night ahead of elections
By Dan Kay   
995 words
20 May 2014
10:24
liverpoolecho.co.uk
LIVEONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
The latest news from around the globe
M&S PROFITS DOWN FOR THIRD YEAR
Marks & Spencer’s boss Marc Bolland clocked up an unwelcome hat-trick today as the retailer reported a third consecutive year of falling profits under his stewardship.
Underlying profits before tax were down 3.9% to £623 million in the year to March 29 with general merchandise (GM) - which includes clothing - seeing like-for-like sales fall by 1.4% though food improved by 1.7%.
Mr Bolland said GM was showing “early signs of improvement”, with investment being ploughed in to transform the business.
LIB DEMS PREDICT ’DIFFICULT’ NIGHT
The Liberal Democrats are braced for a “difficult” night on Thursday, with the party set for an electoral mauling in both local and European contests.
In a late rallying cry ahead of the elections, Nick Clegg will issue a fresh warning about Ukip and Tory Eurosceptics, claiming if the UK severed ties with Brussels they would “hand the keys” to running Europe to the French and Germans.
But the party acknowledged his unashamedly pro-European message is up against “quite extensive hostility in the country” towards the EU.
MAY HAILS HAMZA US TERROR VERDICT
Home Secretary Theresa May has welcomed the conviction of radical cleric Abu Hamza on terrorism charges.
The north London preacher, who was tried under the name Mustafa Kamel Mustafa, could face life in prison after a federal court in New York found him guilty of supporting terrorist organisations, including aiding the taking of hostages in Yemen and seeking to set up an al Qaida training camp in the US.
Mrs May said: “I am pleased that Abu Hamza has finally faced justice. He used every opportunity, over many years, to frustrate and delay the extradition process.
CAMERON CONDEMNS FARAGE REMARKS
David Cameron has urged voters not to be “tempted” by Ukip, saying the Eurosceptic party is being “found out” by a succession of rows over unpalatable views.
The Prime Minister accused Ukip leader Nigel Farage of making “appalling” remarks about Romanian immigration but declined to join Labour MPs in branding him racist.
With just two days to go until European elections which Ukip is widely expected to win and push the Tories into third place, Mr Cameron told the Daily Mail his party could deliver what some Ukip backers wanted.
CHILD MOBILE PHONE EFFECTS PROBED
Scientists commissioned by the Department of Health have launched the world’s biggest investigation into the effects of mobile phones on the developing brains of children.
The Study of Cognition, Adolescents and Mobile Phones (Scamp) will focus on mental functions such as memory and attention which continue to develop into the teenage years.
About 2,500 school children will be tested at age 11 and 12 and undergo a further assessment two years later. Most children start to own a mobile phone at around 11 or 12.
’KEEP UP SEARCH FOR UK YACHT CREW’
More than 100,000 people have signed an online petition calling on US authorities to resume the search for four British sailors who went missing after their yacht capsized in the Atlantic Ocean.
Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt, the local MP for one of the missing men, has appealed to the US Coast Guard not to give up and entrepreneur and adventurer Sir Richard Branson has called on vessels near the area to keep a lookout.
The crew of the 40ft Cheeki Rafiki ran into difficulties about 620 miles east of Cape Cod in Massachusetts last Thursday while returning to the UK from a regatta in Antigua. Contact with the yacht was lost in the early hours of Friday when they diverted to the Azores.
RISE IN INFLATION RATE PREDICTED
Inflation is expected to have risen for the first time in 10 months when official figures for April are published today.
The Consumer Prices Index (CPI) measure of inflation is predicted to have rebounded to 1.8% after hitting a new four-year low of 1.6% the month before.
It will still mean the rise in the cost of living has been at or below the Bank of England’s 2% target for five months in succession - with the rate expected to remain low for some time.
NEW HEART TESTS SPEED UP DIAGNOSIS
New tests could be introduced to drastically reduce the time it takes to diagnose heart attacks.
The two tests measure the levels of cardiac troponin, a protein that is released into the blood when the heart muscle is damaged, often as the result of a heart attack.
Standard tests for cardiac troponin are most accurate when carried out between 10 and 12 hours after the onset of symptoms of a heart attack.
EARLY DEMENTIA SYMPTOMS ’IGNORED’
More than half of people affected by dementia have said they waited six months or more after first noticing symptoms of the condition before seeking professional help, according to a survey.
Research carried out with 1,043 people showed 41% said they had kept concerns about dementia “bottled up”, mainly because they feared upsetting the person affected or they did not want to face the reality of the condition.
The study for the Alzheimer’s Society, carried out on Facebook and online, showed 54% had waited for six months or more after first noticing symptoms of dementia in themselves or someone close to them before seeking professional help.
NIGHTINGALE IN NEW APPEAL CASE BID
A former SAS sniper today launches a fresh bid to appeal against his conviction for illegally possessing a gun and ammunition.
In December, Sergeant Danny Nightingale, from Crewe in Cheshire, had an application for permission to appeal rejected by a judge who considered the matter on the papers.
He will renew the application today before a panel of three judges at the Court Martial Appeal Court in London.
Document LIVEONL020140520ea5k000gp
