{"newspaper":"liverpoolecho.co.uk","id:"3467"}
____
News
Morning news headlines for April 22, 2014
By Dan Kay   
1,045 words
22 April 2014
11:14
liverpoolecho.co.uk
LIVEONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Everything you need to stay up to date around the globe
DAVID MOYES SACKED AS MANCHESTER UNITED MANAGER
David Moyes’ miserable reign as Manchester United manager came to an end on Tuesday, sacked less than one season into the job.
Moyes signed a six-year deal with the Red Devils when he succeeded the retiring Sir Alex Ferguson last summer, but the former Everton boss’ time at Old Trafford has been cut short towards the end of a hugely disappointing opening campaign which sees the reigning champions currently languishing in seventh place in the Barclays Premier League.
WARNING OVER HOSPITAL KIDNEY DEATHS
At least 1,000 hospital patients in England die each month from avoidable kidney problems, according to a new study commissioned by the NHS.
Researchers found that acute kidney injury (AKI) causes between 15,000 and 40,000 excess deaths every year.
The condition refers to a loss of kidney function and can develop very quickly. It can occur in people who are already ill with conditions such as heart failure or diabetes, and those admitted to hospital with infections.
FAMILY LAW REFORMS COME INTO FORCE
The new Family Court in England and Wales comes into force today as part of a major shake-up for the family justice system.
A single Family Court for England and Wales replaces three separate tiers of court that currently deal with family proceedings.
Other changes include a new 26-week time limit for care proceedings to further reduce excessive delays in these cases.
SAVILE VICTIMS ’HOW TO CLAIM’ ADS
Newspaper advertisements have been published telling people who claim they were sexually abused by television presenter Jimmy Savile how to apply for compensation.
Around 140 people have come forward to say they were abused by the DJ and entertainer, who died in October 2011 aged 84.
The compensation scheme was approved following a ruling at the High Court in February.
DOOMED FERRY ’DIDN’T TURN SHARPLY’
New evidence shows that the sunken South Korean ferry did not make a sharp turn shortly before the disaster, but changed course much more gradually, it has emerged.
Full data from the Sewol’s automatic identification system, an on-board transponder used for tracking, showed that the ship in fact made a J-shaped turn before listing heavily and ultimately sinking last week, leaving more than 300 people dead or missing.
A ministry of ocean and fisheries official said on Friday that the vessel had taken a sharp turn, but another official said today that the AIS data had been incomplete and the true path of the ship became clear when the information was fully restored.
64% NOT BOTHERED BY WINNING: SURVEY
Winning may be the aim of the game, but a new survey suggests that many children would not be bothered if there were no winners and losers in school sport.
While most youngsters believe it is important for them to experience the feeling of coming first, a large proportion say they would not be fussed - would even be relieved - if competition was removed from sport.
In fact, the survey suggests it is mothers and fathers who put more store by who wins and who loses, with some admitting that they would be less interested in watching their child play sport if there was no final result.
PM: PROJECTS TO CREATE 150,000 JOBS
David Cameron will return to the political fray by claiming more than 150,000 jobs could be created by £36 billion of infrastructure projects being started in the UK this year.
The Prime Minister, who has been enjoying a family holiday in Lanzarote, will join Chancellor George Osborne at one major scheme to push the Government’s economic message.
They will say that more than 200 rail, road, local transport, broadband, airport and waste management projects are due to start construction over the next year.
AYERS ROCKS, DECLARES STUNNED KATE
The Duchess of Cambridge has described Australia’s Uluru landmark as “absolutely stunning” from the air, before a visit to the world-famous site.
Kate and William saw the unmistakable feature as they flew to the remote town of Yulara, close to the popular attraction also known as Ayers Rock.
Before touring the landmark, a sacred site for the Aboriginal community, the couple visited the National Indigenous Training Academy to present recent hospitality and catering graduates with their certificates.
HIGH SALARIES ’ALIENATING VIEWERS’
Former TV-am host Nick Owen has warned that viewers are put off ITV’s ailing breakfast programmes because of how much their big-name presenters are said to be paid.
Strictly Come Dancing star Susanna Reid, 43, announced last month that she was defecting from BBC Breakfast to front ITV’s new breakfast show Good Morning Britain, in a reported £1 million deal.
The show replaces Daybreak, whose launch presenters Adrian Chiles and Christine Bleakley were dropped, despite their bumper pay packets, a little over a year after the programme first went on air.
POOREST HIT BY WELFARE REFORMS
Almost 1.75 million of the poorest families in the UK have been made poorer by a “perfect storm” of changes to the welfare system over the last three years, a new Oxfam report claims.
The families have been hit by one or more changes including fewer council tax exemptions and the under-occupation policy or “bedroom tax”, according to Multiple Cuts For The Poorest Families.
The report, produced along with the New Policy Institute (NPI), says the the worst-hit 200,000 families affected are losing out by £18 per week or £864 per year.
CARDINAL SLAMS IMMIGRATION RHETORIC
A senior church leader has called for an end to “alarmist” rhetoric on immigration as Nigel Farage prepared to launch Ukip’s campaign for the European elections amid controversy over the party’s new poster campaign.
The Eurosceptic leader says the stark messages about direct threats to UK workers’ jobs from millions of unemployed Europeans are “a hard-hitting reflection of reality”.
The anti-European Union (EU) party is using £1.5 million of funding from millionaire ex-Tory donor Paul Sykes to launch its biggest-ever publicity drive ahead of the May 22 poll which many observers believe it could win.
Document LIVEONL020140422ea4m000b7
