{"newspaper":"liverpoolecho.co.uk","id:"865"}
____
Joe Riley on compassion in care homes, Nigel Farage and how British justice is a laughing stock
By Joe Riley   
570 words
5 May 2014
13:54
liverpoolecho.co.uk
LIVEONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Columnist says too many carers are now abusers
The latest Panorama expose of staff violence and neglect in old people's  homes is part of a growing trend of such disgraceful incidents.
Merseyside has not escaped  its own vile incidents, including  convictions of  despicable carers who have robbed elderly residents or embezzled their savings.
We can no longer heed the once universal assumption that our loved ones are being compassionately treated.
 And lest we forget, many of these unfortunate folk have had to sell their homes to pay for such a so-called privileges.
The costs are astronomical – up to £1,000 a week – equivalent to full board at a top class hotel.
Which beggars belief when the majority spend most of the day sitting in a circle watching one random, blaring, TV channel and occasionally nibbling at soggy  triangular salmon paste sandwiches.
Clearly things have to improve. One case of  abuse is one too many.
Time for all homes to install CCTV and employ at least one full-time officer to monitor the staff, many of whom are not of the calibre, qualification or training to be expected.  
Just why do they need to know?
Inclusion Matters is a procedure-riddled service run in Sefton to help those suffering from depression or anxiety.
But why on earth do the form filling  pen-pushers need  to enquire about a new client's sexuality.
When challenged by one reader, they said they “needed to know.”
He told them what they could do with their poxy  questionnaire. And so say all of us.
 
The three main parties neglect over immigration policy explains the rise of UKIP
It will take more than the splattering of an egg, or a clutch of bonkers associates, to put Nigel Farage off course.
By chance every single customer – about 20 – in a local  restaurant last week, gradually volunteered that they would be voting  UKIP on May 22.
Not a scientific survey perhaps. But one which proves beyond doubt that years of neglect over immigration and Europe by all three major parties, and a wish to placate unrest at all costs, is finally leading to pay-back time.
Immigration is not an academic subject. It is lived on the streets.
We have so 'educated' ourselves as to have eradicated the natural instincts of common sense dictated by our eyes and ears.
Perhaps the age of pretending to be rational and reasonable will soon be over?
 
Rough justice...
Talking  of which, the  Sultan of Brunei has hailed as “a great achievement” new laws which will amputate the limbs of thieves and stone adulterers.
All this as America botches an execution and Iran puts capital punishment in the hands of victims' families.This also applies to criminals being surgically blinded for destroying some-one's sight.
All a tad extreme for most.
But only in Britain could a triple killer be awarded £815 in compensation after prison guards broke his nose-hair clippers and alarm clock.
The real wake-up call is that such nonsense often  makes justice here a laughing stock.
 
Happy to help
Delighted  to have taken a leading role in forcing the cancellation of  insensitive and  misguided plans to build over more than 80 graves at All Saints' Church, Childwall.
Proof, yet again,  that public pressure works.  
Document LIVEONL020140505ea550015p
