{"newspaper":"Liverpool Echo","id:"1703"}
____
  
Features
Out & About
Andy Green   
397 words
18 April 2014
Liverpool Echo
LIVECH
1; National
9
English
(c) The Liverpool Daily Post & Echo Ltd, 2014.   
with Andy Green
I'M very pleased to be able to say that I am writing this column from my usual perch in The Masquerade - yes, it's back open! I haven't mentioned it being closed for the last few weeks because I didn't know exactly what was going on and didn't want to add to the silly misinformation that's been flying around. The main thing is that Liverpool's friendliest gay bar is back and I couldn't be happier.
There was a gaping hole in the Liverpool scene whilst The Masquerade was closed and the thought of a Liverpool Pride without the Mazzie just doesn't bear thinking about. It's very true that you really don't appreciate something until its gone so I hope that people will continue to support all of the venues on the gay scene. Speaking of which, The Navy Bar will be opening earlier this Sunday at 8pm and will be going through until 3am throughout the Easter weekend with the usual array of special offers and great music from DJs Andy Mac and John Hooper.
? ACCORDING a new survey the UK is the 6th most tolerant country when it comes to homosexuality with less than a fifth believing that homosexuality is "morally unacceptable".
The most intolerant country was Ghana with 98%. The five countries more tolerant than the UK were Canada, Czech Republic, France Germany and Spain. Forty countries were polled in total and unfortunately in most of them people thought homosexuality was unacceptable.
We should count ourselves lucky living where we do but there are LGBT people seeking asylum in this country who are finding tolerance hard to come by. Aderonke is a Nigerian lesbian who fled to the UK after her family were killed and she was tortured and sentenced to death for being a lesbian.
On arrival in the UK she faced a humiliating interrogation from UK immigration officers who did not believe she was a lesbian. She's now waiting on the decision of a judge who could order her back to Nigeria where her life wouldn't definitely be in danger.
There is a petition calling on Home Secretary Theresa May to review the case and to change the way LGBT asylum seekers are treated at www.allout.org/aderonke. Please sign up.
Document LIVECH0020140418ea4i0003s
