{"newspaper":"Liverpool Echo","id:"2848"}
____
  
Features
Out About &
Andy Green   
382 words
28 March 2014
Liverpool Echo
LIVECH
1; National
9
English
(c) The Liverpool Daily Post & Echo Ltd, 2014.   
.IT''S Mothers'' Day this Sunday and The Lisbon will have live entertainment on from 5pm with vocalist Anna Lee and guests and boss Eileen will be resurrecting her famous Porn Star cocktail - don''t ask me what''s in it but I''m assured that it''s very good! The Lisbon also launched its new menu this week and I was lucky enough to have a taster yesterday and I can heartily recommend the piri-piri chicken panini but there is plenty more to choose from.
? LIVERPOOL Pride At The Pictures continues next week with a screening of Margarita at The Light Cinema in New Brighton on Tuesday. The film was the closing feature of the 2013 BFI London Lesbian and Gay Film Festival and is a warm, funny and loving drama looking at issues around race, class and immigration. The film starts at 7.25pm.
.IT''S an historic day tomorrow as the first same-sex marriages in England and Wales take place with scores of weddings happening at the stroke of midnight. And, in a welcome gesture, deputy PM Nick Clegg has ordered rainbow flags to be flown in Whitehall to mark the occasion saying: "Raising the rainbow flag on Whitehall is a small symbol to celebrate a massive achievement. I want to wish everyone getting married this weekend the very best of luck, on what is a truly momentous occasion."
However, some are still not happy with the move as the Christian charity World Vision announced that it will not employ people who are in same-sex marriages. It''s a reversal of the announcement they made on Monday and follows a backlash from conservative groups who said they would drop their sponsorship of children if the charity supported equal marriages. The charity, in announcing its change of heart, released a statement saying: "The board acknowledged it made a mistake and chose to revert to our long-standing policy requiring sexual abstinence for all single employees and faithfulness within the Biblical covenant of marriage between one man and one woman.
"We are broken-hearted over the pain and confusion we have caused many of our friends, who saw this decision as a reversal of our strong commitment to Biblical authority. Really angry!"
Document LIVECH0020140328ea3s0004n
