{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"3186"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
A Euro poll wake-up for the Coalition
325 words
10 April 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
14
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
TODAY'S official start of the Tories' campaign for the European elections next month will be marred by this paper's poll showing a surge in support for Ukip, to 15 per cent. The Tories have fallen back a point to 31 per cent — six points behind Labour. Given that the election is about Ukip's defining issue, the EU, this is perhaps unsurprising, but it may reflect wider disenchantment with the established parties: the Maria Miller affair will have done the Tories no good. Ukip MEPs, of course, enjoy a generous expenses regime of their own from Brussels, but many voters are still enraged by the idea that the political classes are enjoying perks denied to the rest of us. This anger may also feed into local elections taking place on the same day.
The poll will reinforce ministers' concerns that the affair has distracted attention from the Government's work with the economy: the reason why the Chancellor reportedly intervened to expedite Mrs Miller's resignation. Higher growth, lower unemployment and increased investment should be feeding into the polls; instead the Tories's support remains vulnerable to Ukip. Meanwhile their Lib-Dem Coalition partners are faring even worse, down by four points.
Labour has been less affected by the rise in Ukip support, though it faces losing voters in its core areas. Thus its efforts today to seem a little more robust on immigration, by proposing tougher penalties for employers who abuse migrant labour, may well have Ukip in mind. Labour may yet be beaten to first place in the European elections by Ukip; the Tories seem unlikely to manage better than a humiliating third place. European elections always involve a greater-than-usual element of protest voting. Still, today's poll deserves to have the effect of galvanising the main parties in an election that usually leaves most voters unmoved.
Document NS00000020140410ea4a0003e
