{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2768"}
____
  
News
PM'S IMMIGRATION PLEDGE IN TATTERS
Martin Bentham ; Joe Murphy ; Nicholas Cecil   
900 words
27 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
1,2
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
NEW FIGURE CLOSE TO RECORD LEVELS SEEN UNDER LABOUR
212,000 MORE PEOPLE ENTER BRITAIN THAN LEAVE OVER 12 MONTHS DAVID CAMERON'S flagship pledge to cut immigration was in tatters today after dramatic new figures showed a net influx of 212,000 migrants into Britain in just 12 months.
The new total, driven by a sharp increase in those arriving from other EU countries, is more than double the Prime Minister's target of cutting net migration to below 100,000 by the next election.
The figure is also close to the record levels of immigration seen under Labour and represents a 38 per cent increase on the previous annual tally.
It comes despite a series of controversial government reforms which are designed to curb the flow but which university and business leaders claim are damaging the country's long-term prospects.
The rise was partly driven by a sharp increase in numbers of Romanian and Bulgarian citizens coming to Britain — a surge of 166 per cent from 9,000 to 24,000 year-on-year.
Campaigners and political opponents called on the Prime Minister to admit defeat as the surprise statistics heaped new pressure on him. Mark Hilton, head of immigration policy at business group London First, said the figures were "game over" for the Government's immigration target.
"What we need to be wary of is the Government trying to control future figures by further limiting the only number over which it has power — non-EU migrants," he said.
"In the past this has hit both highly-skilled immigrants we need, as well as foreign students — who are a huge economic PM 'should never have made migrant pledge' asset. Higher education is our eighth biggest export industry, at £8billion." Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons home affairs committee, said it was "totally unrealistic" for Mr Cameron to expect to hit his net migration target.
He added: "The Prime Minister should never have made this pledge because you cannot control the number of people who leave the country."
Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: "The Government's target is holed below the water. When you operate with total open borders to poorer countries in southern and eastern Europe it's completely pointless to make any estimate of what immigration figures might be because it's out of our control."
There was also criticism from Tories, with backbencher John Baron calling on ministers to "revisit" free movement within the EU, which he described as the "elephant in the room".
But immigration minister James Brokenshire defended the Government's approach. He said ministers had cut net migration from outside Europe and were now determined to curb the "abuse of free movement" between EU states.
"Uncontrolled, mass immigration makes it difficult to maintain social cohesion, puts pressure on our public services and forces down wages for people on low incomes," he said.
"We are building an immigration system that is fair to British citizens and legitimate migrants, that is tough on those who abuse the system or flout the law and that ensures people come to the UK for the right reasons — to work hard and contribute to our economy and society."
Today's Office for National Statistics figures cover the 12 months to the end of last September and reveal 532,000 people arrived in the UK from overseas during that period, a rise of 35,000 on the previous year. A total of 320,000 people departed, giving a net migration total of 212,000, up dramatically from the tally of 154,000 in the comparable 12-month period a year earlier.
The key factor was a 60,000 rise in the net inflow of citizens from other EU countries. These included the extra 15,000 Romanians and Bulgarians, who arrived before the lifting of controls at the end of 2013.
But there were also an extra 23,000 arrivals from EU members such as Spain, Italy and Portugal in an apparent reflection of their poor jobs markets.
Iimmigration from countries outside Europe, such as India, Pakistan and African nations, fell by 25,000, mainly due to a drop in student numbers.
Non-EU countries still account for the bulk of the net influx into the UK, with 141,000 more of their citizens arriving than departing.
The report says work is the main reason people migrate here, with 218,000 arrivals for this reason last year. Another 176,000 came to study, while 66,000 arrived to join relatives.
Editorial Comment Page 14 Mark Boleat Page 15 tourist boss slams 'stupid' visa policy THE boss of Merlin Entertainments, the theme park operator behind the London Eye, Madame Tussauds and Legoland, today hit out at the Government's visa policies, saying it had hoisted a "highly restrictive and major barrier to entry to Chinese tourists who would come here and spend a lot of money".
Nick Varney, chief executive of Merlin, said London's tourism was missing out as a result. "We are the biggest commercial operator in London, and our biggest concern is the visa policy. When I look at Madame Tussauds in Sydney, Hong Kong, Paris and elsewhere, they're all getting many more Chinese visitors than in London and the one barrier is the Government's visa policy. It's stupid."
Business Page 45
Document NS00000020140227ea2r0005u
