{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"825"}
____
  
News
Home Office to be targeted on illegal 'overstays'
Martin Bentham   
482 words
26 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
2
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
THE GREAT IMMIGRATION DEBATE Evening Standard A NEW investigation into the effectiveness of the Government's attempts to remove illegal migrants has been launched by the border watchdog in response to public concern about the number of overstayers living in Britain.
John Vine, the Chief Inspector of Borders, said the probe would examine whether the Home Office was "now getting a grip on overstayers" after earlier figures showing that as many as 150,000 people refused permission to stay in the country could still be here.
He said the problem was "one of the greatest areas of public concern" and that it was important that illegal migrants were removed "promptly" and "efficiently" if faith in the immigration system was to be maintained. Mr Vine's comments came during an interview with the Evening Standard in which he also called for improvements to eliminate "inconsistency" in the way that visa applications by investors, entrepreneurs and other talented migrants are processed.
He said that it was "very important" to prevent unnecessary delays in such applications because it was "clearly in the interests of the UK".
Those remarks will please pro-immigration campaigners and law firms in London who complain that administrative problems and the Government's bid to control overall migration figures are deterring some talented foreigners from coming here.
But Mr Vine also warned that he remained concerned about the Home Office's performance in ensuring that those who overstay their visas — thought to be the main cause of illegal Guildhall EC2, 6.30pm, March 3. Free admission but strictly ticketonly. Register for tickets at standard.co.uk/immigrationdebate migration in this country — are removed from the country.
"I want to see whether the Home Office are now getting to grip with overstayers and how effective they are in removing them from the UK," he said, adding: "One of the areas of greatest public concern is the fact that there are people who are in the UK illegally."
Mr Vine's new investigation follows a 2012 probe in which he discovered the existence of a "migration refusal pool" of 150,000 people whose whereabouts were unknown following the rejection of their applications to stay in Britain.
He said at the time that 40 per cent had not been served with papers telling them to leave and that immigration staff had no "clear strategy" for ensuring that such overstayers were sent home.
On other aspects of the immigration system, Mr Vine said he believed that there was now a "consistent standard of border checking" at all ports, which he described as "progress", and "better customer service" by staff issuing visas. Border staff were also being deployed more effectively at Heathrow and Gatwick to reduce passport queues. Mr Vine warned, however, that sham marriages, involving non-Europeans marrying EU citizens, remained a "massive loophole".
Document NS00000020140226ea2q00085
