{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2760"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Migration figures due for release
468 words
27 February 2014
03:30
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Official migration figures are to be released today amid growing concerns that Government curbs are sending a message out that Britain is "closed for business".
Data released by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) for the year to September 2013 will also reveal if the Government is moving closer or further from its target of bringing net migration down to the tens of thousands.
In the last set of quarterly statistics, released in November last year, net flow of migrants saw its first annual increase for two years.
Rising to 182,000 in the year to June, from 167,000 the previous year, net migration moved further away from Prime Minister David Cameron and Home Secretary Theresa May's hopes of slashing the figure b efore the next election in 2015.
Tory science minister David Willetts revealed yesterday that immigration curbs had "played disappointingly badly" in India despite prime ministerial charm offensives to show Britain welcomes students.
Ministers have been working "flat out" to attract international candidates but Indian press coverage about reforms to hit the net migration target has been "surprisingly negative", Mr Willetts told Total Politics magazine.
David Hanson, shadow immigration minister, said: "Even members of the Cabinet believe that under David Cameron's Government and chaotic immigration system Britain is viewed as being closed for business.
"Immigration under Theresa May is a shambles with backlogs increasing, delays in visas for business visitors and hostile rhetoric to international students.
"It's no wonder David Willetts now accepts that all of this means that vital trading partners like India are simply put off from doing business with the UK under this government."
Against a backdrop of growing concern about the arrival of Romanians and Bulgarians when access restrictions to the UK labour market were lifted on January 1, Mr Cameron unveiled further tough measures to clamp down on immigration.
New EU arrivals will not be able to claim benefits for three months when they land in the UK and once that period is up will only be able to claim out-of-work benefits for a maximum of six months unless they can prove they have a genuine prospect of employment.
In addition, those found begging or sleeping rough could be deported and barred from re-entry for 12 months unless they can show they have a proper reason to be in the UK, such as a job.
Other proposals previously announced will see migrant access to the NHS restricted, while landlords, employers, bankers and DVLA staff will all be expected to take part in checks for illegal immigrants under tough reforms.
But recent reports suggest the eastern European influx failed to materialise as it emerged claims of fully-booked flights and coaches from Bucharest and Sofia were incorrect.
Document NSONL00020140227ea2r0018l
