{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1632"}
____
  
Features
Also showing...
Charlotte O'Sullivan   
924 words
28 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
52,53
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
MY STUFF Cert 15, 80 mins A FINNISH documentary about a material boy and the joys of letting go. It all begins with a naked Petri Luukkainen explaining why all his worldly goods are locked up in storage. For a year, he will extract one item per day and buy nothing new. Petri has no girlfriend, no children and very understanding colleagues, friends and family. He thinks it'll be a cinch. His quest may strike some as indulgent and the film's tone is occasionally fey. Mostly though, it's charming and — when our hero is talking to his frail granny (about to go where no stuff can follow) — wonderfully sad.
THE FOLD Cert 15, 89 mins AN INTERESTING premise (sexually scrambled Anglican vicar struggles to accept the death of her teenage daughter) is let down by weak Confused: Dakota Blue Richards in The Fold direction and dialogue in this Cornwall-set Brit drama. Catherine McCormack does her best to make us believe in Rebecca, stiff-mouthed with misery until a self-harming, immigrant youngster (Marina Stoimenova, limited) catches her eye. That we never discover why or how the daughter died is a nice touch but the happy-shiny Bulgarian gypsies who offer a musical lifeline for Rebecca's other child, Eloise (Dakota Blue Richards, who made her debut in The Golden Compass) sum up everything that's wrong with John Jencks's confused seaside tale.
LEAVE THE WORLD BEHIND Cert 15, 95 mins A STAGEMANAGED yet weirdly gripping documentary that tracks the final tour of DJ trio Swedish House Mafia. Axel, Sebastian (above right) and Steve are very good at leaping around and pointing up at the sky. They create songs on computers (Don't You Worry Child) that throw loved-up youngsters into a state of delirium. Yet, no longer party animals themselves, they've clearly begun to experience moments of self-doubt. Are they shamans or charlatans? Do they love or loathe each other? As they trot around the globe the millionaires emerge as immature, vapid wrecks ("I feel fat and swollen," confesses Sebastian). Fans, and nonfans, will be dazzled by the pumpedup lunacy on display.
THE BORDERLANDS Cert 15, 89 mins CRAFTY Essex boy Robin Hill (fantastic as a folk-song-crooning killer in Ben Wheatley's Down Terrace) is the main reason to watch Elliot Goldner's low-budget foundfootage horror flick. Hill plays atheist techie Gray, hired to support a Vatican investigation into a haunted West Country church. The banter between him and one of the priests (Gordon Kennedy's cynical Scot) is funny and unsettling. And the stark church is a winner. But once things start to go bump in the night it all gets yawnsome. The final insult is an Italian maverick who doesn't sound Italian, probably because he's played by an actor from Finsbury Park.
DANGEROUS ACTS STARRING THE UNSTABLE ELEMENTS OF BELARUS Cert 15, 76 mins THEY may be guilty of romanticising "normal" Europe but the Belarus acting troupe at the centre of Madeleine Sackler's documentary are unquestionably brave. They defy President Lukashenko, "Europe's last dictator", to perform irreverent shows and, when their friend and presidential hopeful Andrei Sannikov gets arrested for taking part in "anti-government riots", four of them are forced into exile. The shows go on but the losses involved are palpable (a single mum has to keep abandoning her daughter; the director doesn't get to say goodbye to his dying dad). Recommended viewing.
AFTERNOON DELIGHT Cert 18, 97 mins QUENTIN TARANTINO put this in his top 10 list for 2013, maybe because one of the main characters, a Los Angeles stripper called McKenna ( Juno Temple), reminded him of one of his own creations (Alabama in True Romance). Temple is rivetingly scuzzy as McKenna, who upends the life of Rachel, a discontented, middle-class housewife (Kathryn Hahn, superb), through no real fault of her own. Jill Soloway's film works best when we're not sure which — if either — of these two flakes we should trust. Tension dissolves towards the end but Jane Lynch's turn (as Rachel's pompous, self-referential shrink) never gets old.
BROADWAY'S ROMEO & JULIET Cert PG, 140 mins A CHANCE to catch the Broadway debut of Orlando Bloom, who's adequate in a patchy, modern-dress production that wasn't especially well received by US critics or even a box-office smash. Lowpoints of the show (filmed on high-definition cameras) include Juliet (Condola Rashad) frantically shouting her lines on a swing and Romeo straddling a bad-boy motorbike on stage. Then again, the lovers' first scene together is moving, while performances by Jayne Houdyshell (the nurse) and Christian Camargo (Mercutio) growl with intelligence. Another plus: most of Shakespeare's words are left in one piece, so students keen to avoid actually reading Romeo and Juliet won't be led too far astray.
ALMOST MARRIED Cert 15, 97 mins A WEDDING-RELATED romcom (set in the North East), which is aimed at men who think visiting brothels is saucy. Talented Philip McGinley (Game of Thrones) wastes his time as Kyle, a chlamydia victim thanks to stag-night shenanigans, led by his over-excitable best friend Jarvis (Mark Stobbart). Kyle is told he'll have to wait three months before having sex with his fiancée (Emily Atack). The scenario does have bleakly comic potential but writer/ director Ben Cookson can't resist quickie laughs. If this was on TV, you'd switch channels.
Document NS00000020140328ea3s0007m
