{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1859"}
____
  
Politics
Tory minister attacks Vince Cable for ‘condescending falsehoods’ on migration
394 words
6 March 2014
15:15
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
The Coalition battle over immigration erupted into open warfare today as a Tory minister accused Vince Cable of deliberately misleading the public with “condescending falsehoods". 
Immigration minister James Brokenshire said Mr Cable had made a succession of claims about migration that were “simply wrong" as he tore into the Lib-Dem Business Secretary in a highly personal attack.
Mr Brokenshire said the errors included the claim that migrants do not push Britons out of jobs and Mr Cable’s insistence that last week’s surge in net migration was the result of more British emigration, rather than a doubling in the influx of EU migrants.
The minister added that Mr Cable was also “wrong" to claim that overseas students return home after their studies because the figures showed otherwise.  He said Mr Cable was similarly mistaken to claim that higher immigration was “good news" when in reality only “haves"  like the Business Secretary benefited at the expense of poorer Britons who had most to lose.
Mr Brokenshire added that Mr Cable had used an article this week to “rather condescendingly" call for people to “stick to the facts" on immigration, but had ignored his own advice.
“Vince Cable has made a number of statements about immigration in the last week and, to be frank, a lot of them were simply incorrect," he claimed. “You have to wonder why he keeps asserting these falsehoods."
The immigration minister said Mr Cable also risked taking Britain back to the “bad old days" of “out of control" immigration and insisted that the Government’s approach of trying to control migration was achieving success by reducing inflows into Britain from outside Europe.
Today’s assault by Mr Brokenshire comes ahead of a speech tonight by Mr Cable in which he will praise migration and say that he is “intensely relaxed" about migrants coming here to work.
It also follows controversy about an unpublished government study on the impact of migration on British jobs. Some reports have claimed that it shows a negligible effect, but Mr Brokenshire insisted that it confirmed instead that British jobs were affected, particularly in poorer economic conditions. Figures from the Office for National Statistics showed last week that net migration has risen to 212,000 a year, more than double the Government’s target.
Document NSONL00020140306ea36003v1
