{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2986"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
This row about halal meat is bloody trivial
Andrew Neather   
531 words
9 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
FANCY a halal burger? Several newspapers think you don't. This week they've been attempting to whip up public outrage by "revealing" that several fast-food chains and supermarkets use or sell exclusively halal lamb, beef and chicken. Most of these have admitted this for years, though few products are labelled as such. But non-Muslims are indeed consuming a lot of halal meat.
At the 2011 census, 4.8 per cent of the UK population were Muslim. Yet according to Defra, 50 per cent of all sheep and 30 per cent of all poultry slaughtered in the UK are now killed by dhabihah — slitting the animal's throat with a sharp knife.
The likes of Nando's and Tesco have made a commercial decision: rather than marketing separate products for Muslims and non-Muslims, they can make more by selling meat acceptable to everyone. Except it apparently isn't, to some.
Personally I'm uneasy with this fresh example of religion's insidious reinsertion into English public life. The churches have already wrestled back a bigger role in the school system than they enjoyed 30 years ago, while broadcasters must now tiptoe around the delicate sensibilities of various god-botherers in ways they didn't back then.
Moreover, it's quite possible for a religious minority with odd dietary laws to manage in Britain without the rest of us having to fit in. Observant Jews always have, going to some lengths to do so (I'll never forget the bizarre kosher pizza joint that an orthodox girlfriend once took me to.) Yet there are ten times more Muslims than Jews in Britain now — 2.7 million, a million of them in London. Nor, in practice, is most halal so different to nonhalal killing: 88 per cent of halal meat comes from pre-stunned animals (while Islam in theory bans pre-stunning, several UK halal certification bodies have decided the process is acceptable, to the dismay of traditionalists.) None of it's pretty. Pre-stunning of poultry, halal or not, is normally done either by gassing the birds or by shackling them upside down and passing their heads through an electrified bath. I wouldn't want to work in any slaughterhouse — but then I wouldn't want a job down the sewers or on refuse lorries either, equally essential though those unpleasant tasks are. If you're really that squeamish about animals being killed for us to eat, go veggie.
This row isn't really about animal suffering, though. Instead, it's a new way of bashing Muslims and immigrants — or not so new, given that halal and kosher meat have been a hobby horse of the BNP and French Front National for years. The animal rights nutters and racists in this unholy alliance deserve each other.
Let's label halal goods as such, as kosher meat is. But it won't get in the way of my enjoyment of a good kebab — let alone a bacon sandwich.
This row isn't really about animal suffering. Instead, it's a new way of bashing Muslims and immigrants
Document NS00000020140509ea590007p
