{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"714"}
____
  
Home
London student Yashika Bageerathi 'alone and scared' after being deported to Mauritius
Raziye Akkoc, Tim Moynihan   
754 words
4 April 2014
12:48
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Teenager Yashika Bageerathi is alone and scared and does not know what to do after landing in Mauritius following her deportation last night, she has said.
Several last minute efforts were made to prevent her being sent to her native country, including an emergency court order and an appeal from chairman of the Home Affairs Select Committee Keith Vaz.
The 19-year-old was taken on an Air Mauritius flight and is looking for somewhere safe to stay following a police interview at the airport, her headteacher said.
Friends, family, politicians and her school have all campaigned to prevent her deportation, to no avail.
Ms Bageerathi came to the UK with her mother, sister and brother in 2011 to escape a relative who she said was physically abusive, and claimed asylum last summer.
She told ITV News on Skype from Mauritius: "I am just all alone here, everyone is in England.
"I don't know what to do."
She confirmed that four security guards flew with her and said: "I just wanted to do everything lawfully and I was just doing everything being asked."
She said she was scared, adding: "Even today I was told media people (were) waiting for me at the airport and even walking in the airport people were looking at me like I was a criminal."
More on this story
Asked what her message was to politicians, she said: "I really want to complete my education and it's just so hard being here.
"I want to be there with my friends, in school with my teachers."
Asked what she was going to do now, she said: "I don't know, still trying to make arrangements."
She said she did not think she could complete her education there.
"I don't think I can, with all the people watching me and all the media wanting to talk to me about what (is) happening - I don't know, it's just so annoying and unfair," she said.
"It's really unfair to come to know I was coming back on the same day and not inform me before."
Lynne Dawes, headteacher at Oasis Academy Hadley in Enfield, north London, said the school was in regular contact with the promising student and the immediate concern was to find her a safe place to stay.
She said they were working to ensure she would still be able to complete her A-levels.
She said the student felt "low" and added: "She's feeling the lowest I have heard her be for quite a while.
"She was also very subdued."
A spokesman for the Oasis charity, which runs the academy, said they were supporting the family, as well as the student, who he described as "very frightened".
He added: "Yashika's mum is very upset understandably, she's very emotional and she's very worried.
"Worry is the overriding feeling."
Previous attempts to deport Ms Bageerathi were thwarted when Air Mauritius refused to fly her out following an earlier refusal by British Airways - but Air Mauritius confirmed it had received a "directive" from the UK authorities that the youngster must leave.
The deportation followed a judge at London's Law Courts refusing to grant an emergency injunction to block the deportation to give her time to take her case to the Court of Appeal.
The last-ditch application was made yesterday as the youngster was being driven from Yarl's Wood Immigration Removal Centre in Bedfordshire to Heathrow airport.
Even last-minute attempts by Keith Vaz MP to stop the deportation failed after he had written to the Home Secretary to ask her to "urgently reconsider" the decision.
In his letter to Theresa May yesterday, Mr Vaz said: "It is hardship enough for this young woman to be separated from her family and returned to Mauritius, where she claims she fears persecution.
"To interrupt her education at this late stage in order to do so seems needlessly cruel."
Ms Bageerathi, whose case sparked a petition that has attracted around 178,000 signatures, had been detained at Yarl's Wood since March 19.
Paul Nettleship, one of the solicitors for Ms Bageerathi and her mother, said the options were limited for the student but they were looking into pursuing an out of country appeal.
He said: "We're looking into it but the problem is that even if we can do that, it will be after her exams."
Document NSONL00020140403ea43002s1
