{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"430"}
____
  
Comment
Sarah Sands: The rich are harder to sway than the poor; It is easier to enact in poor countries than rich countries. It is the powerful who wish to enslave women as much as the powerless
957 words
11 March 2014
11:12
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
In the last week I have encountered two female stars of the Labour party from different generations. The first was Luciana Berger, aged 32. She is the grand-niece of trade unionist and class warrior Manny Shinwell but her causes have not been on tribal lines. Many Tories agreed with her short and effective campaign to ban smoking in cars.
The other Labour woman, Harriet Harman, is more ardently party political. She believes the cause of female advancement needs to be fought vigilantly and eternally by Labour in Parliament.
Both women have a point. For younger people, causes are not founded in party politics. The young political activists I know like to spread the word through Facebook petitions and they see the UN as more relevant than their local MP. But Harman is right that you have to keep battling on with first principles because if you don’t, nothing really happens.
A social cause highlighted by the Evening Standard is ending inflicting female genital mutilation on girls who are British citizens. A momentum has built up against this vile and pointless practice. It crosses political parties and papers. Next week, City Hall is hosting a discussion on how to rescue girls from this fate, comparing our record in the UK with the more determined measures of France. I shall chair the discussion.
In some ways, this resembles the model of new politics. Those in political power align themselves with a genuine shift in social attitudes. African countries have been under the spotlight for being the source of FGM. Yet charity Orchid reports rapid success in changing the culture. Senegal is close to becoming FGM-free. This work can be done on the ground as part of public health projects.
It is trickier to deal with the diaspora from these countries. When we discover that girls in great global capitals such as London are being whisked out of the country to be branded as goods for life, our indignation rises. Not here! Not in our name! Schools and doctors should protect them. We must all protest.
Politicians can exert influence over poor countries by linking conditions to foreign aid. What good is that for Dubai, which is alleged by FGM campaigners to be an increasingly popular destination for cutting?
Meanwhile, in Indonesia, the minister of health has just issued guidelines for FGM. They demand that the patient lies on her back and that her vulva is cleaned first with iodine. In Egypt too, FGM has been made medically respectable and thus institutionalised. If girls are not in danger of infection or death, what is wrong with branding them?
This is the dilemma of social change. It is easier to enact in poor countries than rich countries. It is the powerful who wish to enslave women as much as the powerless. On this I want to stand with Harriet Harman and yell like a banshee: “Leave our girls alone."
Buy British but don’t hire them?
The argument over foreign domestic staff makes everyone squirm. Danny Alexander defended the right to employ immigrants yet his description of his own domestic arrangements lacked conviction. “We use a brilliant British child minder…and a Portuguese lady occasionally comes in to clean our home." Note the enthusiastic appropriation of the former, and the lacklustre, mildly surprised mention of the latter.
Meanwhile the Camerons  choose a Nepalese nanny and the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have hired a Spanish “supernanny". Prime ministers and royals in the past would have been likely to have recruited British nannies. I pass no judgment either way, but it is interesting that the same people who bang on about the need for us to buy British apples have no corresponding wish to bring British-born people into their houses.
Russian propaganda echoes 1984
The disturbing and excellently performed production of 1984 at the Almeida Theatre is to transfer to the West End. Good, although I have reservations about its political premise. The story is given a twist by the cast doubling up as members of a book club, studying 1984. We also watch Winston’s affair via a huge live video screen. The message is that we have all sacrificed privacy for a life of surveillance. 1984 exists as an Edward Snowden nightmare.
Nevertheless, it is not a society that I recognise. It strikes me that there is a simpler analogy to 1984. Russian state broadcasting at the moment is sticking to the book’s logic that war is peace. 1984 is right about the nature of propaganda. But it is wrong to say that it is happening here.
Why is the world assembling in London? Because despite an ugly scandal within the Met and a few greedy or reckless politicians, we are a democratic society founded on the rule of law.
Rugby’s union of gentlemen
A sunny Sunday and the crunch and grunt of an England-Wales rugby scrum at Twickenham — what could be more pleasing? The Rugby World Cup next year is going to be terrific. Imagine playing Scotland post- referendum. I guess Prince Harry also feels an emotional attachment/rivalry towards South Africa, although less so since Chelsy Davy made way for the homegrown blonde, Cressida Bonas.
Next year will be Prince Harry’s chance to champion rugby as a mainstream sport. For one reason alone I think it has to be taught in state schools. Look how rugby players treat their referees. There is no comparable respect for them among football players.
Twitter @sandsstandard
Document NSONL00020140311ea3b0028p
