{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1069"}
____
  
News
Matthew d'Ancona: On immigration, Ukip is out of step in modern Britain
1,033 words
7 May 2014
15:53
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
A new study reveals that attitudes to, and among, ethnic minorities in the UK are changing for the better
With each passing day, the rise of Ukip reminds me ever more of the funniest book in the English language, Wodehouse’s The Code of the Woosters. You may recall that the villain of this Jeeves and Wooster masterpiece is Roderick Spode, who leads a fictional fascist group called the “Black Shorts”: a figure both sinister and absurd.
Nigel Farage’s party is not, of course, fascist, and Farage himself is no “amateur dictator”. But he and his colleagues, with their dismal rhetoric and thundering warnings that parts of Britain are becoming “unrecognisable”, are showing, shall we say, distinctly Spodean tendencies.
Yesterday Roger Helmer, who considers homosexual behaviour “abnormal and undesirable”, was selected as Ukip’s contender for the Newark by-election. Let us add his nasty beliefs to the pile: Ukip candidates for office have already declared that “Islam is evil”, that Lenny Henry should “go and live in a black country” and that Ed Miliband was “not British”. In all this, Farage postures as New Spode, Spode-Lite, the sensible reactionary who disowns all such extremity. But he is the prime offender in the sense that he encourages, stokes and depends upon public anxiety about “mass immigration”.
How refreshing, then, to read A Portrait of Modern Britain, a well-timed report by the think-tank Policy Exchange. The research, by Rishi Sunak and Saratha Rajeswaran, is both hearteningly upbeat and impeccably nuanced. Quarrying data from the Office for National Statistics, the Understanding Society study and other academic sources, Policy Exchange has delivered an empirical study of contemporary Britain that is quite at odds with the phobic rantings of Ukip.
What do Farage and co make, for instance, of the fact that 90 per cent of white and minority residents “feel that their local area is a place where people from different backgrounds get on well together”? Or the powerful sense of loyalty to Britain felt by the overwhelming majority of citizens from ethnic minorities? To take one example: 71 per cent of Bangladeshi Britons identify themselves as solely British.
The report’s most illuminating premise is that black and ethnic minority (BME) citizens should not be regarded as a single entity but as a series of distinct groups: Indian, Pakistani, Black African, Black Caribbean, Bangladeshi, Chinese, Sikh, and others. This approach means that the portrait is more vividly pixellated: 24 per cent of Pakistani men are taxi drivers; 75 per cent of Indian pupils achieve five A*-C grades (including English and Maths); south Asians are six times more likely to have diabetes than the general population, and so on.
Related stories
What does unite BME citizens is that, for the most part, they do not trust the Tories. Only 16 per cent of minority voters backed the Conservative Party in 2010, while 68 per cent supported Labour. All that can be said in defence of this lamentable performance is that it was better than the 11 per cent scored by Michael Howard in 2005.
In the early years of his leadership, David Cameron made much of this deficit and the need to craft a form of Toryism that was welcoming to BME voters. But the Crash distracted him and Ukip spooked him: in office he has devoted more time to talking tough on immigration than to stretching a hand out to minority communities. As I have written before, there is absolutely no point in the Prime Minister chasing Ukip rightwards. Better to speak from the heart and denounce the party for what it is.
It is no exaggeration to say that the future of the Conservative Party depends upon this moment of confrontation — for demographic as well as moral reasons. The Policy Exchange study recruits Professor Philip Rees from the University of Leeds to model population growth on the basis of a complex database  and concludes that by 2051 up to 30 per cent of the UK population will come from an ethnic minority.
This is a striking prediction. Even more striking, however, has been the relaxed response. Yesterday’s Sun, for instance, hailed “MELTING POT UK”, with the subheading “MPs warned not to ignore minority vote”. In its editorial, the Daily Telegraph declared the report “a reminder of what a unifying concept Britain is”. Already, according to Policy Exchange, one in eight multi-person households includes people from more than one ethnic group. Almost half a century after Enoch Powell foresaw “the River Tiber foaming with much blood”, it is flowing peacefully.
All the polls suggest that Ukip will do very well in the European elections a fortnight tomorrow. Farage has momentum, the aura of novelty (remember Cleggmania?) and the mask of the Purple Pimpernel who has got under the skin of the “Establishment”. But when he claims, as he did in his spring conference speech, that “this is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren”, he does not speak for the nation.
The complexities of a multi-ethnic society are considerable. But that is just another way of saying that globalisation, digital technology, population mobility and cross-border perils such as fundamentalist terrorism and climate change are redrawing the political and social landscape at unprecedented speed. The good news is that, for all the difficulties implicit in this upheaval, Britain is for the most part handling change with dignity and compassion.
As for Ukip, I refer you to Bertie Wooster’s definitive denunciation: “The trouble with you, Spode, is that just because you have succeeded in inducing a handful of half-wits to disfigure the London scene by going about in black shorts, you think you’re someone. You hear them shouting ‘Heil, Spode!’ and you imagine it is the Voice of the People. That is where you make your bloomer. What the Voice of the People is saying is: ‘Look at that frightful ass Spode swanking about in footer bags! Did you ever in your puff see such a perfect perisher?’” Timeless and unimprovable.
Twitter @MatthewdAncona
Document NSONL00020140507ea57000hz
