{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1458"}
____
  
Technology
London Technology Week: Boris Johnson unveils annual event to rival Fashion Week
762 words
13 March 2014
11:11
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Boris Johnson today unveiled plans for the first ever London Technology Week which he hopes will eventually rival London Fashion Week in its global reach.
The annual spectacle would include more than 25 events - including a major conference hosted by Bloomberg - and bring together over 1,000 influential tech experts this June.
New immigration rules that will give tech city firms the right to bring in migrants on “exceptional talent" visas and that were also put before Parliament today.
The system already exists for groups such as the Arts Council and the Royal Academy of Engineering and will allow a total of 500 migrants with high technological skills to get visas from April and then another 500 from October.
Mr Johnson, setting out his vision for the future of Tech City, also announced plans for a group of tech ambassadors to champion the capital internationally.
Gerard Grech, chief executive of Tech City, and prominent entrepreneur Sherry Coutu are among nine industry leaders who will help attract more firms and talent to London and advise City Hall on how to promote Europe’s biggest digital cluster.
In addition, the Mayor announced the arrival of three new tech firms which will open offices here with dozens of jobs initially but more coming over time.
On a visit to the TechHub space on Old Street, Mr Johnson said: “There is nowhere to rival London for tech firms to thrive and grow – we have the talent, the investors, and the entrepreneurial spirit. Our tech offer now spans the capital in its entirety, from Tottenham to Croydon and from Wembley to Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park.
“I want London’s world class tech sector to be as well known around the globe as our tourism, arts and financial services - it certainly deserves to be. London is where it all comes together. We need to build on this impressive growth and champion London as the global leader for ambitious tech companies."
The Mayor was joined by some of the world’s leading tech industry figures including Mind Candy boss Michael Acton Smith, Facebook’s Nicola Mendelsohn and Sir William Sargent, chief of Framestore which won a visual effects Oscar for Gravity.
Sir William told the Standard: “When you grow a business you’re on a roller coaster, so if you feel you have a supportive environment around you, starting with local planners and the Mayor’s office, it can help you get over the little humps you experience in the first few years.
“The Mayor and the Government need to facilitate the virtual circle of success stories in London’s tech sector. All they can do is enable and champion, they can’t actually create the jobs or the businesses. It’s not about the money they spend, it’s about the personal enthusiasm they show for it."
Deputy mayor for business, and chair of London & Partners, Kit Malthouse added: “Our job is to help maintain the ecosystem. We’re the groundsmen that will help look after the pitch and provide the football so it’s ready when the players want to go out and play."
City Hall has been lobbying for the UK visa system to be simplified to allow in more highly skilled digital technology workers. It is understood that today’s visas announcement was already planned but the timing was co-ordinated with the Mayor’s announcement.
Immigration minister James Brokenshire said: “These changes today will ensure that the UK remains competitive in attracting global talent to work for British businesses, so that we can succeed in the global race."
It comes as a new YouGov survey for L&P found 84 per cent of tech firms based in London believed the outlook for their sector was bright, while 71 per cent said that being based in London would help them attract investment. More than half said they would expand their business here.
New firms welcomed to the capital by Mr Johnson are Park Jockey, a US company that has developed a free app to reserve and find car parking, Deya Tech, a Chinese firm which specialises in providing document management software and Solocal, a French e-commerce giant that deals with online classified ads and directories.
Tech City was launched by Mr Cameron and the Mr Johnson in November 2010 to support the growth of the technology cluster. The sector has grown by 28 per cent since 2010 with 340 London based firms attracting investment of over £1.47 billion.
Document NSONL00020140313ea3d002ph
