{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"3440"}
____
  
News
Give blacks and Asians a better deal, says Khan
Joe Murphy   
399 words
15 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
4
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
LABOUR declared war on racial inequality today by pledging action to increase the number of black and Asian people in the police, the judiciary, company boardrooms and on TV.
In a policy-rich speech, shadow justice secretary Sadiq Khan revealed that although unemployment is falling among the white population, it is rising in black and minority ethnic (BME) communities.
"The fact is Britain remains a hugely unequal country for black and ethnic minority people," said Mr Khan, the son of an immigrant bus driver, at an ¦¦¦event staged in Tower Hamlets by Operation Black Vote.
"If you are black or Asian in Britain today you are significantly more likely to be unemployed, will earn less and live a shorter life than your white counterparts. This is a moral issue and political issue — an injustice that offends our basic values of fairness."
Launching a consultation on policy ideas for the 2015 Labour manifesto, Mr Khan outlined several firm policy plans, including: Police forces including the Met would face a new "legal requirement" to have active recruitment policies designed to increase diversity.
Companies will face legislation unless they increase the number of black people in directors' posts.
Targets will be set to double to 18 per cent the number of BME candidates in the Fast Stream programme of Civil Service promotions. Two QCs have been asked to recommend ways to get more BME judges and magistrates.
The Work Programme would be changed to target unemployed black and Asian people more effectively.
Mr Khan, Labour's London elections campaign boss, believes the BME population is increasingly important in key marginal seats and outer London boroughs. Mayor Boris Johnson last week warned Conservatives against being "complacent" on the issue.
Mr Khan said unemployment fell 14.6 per cent among white people in the past year, but rose 4.5 per cent among blacks and Afro-Caribbeans, 3.3 per cent in Bangladeshi communities and 5.4 per cent among people of mixed race. Fifteen per cent of white Londoners were paid less than the Living Wage, against 34 per cent for Asian Londoners.
He urged TV stations to use a BME presenter like Amol Rajan in the general election Leaders Debates, and said the new London Live has "shown up" other TV channels with its range of black and Asian presenters.
Document NS00000020140515ea5f0003a
