{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"3200"}
____
  
Comment
Evening Standard comment: A Euro poll wake-up for the Coalition
619 words
10 April 2014
13:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Today’s poll deserves to have the effect of galvanising the main parties in an election that usually leaves most voters unmoved
Today's official start of the Tories’ campaign for the European elections next month will be marred by this paper’s poll showing a surge in support for Ukip, to 15 per cent.
The Tories have fallen back a point to 31 per cent — six points behind Labour. Given that the election is about Ukip’s defining issue, the EU, this is perhaps unsurprising, but it may reflect wider disenchantment with the established parties: the Maria Miller affair will have done the Tories no good. Ukip MEPs, of course, enjoy a generous expenses regime of their own from Brussels, but many voters are still enraged by the idea that the political classes are enjoying perks denied to the rest of us. This anger may also feed into local elections taking place on the same day.
The poll will reinforce ministers’ concerns that the affair has distracted attention from the Government’s work with the economy: the reason why the Chancellor reportedly intervened to expedite Mrs Miller’s resignation. Higher growth, lower unemployment and increased investment should be feeding into the polls; instead the Tories’s support remains vulnerable to Ukip. Meanwhile their Lib-Dem Coalition partners are faring even worse, down by four points.
Labour has been less affected by the rise in Ukip support, though it faces losing voters in its core areas. Thus its efforts today to seem a little more robust on immigration, by proposing tougher penalties for employers who abuse migrant labour, may well have Ukip in mind. Labour may yet be beaten to first place in the European elections by Ukip; the Tories seem unlikely to manage better than a humiliating third place. European elections always involve a greater-than-usual element of protest voting. Still, today’s poll deserves to have the effect of galvanising the main parties in an election that usually leaves most voters unmoved.
Two wheels v four
The coroner at the inquest into the death of Russian cyclist Venera Minakhmetova, killed at Bow roundabout last year, decided that the cause of her death was that she had jumped red lights. Plainly the coroner was right to point out that this is reckless behaviour, though cyclists claim that, notwithstanding significant changes to Bow roundabout where the accident took place, this is still a junction with confusing signals, of which cyclists remain wary. Indeed, this is not the only tragedy partly attributable to risk-taking behaviour: another inquest heard today that a cyclist was killed riding while intoxicated at Whitechapel.
Obviously, all road-users must respect the rules of the road as a matter of courtesy as well as safety. But the consequences of errors for cyclists are more lethal than for motorists. Their sheer vulnerability was manifest yesterday in an accident at Shepherd’s Bush, in which a cyclist was pinned under a skip truck. We need more dedicated cycle lanes — which the Mayor has already promised. But we also need a culture of road use in which both motorists and cyclists treat each other with respect.
Fairer council tax
The Liberal Democrat Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Danny Alexander, has told this paper that his party would introduce higher council tax bands for homes worth more than £2 million if it were elected to government. It’s a policy with a clear logic: council tax at higher existing bands simply doesn’t reflect the value of the most expensive homes. But will it rescue the Lib-Dems’ fortunes in London? That must be less certain.
Document NSONL00020140410ea4a0012z
