{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"469"}
____
  
Comment
Evening Standard comment: The toll of gang violence on London
Evening Standard   
620 words
12 March 2014
11:42
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
The figures obtained by this paper about the number of violent offences committed by known gang members make sobering reading. Young men on the Met’s official gang database were responsible for more than 6,600 violent offences in three years, including 24 murders, 28 attempted killings, 170 firearms offences, as well as stabbings and kidnappings. Other offences committed by gang members include causing grievous bodily harm with a weapon and robbery.
Each was carried out by one of 3,484 gang members on the database. Two were just 13, another 24 were aged 14 and nearly 550 were 17 or younger. Given that the offences described here are the most serious and violent and do not include, for instance, drug-trafficking, the scale of the impact of gangs on the areas in which they live is extraordinary. The fact that much of the violence is gang-on-gang does not make it any less disturbing.
What is also troubling is that these crime levels have been fairly consistent in the three years to February. They have not dropped significantly as a result of the Met’s greater concentration on gang violence. The Met’s strategy is sound — to make life as difficult as possible for the most serious gangsters and to offer positive alternatives to less hardened individuals, as this paper has championed through its Frontline London campaign. And the Home Office has spent tens of millions in anti-gang initiatives since the 2011 riots.
We are left with the sobering conclusion that the best efforts of police and social workers have served simply to keep levels of gang violence stable and a great deal of violence has been prevented by the imprisonment of the worst offenders. Perhaps the most urgent element of any new anti-gang strategy is to ensure that, while in prison, and after release, these individuals are given the support they need not to return to the gangs.
The in-out question
With his recalibration of Labour’s position on the EU today, Ed Miliband has not ruled out a referendum on EU membership — nor has he committed himself to one should Labour win the election. What he has done is promise that in the unlikely (as he sees it) event of Britain being asked to transfer further powers to the EU, he would hold an in-out referendum. It is a reasonably neat solution to the problem of being seen to refuse people a say on the issue, or of being bounced into promising a poll by the Tories.
Yet the strategy has its dangers. In making clear that he thinks it very unlikely that Britain will be asked to cede further powers to Brussels, he is ruling out a poll in the foreseeable future — despite potentially serious changes to the EU’s workings as a result of the divide between the eurozone core and non-euro nations. His gamble is that most of the electorate shares his view that the Tories look out of touch with their fixation on Europe. It may turn out that on issues such as freedom of labour the EU plays into concerns about immigration that people do care about. Still, today’s pledge puts some clear water between the main parties: that should serve a useful electoral purpose.
Serpentine in space
The Serpentine pavilion, like the Fourth Plinth in Trafalgar Square, is a source of ever-changing inspiration and interest. This year’s design by Chilean architect Smiljan Radic resembles a space pod, or possibly a mushroom, which glows at night. And it’s precisely because it’s only temporary that it seems such fun.
Document NSONL00020140312ea3c002mz
