{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2193"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Cable slams Tory immigration policy
1,079 words
8 March 2014
11:30
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Vince Cable has stepped up his row with the Tories over immigration, accusing his coalition colleagues of tending to "fan the flames of prejudice" over the issue.
The Business Secretary's comments on the "toxic" subject came as he threw his weight behind Liberal Democrat calls for changes to make it easier for foreign students to stay and work in the UK, and for immigrants to bring their families to live with them.
Mr Cable's latest intervention comes just days after he was attacked by Immigration Minister James Brokenshire over the Lib Dem minister's belief that the rise in immigration was "good news" for the country.
The Business Secretary said the Lib Dem proposals would help "persuade the public to calm down" about fears of the impact of immigration.
Speaking at the Lib Dem spring conference in York, Mr Cable said: "It was never more necessary to have a party that was willing to stand up on this toxic issue and address it from the point of view of realism and evidence and fact.
"The Labour Party will always hide in a bunker when difficult issues like this come along and the Tories tend to fan the flames of prejudice and then they panic when it gets out of control and parties even further to the right take over.
"We have an acute responsibility here."
He said Liberals had stood up for the rights of immigrants, be they Jews from eastern Europe in the early 20th century, East African Asians and citizens from Hong Kong.
Mr Cable said: "We have got the same challenge today and we have got to meet it. One of the ways of meeting it is to be realistic and address people's genuine concerns."
The Business Secretary backed proposals to allow science, engineering and maths students from outside the European Union (EU) to work in the UK for up to three years after graduating.
The plans would also allow the Migration Advisory Committee to make it easier for people to bring a spouse to join them in the UK.
The proposals would also allow elderly relatives to join their families in the UK as long as they paid a levy to cover their likely health costs.
Mr Cable said it was a "balanced platform, it gives us a platform of credibility with which we can then persuade the public to calm down, accept that immigration - properly managed - is good for our country and it is right that we accept the obligations that go with European membership too".
But there was some criticism of the immigration proposals at the conference, with Northamptonshire councillor Jill Hope warning that the levy on health costs for elderly relatives would amount to "hundreds of thousands of pounds".
"It's a throwaway line and it's completely unworkable," she told the conference.
The Business Secretary's comments came at a conference which has been dominated so far by the issue of the UK's links with Brussels.
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said the Tories had nothing meaningful to say on the issue as he sought to portray May's European elections as a straight choice between his Liberal Democrats and Ukip.
Mr Clegg has gambled that casting the Lib Dems as the "party of in" will appeal to voters concerned about severing ties with the EU.
Taking a swipe at both his Tory coalition colleagues and Labour over the EU, Mr Clegg said: " The two main parties in this country no longer have anything meaningful to say about Europe.
"Labour seems to be enjoying sitting on its hands and in a rather cowardly manner failing to make the internationalist case at all.
"The Conservatives are deeply divided between a significant part that agrees with Ukip, and another part casting around for ideas to keep them in the EU, so Labour and the Conservatives are split or confused, or completely lost the courage of their convictions.
"When big parties create vacuums like that they get filled, and they are being filled by the two other parties.
"Whether you agree with us or not, at least we have the merit of having clear and consistent views on this."
Mr Clegg will take on Ukip leader Nigel Farage in two head-to-head debates ahead of the European elections as part of the Lib Dem effort to set them up as the natural opponents to the party which has pushed them into fourth place in a series of opinion polls.
In an interview with The Guardian, he said: " The irony is that you have got the two smaller parties telling the country what the choice is, and the choice increasingly is whether we remain in or not.
"It is the same choice in Dutch, French and German politics - do you respond to globalisation by being open or closed?"
Mr Clegg said he understood the appeal of Ukip to voters: " At a time of economic insecurity, in the wake of this massive cardiac arrest we suffered back in 2008, because of all of the anxieties associated with globalisation where people feel their lives are being affected by forces which they can't control, I think it is totally logical actually that some people will find it quite seductive when a politician says, 'it's someone else's fault and all your anxieties can be lifted from your shoulders if only we just shut the door'."
In contrast to David Cameron, he added: "I've never dismissed Ukip as nutters and fruitcakes.
"I take what they represent deadly seriously and, by the way, I wouldn't be having a debate with Nigel Farage unless I took what he says very, very seriously."
But he said Mr Farage "wants to turn the clock back, he doesn't like modern Britain, he wants to dismiss so many of the big modern features of modern life - I want to embrace them".
The immigration proposals, passed overwhelmingly by the conference, replace previous Lib Dem policies on the issue, including the controversial amnesty and regional system.
Under the new policy, the Lib Dems would back extending to six months the period before EU migrants could claim UK benefits, as part of Europe-wide reforms.
The plan would also require asylum seekers to try to find work after six months.
Former minister Sir Andrew Stunell, who helped draw up the plans, said they would "help Nick see off Nigel Farage".
Document NSONL00020140308ea38001rx
