{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"3322"}
____
  
Comment
Evening Standard comment: Good economic news as the polls tighten
633 words
14 May 2014
12:33
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
A voteless recovery remains a danger for the Tories, but the Chancellor is now entitled to some guarded optimism
Today's unemployment figures for the three months to March further reinforce signs of a strong recovery — down to 6.8 per cent, the lowest figure in five years. The fall in unemployment is not large in itself, 0.1 per cent: what matters is the trend, coming after a small fall in the quarter before. And that adds to an increasingly pervasive sense that the recession is coming to an end. Meanwhile other new figures show that wage increases are now close to crossing over with the inflation rate.
Delivering the Bank of England’s inflation report today, Governor Mark Carney was similarly positive, though he conceded that the economy had now “edged closer to the point” where interest rates will need to “gradually rise”. Markets expect gradual rises from next spring. This may be something that the economy can weather in its current state, especially if rises are slow and incremental. Indeed, to the extent it cools an overheated mortgage market, an increase in the historically low rates may soon be necessary, though Mr Carney points out that there are other tools available.
That will not make rate rises any more welcome to mortgage owners — one of the uncertainties in how all these trends translate into politics. As we report today, the latest poll shows that Labour retains a three-point lead, after two polls this week showing the Tories just ahead. In truth such results are within the polls’ margin of error. Ukip is two points ahead of the Liberal Democrats — an indication of how things may go in the European elections next week. But the other finding of today’s poll is the extent of economic optimism: over half of those polled think things will continue to get better. A voteless recovery remains a danger for the Tories, but the Chancellor is now entitled to some guarded optimism.
More migrants
Given the extent of fears that Britain in general and London in particular would be swamped by an influx of migrants from Bulgaria and Romania once the last labour restrictions were lifted on migrants from those countries in January, today’s migration figures are reassuring. The number of people from both countries working here was 140,000 for the first quarter, down by 4,000 on the preceding quarter but up by 28,000 per cent on the same period last year. This is a manageable number, though the numbers coming from those countries may rise. Still, the overwhelming majority have come here to work: in London, many are in the City and in the health service. That matters: David Cameron’s move to restrict benefits to EU migrants for the first few months after their arrival is based on deterring those who come to claim benefits; their numbers are relatively few.
Of course there remains an issue with immigration numbers overall, not least for the Tories: these figures confirm that ministers have almost no chance of hitting their pledge of reducing net migration to less than 100,000 by next year. But so far as fears about migration from Bulgaria and Romania are concerned, the fears of an influx seem wide of the mark.
Girl power
The British Government has urged Nigerian families to continue to send girls to school, notwithstanding the kidnap of over 200 girls by Boko Haram. It is grim that sending a girl to school requires real courage but in northern Nigeria, that is the sad reality. We salute those families that do take the risk. The aim should be that this should be a normal thing to do, not an act of bravery.
Document NSONL00020140514ea5e0018l
