{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"975"}
____
  
News
Cameron blasts Farage for saying some 'pretty unpleasant things'
Nicholas Cecil   
429 words
19 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
3; National
10
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
DAVID CAMERON today accused Nigel Farage of saying some "pretty unpleasant things" for suggesting that Londoners would not want a group of Romanian men as neighbours.
Mr Cameron stopped short of calling the Ukip leader racist, but he told the BBC this morning: "I think he has said, in recent days, some really pretty unpleasant things and he has even himself had to admit he got it wrong.
"I will leave others to judge, but what I have heard from some of the candidates, some of the donors to the party, is a succession of pretty appalling things. I would just say to people look, what we need in Britain is not the poli-tics of anger, we need the politics of the answer — how do we get migration better under control, how do we reform our welfare, how do we get the relationship right with Europe?" Mr Farage was earlier today accused of "stealing language from the BNP" after Ukip took out an advert in The Daily Telegraph to try to defuse the row which ensued after he said he would be concerned if Romanian men moved in next door to him.
Last night, he expressed "regret" for his remarks but today took out the advert to defend his arguments that Romanian immigrants are to blame for an increase in crime, particularly at cash machines.
The ad includes the sub-headline "All We Want is Our Country Back" and in it, Mr Farage says the "vast majority" of Romanians in the UK want to "better their lives and would make good neighbours" but added that eastern European gangs were exploiting EU freedom of movement rules.
Liberal Democrat president Tim Farron said the subheadline was very similar to the BNP's slogan "We Want Our Country Back" and added: "Stealing language from the BNP only inflames community tensions and is the politics of division."
Mr Farage was forced to fend off a barrage of accusations of racism after an LBC interview on Friday.
He initially stood by his words, but told BBC News last night: "In life, sometimes people get things wrong. I regret the fact that I was completely tired out and I didn't use the form of words in response that I would have liked to have used.
"I should have just hit back immediately and said, 'Look, understand there is a real problem here — you can't deny it — too much criminality from these gangs has come to London'."
Nick Clegg Page 15
Document NS00000020140520ea5j0000o
