{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"3185"}
____
  
News
Cooper pledges to deport more migrants who commit crimes
Nicholas Cecil   
446 words
10 April 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
EU MIGRANTS who commit burglaries, assaults or deal in drugs would be automatically considered for deportation under tougher rules proposed by Labour.
Shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper unveiled plans today to remove thousands more immigrants found guilty of crimes in Britain.
The Home Office can deport EU citizens if they have been resident in Britain for less than five years and are jailed for more than a year for sexual, violence or drugs-related offences, more than two years for other offences, or if they reoffend.
However, Ms Cooper is proposing to deport offenders who have been here for possibly less than two years for less serious offences such as minor drug dealing, robbery, burglary, common assault and sexual assault.
"Most people come to Britain to work and contribute to our communities. But it's only fair that new migrants shouldn't be able to claim benefits and should learn English so our communities are not divided," she told The Standard. "There should be firmer action if people don't abide by the rules, so those who commit crimes soon after arriving can be swiftly deported."
Ms Cooper admitted that Labour "got things wrong on immigration", including failing to have transitional controls after EU expansion in 2004 to let in a swath of Eastern European states. But she claimed the Government was having a "worst of all worlds", in which illegal immigration was allegedly getting worse, businesses were unable to access the skills they need and thousands of fee-paying foreign students were being deterred from going to British universities.
Calling for exit checks at Britain's borders, Ms Cooper said: "London has been built on the ideas, ingenuity and sweat of people who travelled here over centuries to be part of Britain.
"Immigration is important for Britain's future. But that's why we need stronger controls to deal with the problems immigration can cause, and reforms to make the system fair for all."
The Liberal Democrats have been pushing for exit controls, while the Tories are said to be less enthusiastic.
Ms Cooper also pledged that serious exploitation of migrant labour to undercut wages would be a criminal offence under a Labour government.
She also called for the fingerprinting of illegal immigrants caught at Calais to help further action if they try to reenter the UK.
In a speech in central London, she also accused the Tories of failing in their target to cut net migration to tens of thousands and of using the "language of the Seventies National Front" with vans which toured north London telling illegal migrants to "go home".
Document NS00000020140410ea4a00050
