{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"3679"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
Don't patronise voters, they're not 'always right'
Amol Rajan   
599 words
22 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
LAST week, David Cameron coined a phrase that I strongly agree with. Before we get to it, some context.
It is one of the most deeply rooted superstitions of our age that the voter is always right. Like its sibling in the world of commerce — "the customer is always right" — this proposition is based on the needs of those who believe it: namely, the need to get re-elected, or to sell a product. But that need doesn't make the proposition true. In fact, the idea that the voter is always right is wrong, damaging and counter-productive.
Everything you have read about today's local and European elections, and about the march of Ukip, mentions a rising tide of anger. Voters, their suspicions confirmed by the expenses crisis, and their wallets emptied by a financial crisis which wasn't their doing but for which they paid, feel increasingly alienated by various elite projects, not least the EU. A cast of entrenched horrors, from the sickening disparity in our schools to the legalised robbery by the rich that is housing policy, just makes things worse.
On some of these things, voters are right. But which politician dares state the obvious fact that on many things voters are hopelessly wrong? A majority think crime is rising. It's actually falling, across the board.
A majority think immigrants take British jobs. They don't: but the "lump of labour fallacy" takes some explaining. A majority think MPs are corrupt. They're not: most are exhausted, loyal patriots who could get paid better elsewhere.
Doubtless many readers will castigate a metropolitan media maven like me — full disclosure: I live in Barnsbury! — for being myopic. I can hear them now: "It's easy for you to say, mate." There are two problems with this line of argument: first, I didn't always work in the media, or live in Islington; second, you're changing the subject from what I am saying to who is saying it.
Naturally I understand that no politician would wander around with a banner declaring that voters wrong. But the almost total absence of correctives to popular misconceptions is very corrosive, because it stops us seeing politics for what it is — and therefore what it can and can't achieve.
Another very common superstition is the belief that all social problems are capable of political solutions. Plainly, they are not.
I know I'm naive but my approach to politics is defined by three rules: a commitment to truth over tribe; the application of moral rather than ideological analysis; and an attempt to encounter the world as it really is, not as we pretend it to be.
So when the Prime Minister said voters should look to the "politics of answers not anger", he was spot on.
Britain is riddled with injustice. Our democracy belongs to the analogue age, and there is urgent work to be done. But we're doing OK, too. Our schools are getting better, our health service is excellent, and you can get wi-fi in the British Library.
Patronising voters by offering a mirror to their delusions is dishonest, and thereby convicts our political class of the very crime voters accuse them of. What is worse, it signals the emotional infancy of a country too spoilt to know its luck.
Amol Rajan is editor of The Independent. Twitter: @amolrajan
Everything you have read about today's elections, and the march of Ukip, mentions a rising tide of anger
Document NS00000020140522ea5m00096
