{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2253"}
____
  
News
charles 'hitler' attack on putin backed
Nicholas Cecil; Robert Jobson ; Will Stewart   
735 words
21 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
1,5
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
CLEGG DEFENDS PRINCE'S RIGHT TO SPEAK ON SENSITIVE ISSUES
PRINCE Charles today won Government backing over his right to speak on sensitive issues, despite risking a diplomatic storm by apparently comparing Vladimir Putin to Hitler. Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg defended the prince over the comment, which could hit already tense Anglo-Russian relations.
The heir to the throne is said to have likened the Russian president to the Nazi leader in a private conversation during a visit to Canada. Condemning Russia's actions over Ukraine, 'Royals don't have to take vow of silence' Charles is reported as telling a Jewish woman who lost relatives in the Nazi Holocaust: "And now Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler."
Mr Clegg declined to comment on the specific allegation but supported the Prince of Wales giving his views on British and global controversies.
"I certainly support his right to speak freely, particularly in conversations he thinks are private," he told the BBC.
"I have never been of this view that if you are a member of the Royal Family somehow you have to enter into some Trappist vow of silence."
Asked if he agreed there were parallels to be drawn between Nazi Germany and Russia's annexation of Crimea plus intervention in eastern Ukraine, the Liberal Democrat leader said: "I'm not going to start comparing one period of European history to another.
"All I'd say is that right now I think the behaviour of Putin is not only menacing to Ukraine but it is very destabilising for Europe more generally." Downing Street and the Foreign Office declined to comment, although No 10 highlighted that the Prince's conversation had been private. A Clarence House spokesman said: "We would like to stress the Prince of Wales would not seek to make a public political statement during a private conversation." Ukip leader Nigel Farage, who said previously he admired Mr Putin for his handling of the Syrian crisis, disagreed with the prince's reported comment.
He added: "The difference is that right from the very start Hitler was expansionist and we haven't seen much evidence of that until now from Putin. Arguably what has happened in the Ukraine is because he has been poked with a stick by the rest of the world."
The Labour Party's deputy leader Harriet Harman declined to voice backing for the Prince, saying: "It was an official visit, was it not? I think I'm just going to refer you to the Palace."
Labour MP Mike Gapes, ex-chairman of the Commons foreign affairs committee, tweeted: "If Charles wants to make controversial statements on national or international issues he should abdicate and stand for election. In constitutional monarchy, policy and diplomacy should be conducted by Parliament and Government. Monarchy should be seen and not heard." The Kremlin remained silent on the row today, as did most of the Russian media. However, the website of major popular newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets, seen as pro-Kremlin, warned that Charles "risks triggering an international scandal and complicating the already far from cloudless relations between Great Britain and Russia".
Charles's remark came on a tour of the Museum of Immigration in Halifax, Nova Scotia, as he and the Duchess of Cornwall paid tribute to Second World War veterans and their families.
Jewish museum volunteer Marienne Ferguson, 78, told the Prince she fled to Canada with her family shortly before the Nazis annexed the Baltic coastal Free City of Gdansk in 1939.
After meeting Charles, Mrs Ferguson said: "He told me, 'And now Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler'.
"I must say I agree with him and am sure a lot of people do. But I was very surprised he made the comment as I know Royal Family members are not meant to say these things." Charles is due to meet Mr Putin in a few weeks at the 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings in Normandy on June 6. The Standard understands that he is refusing to cooperate with a "master plan" over transition of the reign.
He fears, we have been told, that if he adopts the Palace plan to make him a "shadow King" it will limit his right to speak out, to which he is not prepared to sign up.
Document NS00000020140521ea5l0005p
