{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1720"}
____
  
Features; Opinion, Column
A media storm won't cleanse British sexism
Rosamund Urwin   
516 words
17 April 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
IN A game of sexist top trumps, would Britain emerge victorious? Would we see off every other nation, beating Yemen with its lone female MP, India with its record on rape or Saudi Arabia where law-makers think women are such delicate flowers that they couldn't possibly get behind a wheel? No, of course we wouldn't. So we can all just ignore the meddling, mad woman from the United Nations who claimed that the UK was the most sexist country in the world, right? Except that she didn't actually say that. Professor Rashida Manjoo, the UN's special rapporteur who is currently jetting around the world to research violence against women, simply said that sexism is more overt in the UK. She was comparing Britain with a small pool of countries she has visited on this trip, which admittedly include Bangladesh and Somalia. Her comment referred to the media portrayal of the sexes and the marketisation of women's bodies.
"Have I seen this level of sexist culture in other countries?" Manjoo asked. "It hasn't been so in your face... I'm sure it exists but it wasn't so much and so pervasive."
Arguing that sexist culture is more out-in-the-open is not the same as saying it is at its most severe. Sexism has a multitude of different manifestations, many of which are much more covert than up-skirt shots in newspapers or the Sun's Page 3. Those are overt by intention: a topless 21-year-old is half there to sell papers to men, half to annoy feminists like me.
What was telling, though, were the screeching denials from (mostly male) commentators about Manjoo's misconstrued statement. "How dare she generalise and accuse ALL Brits of abusing women!" was a typically hyperbolic response. The British boys' club that she had spoken of closed ranks. So instead of engaging in a discussion about the position of women in Britain today, these men simply listed the countries that were worse. Not being Yemen doesn't make Britain an equal opportunities Elysium.
This confected media storm distracted from all the issues Manjoo was raising. Her report set out the extent of violence against women in Britain, the way austerity measures are affecting services for victims of domestic abuse, and the way legal aid cuts are disproportionately hitting women from ethnic minorities. Clearly, these don't make such good headlines. Worst of all, it emerged Manjoo had been denied access to the Serco-run Yarl's Wood immigration detention centre — despite repeated requests. Given that a 40-year-old woman died of a heart attack there last month, it needed a visit.
The rest of the world may not need the UK to teach Misogyny: 101 seminars — other countries are good enough at it themselves. But nor is Britain the best of all possible worlds for women.
Twitter: @RosamundUrwin
Sexism has a multitude of manifestations. Not being Yemen doesn't make Britain an equal opportunities Elysium
Document NS00000020140417ea4h0006y
