{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1002"}
____
  
Comment
Sam Leith: Now money talks louder than ever
896 words
19 May 2014
13:37
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
In an odd way, ambivalence about rich foreigners parallels how Ukip thinks about poor foreigners
The latest Sunday Times Rich List tells us that the wealthiest 64 individuals in the UK own as much as the poorest 30 per cent of the population combined. And since the 2008 crash, the aggregate fortune of the richest 1,000 has doubled. A fillip to the argument of French economist Thomas Piketty, who says our problem is returns on capital are greater than economic growth: ie, the way to get rich is to be rich.
I don’t know when the very rich got a euphemism. They’re called HNW: “high net worth”. I assume having the W stand for “worth” rather than “wealth” (ie “value” rather than “price”, in the cynic’s binary) testifies to the phrase’s origins in the wealth-flattery industry.
Euphemism, like net worth, is subject to inflation. Even within the category, Piketty’s widening gap is evidenced. In recent years we’ve encountered the VHNW (“very high net worth”) and the UHNW (“ultra high net worth”) and if trends continue we can expect MHNW and SHMW — “mahoosively” and “stupendously” — to follow.
What does it do to us to contemplate these people among us, with their ballooning bank balances and the compound interest on their superlatives? Why do we consume facts and figures about them with such appetite? Like the ordinary kind, wealth-pornography evokes complicated and rancid emotions: envy and disapproval and fascination and disgust and, in turn, self-disgust. Give us excess of it, that surfeiting...
In an odd way, ambivalence about rich foreigners parallels how Ukip thinks about poor foreigners. The likes of me deplore Nigel Farage’s apparent assumption that your Romanian neighbours will be criminals; but we’re not slow to make that assumption about UHNWs.
We wonder if they’ve accumulated their abnormally sized piles of potatoes through graft or restrictive business practices; through plundering the mineral wealth of ex-Soviet states or the exchequers of African dictatorships. We imagine they conspire to rig markets and avoid tax. This is, obviously, true of some but not all of them.
Ukip types resist statistics indicating immigrants put more in than they take out of the economy; that’s not the point, they say — it’s about the character of the nation changing. As we contemplate vacant windows in Mayfair and double-parked Lamborghinis, something similar applies. We’re told London’s friendliness to international money brings more than it costs us. But we think: they don’t belong here. They are making parts of the city no-go areas. And for every tax-paying, worker-employing James Dyson there are five non-dom vampire squids to whom our tax regime’s sucking up is a moral stain.
A coin-flip, then? Not quite. UHNWs own media organisations and fund political parties, while Romanian immigrants for the most part don’t.
A bit more respect goes a long way
We read a good deal about the objectification of women and its connection with sexual violence. So when Pamela Anderson, one of the most objectified women of all time, stood up at a charity event and spoke about how she was abused at six, raped at 12 and gang-raped in her teens, it deserves to be taken seriously.
“Pamela was so brave,” one website reported a witness saying. It continued: “The actress had dressed to impress in a dangerously low-cut Vivienne Westwood frock as she celebrated the occasion with a cocktail party aboard a luxury yacht”, and noting approvingly the “tiny spaghetti straps that barely managed to contain her ample bosom”. Stay classy.
Plots are lost in the bubble
The Governor of the Bank of England warns of a property price bubble. As Bob Dylan put it: “You don’t need a Weatherman to know which way the wind blows.”
Things, especially in London, are going nuts. The New York Times, for Pete’s sake, is now writing reports into house prices in Brixton. And psychologically, the idea of the bubble bursting doesn’t seem to hold much fear: we see things levelling out and, like last time, catching a thermal again a couple of years later.
The worst danger, then, is that whenever it’s said we’re in the midst of an unsustainable property bubble anyone who owns a house and reckons they have a fighting chance of keeping the mortgage repayments up says: “That’s terrible” and thinks: “Yippee!” Does that hunch vote? You bet it does.
Larger than life (or a London bus)
What do we want from dinosaurs? Enormousness of course. And this is what the latest find in Patagonia delivers. A grown man is pictured lying next to a thigh-bone, or perhaps a toe-bone or a stirrup-bone, which is broader than he is and a good bit longer. Incredisaurus, as the new species is not called, has been officially declared to have been three buses long and to have weighed 14 elephants. The idea of it makes children of us all. But there’s a whisper of melancholy: do we really hold out hope of anyone finding a bigger, or have we passed Peak Dino? We Londoners can console ourselves, at least, that the unit of measurement remains the London bus.
Document NSONL00020140519ea5j001xl
