{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2179"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Tories 'have nothing to say on EU'
833 words
8 March 2014
00:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
The Tories have nothing meaningful to say on Europe, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg claimed as he sought to portray May's European elections as a straight choice between his Liberal Democrats and Ukip.
Mr Clegg has gambled that casting the Lib Dems as the "party of in" will appeal to voters concerned about severing ties with the European Union.
The Liberal Democrats will also highlight their flagship tax policy as their spring conference continues in York, with Treasury Chief Secretary Danny Alexander set to announce that raising the personal allowance to £12,500 will be a key policy demand for the party in any coalition negotiations after the 2015 general election.
Taking a swipe at both his Tory coalition colleagues and Labour over the EU, Mr Clegg said: " The two main parties in this country no longer have anything meaningful to say about Europe.
"Labour seems to be enjoying sitting on its hands and in a rather cowardly manner failing to make the internationalist case at all.
"The Conservatives are deeply divided between a significant part that agrees with Ukip, and another part casting around for ideas to keep them in the EU, so Labour and the Conservatives are split or confused, or completely lost the courage of their convictions.
"When big parties create vacuums like that they get filled and they are being filled by the two other parties.
"Whether you agree with us or not, at least we have the merit of having clear and consistent views on this."
Mr Clegg will take on Ukip leader Nigel Farage in two head-to-head debates ahead of the European elections as part of the Lib Dem effort to set them up as the natural opponents to the party which has pushed them into fourth place in a series of opinion polls.
In an interview with The Guardian he said: " The irony is that you have got the two smaller parties telling the country what the choice is, and the choice increasingly is whether we remain in or not.
"It is the same choice in Dutch, French and German politics - do you respond to globalisation by being open or closed?"
Mr Clegg said he understood the appeal of Ukip to voters: " At a time of economic insecurity, in the wake of this massive cardiac arrest we suffered back in 2008, because of all of the anxieties associated with globalisation where people feel their lives are being affected by forces which they can't control, I think it is totally logical actually that some people will find it quite seductive when a politician says, 'it's someone else's fault and all your anxieties can be lifted from your shoulders if only we just shut the door'."
In contrast to David Cameron, he added: "I've never dismissed Ukip as nutters and fruitcakes.
"I take what they represent deadly seriously and, by the way, I wouldn't be having a debate with Nigel Farage unless I took what he says very, very seriously."
But he said Mr Farage "wants to turn the clock back, he doesn't like modern Britain, he wants to dismiss so many of the big modern features of modern life - I want to embrace them".
Mr Clegg will make an appearance on the conference platform later today, answering questions from activists.
Before that Mr Alexander will set out how the party would further increase the income tax threshold to £12,500 in the next parliament.
Treasury Chief Secretary Danny Alexander will confirm that increasing the threshold will be written into the party's manifesto for the contest, and a rise of at least £500 - giving a tax cut of £100 - would be earmarked for the first Budget or Autumn Statement after the election.
The Lib Dems have made raising the point at which people start paying income tax to £10,000 a priority in Government, with Mr Clegg pressing for a further £500 rise to give a "workers' bonus" in this months' Budget.
Activists are also set to consider a new set of immigration policies - replacing the Lib Dems' former commitment to an amnesty and the potential for regional quotas.
Instead the conference will be asked to back a push for European migrants coming to the UK being forced to wait six months before gaining access to the benefits system as part of a Europe-wide reform.
But the changes proposed by the Lib Dems would also make it easier for immigrants to bring members of their family to join them in the UK.
Business Secretary Vince Cable, who has repeatedly clashed with coalition colleagues over immigration, is expected to request to take part in the debate along with rank and file party members.
Coalition welfare policies will also come under scrutiny as the Lib Dems debate a motion calling for an urgent independent review into the relationship between benefit mistakes or penalties and the growth of food poverty.
Document NSONL00020140308ea38000mb
