{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2990"}
____
  
Comment
Andrew Neather: This row about halal meat is bloody trivial
993 words
9 May 2014
12:42
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
This row isn’t really about animal suffering. Instead, it’s a new way of bashing Muslims and immigrants
Fancy a halal burger? Several newspapers think you don’t. This week they’ve been attempting to whip up public outrage by “revealing” that several fast-food chains and supermarkets use or sell exclusively halal lamb, beef and chicken. Most of these have admitted this for years, though few products are labelled as such. But non-Muslims are indeed consuming a lot of halal meat.
At the 2011 census, 4.8 per cent of the UK population were Muslim. Yet according to Defra, 50 per cent of all sheep and 30 per cent of all poultry slaughtered in the UK are now killed by dhabihah — slitting the animal’s throat with a sharp knife.
The likes of Nando’s and Tesco have made a commercial decision: rather than marketing separate products for Muslims and non-Muslims, they can make more by selling meat acceptable to everyone. Except it apparently isn’t, to some.
Personally I’m uneasy with this fresh example of religion’s insidious re-insertion into English public life. The churches have already wrestled back a bigger role in the school system than they enjoyed 30 years ago, while broadcasters must now tiptoe around the delicate sensibilities of various god-botherers in ways they didn’t back then.
Related stories
Moreover, it’s quite possible for a religious minority with odd dietary laws to manage in Britain without the rest of us having to fit in. Observant Jews always have, going to some lengths to do so (I’ll never forget the bizarre kosher pizza joint that an orthodox girlfriend once took me to.)
Yet there are ten times more Muslims than Jews in Britain now — 2.7 million, a million of them in London. Nor, in practice, is most halal so different to non-halal killing: 88 per cent of halal meat comes from pre-stunned animals (while Islam in theory bans pre-stunning, several UK halal certification bodies have decided the process is acceptable, to the dismay of traditionalists.)
None of it’s pretty. Pre-stunning of poultry, halal or not, is normally done either by gassing the birds or by shackling them upside down and passing their heads through an electrified bath. I wouldn’t want to work in any slaughterhouse — but then I wouldn’t want a job down the sewers or on refuse lorries either, equally essential though those unpleasant tasks are. If you’re really that squeamish about animals being killed for us to eat, go veggie.
This row isn’t really about animal suffering, though. Instead, it’s a new way of bashing Muslims and immigrants — or not so new, given that halal and kosher meat have been a hobby horse of the BNP and French Front National for years. The animal rights nutters and racists in this unholy alliance deserve each other.
Let’s label halal goods as such, as kosher meat is. But it won’t get in the way of my enjoyment of a good kebab — let alone a bacon sandwich.
Actions speak louder then hashtags
In Dave Eggers’s brilliant dystopian novel, The Circle, users of this fictional Facebook-Google hybrid can send “frowns” to people whose behaviour they disapprove of: 19,282 send frowns condemning the Central Guatemala Security Force for human rights abuses. As presented by Eggers, such instant protest in a blizzard of social media messaging is as trivial as it is ineffectual.
I hope the same doesn’t turn out to be true of the #BringBackOurGirls Twitter hashtag campaign urging action to rescue the Nigerian schoolgirls abducted by Islamist terrorists Boko Haram. Even Michelle Obama has got in on the act, and indeed the campaign has at last got this appalling crime some proper news coverage.
But as @FelicityMorse tweeted Obama, “Don’t give me your hashtags, woman, your husband is the president.” Social media activism can help change perceptions. But to rescue people, you need someone’s boots on the ground.
When it comes to fine dining, the rich are on a different planet
The Bulgari hotel in Knightsbridge has one sole purpose: to appeal to the hugely wealthy. In this respect alone, its now defunct Il Ristorante eaterie, despite a panning from my colleague David Sexton two years ago, did the job: its wildly pricey food was expressive primarily, said Sexton, “of the stratosphere of international wealth”.
Now superstar French chef Alain Ducasse has opened a new restaurant, Rivea, in the same space. The food is a refined but still gutsy take on Provençal cuisine — simple, bold flavours, “completely different”, he told me, to his classic French haute cuisine up the road at the Dorchester.
It’s seriously impressive and deserves to succeed. Will the oligarchs notice the difference?
I do hope so — even if they feel they must pass up the terrific Provençal wine list for something more show-offy such as the £4,500-a-bottle 1988 Pétrus.
* Labour’s new Nick-Clegg-bashing election broadcast (bit.ly/1otyIwS) seems to have a very limited target: Lib-Dem defectors to Miliband’s party.
Labour strategists fear that some of the 25 per cent of 2010 Lib-Dem voters who have switched to Labour — less than six per cent of all voters — may drift back. Some polls this week put Labour just one point ahead but this still seems a pretty unambitious strategy. These are very small margins in a nation of 63 million — all the more so against this week’s other arresting poll finding, that 17 per cent of Britons would have sex with a robot.
But then one poll last year found that 19 per cent of Brits believe the Earth has been visited by aliens. Ukip’s supporter base may be larger than we thought.
Twitter @hernehillandy
Document NSONL00020140509ea590009e
