{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2420"}
____
  
Events & Attractions
Borough by borough guide to going out in London
Shalinee Singh   
4,267 words
14 April 2014
13:50
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Do you know what's going on in the area where you live or work? Here's our alphabetical guide to every London borough, featuring local restaurants, bars, culture and attractions
Explore your own backyard or venture somewhere new with our guide to what you can find in each of London's 33 boroughs.
Barking and Dagenham
Upcoming talent and accessible theatre is the focus at Barking’s Broadway Theatre although it does also occasionally host relatively well-known names. The Grade I listed Eastbury Manor House is owned by the National Trust – explore the atmospheric rooms of this Tudor gentry house and stop for a cuppa in the garden tea room. For more of an adrenaline rush go karting at Capital Karts which has the UK’s longest indoor track. There are few fine dining options in the borough, but Cristina’s restaurant claims to serve the best steak in Barking.
More on Barking and Dagenham: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Barnet
Brent Cross is Barnet’s largest shopping centre, packed with retail stores and restaurants. Established local restaurant Emchai serves up good Malay and Chinese food, a branch of Bengal Berties is well-liked for its curries and biryanis, and modern British fare can be found at the Savoro Restaurant with Rooms. A huge range of dance classes take place at All Saints Arts Centre, and the borough is also home to the multi-disciplinary Arts Depot in Finchley and community theatre The Bull Theatre, home to a performing arts school where Amy Winehouse was a pupil. The RAF Museum in Hendon exhibits over 100 displays of historic aircraft.
More on Barnet: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Bexley
Oxleas Woods is 8,000 years old and one of the most extensive areas of woodland in London. There's a café and you can even buy Oxleas Woods honey. If you want a different kind of day out you’ll soon be able to visit Crossness Pumping Station. Opened in 1865 as part of London’s main sewerage system, the centre is undergoing repair including the creation of a new visitor centre. Watersports fans can get their fix at Danson Park which runs sailing and windsurfing classes. For Greek-Cypriot food, try local favourite Cyprus Village.
More on Bexley: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Brent
Wembley Stadium is well-known for its impressive exterior and the huge range of sporting events and massive gigs it hosts. Wembley Arena next door is a music venue too, and tends to be popular with touring A-list comedians. Brent is also the home of the magnificent Hindu mandir, Neasden Temple. Good quality, diverse cuisine can be found in Brent whether it be Iraqi at Mesopotamia in Wembley Park, Japanese at Willesden’s Sushi-Say or Georgian at Tamada in Kilburn. Paradise by Way of Kensal Green is known for raucous club nights but most of the time is a friendly local pub and restaurant. Up the road from Paradise is social enterprise independent cinema The Lexi.
More on Brent: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Bromley
In the far reaches of south east London is leafy Bromley – perhaps its best-known areas are Crystal Palace, Beckenham and Chislehurst. Attractions include the dinosaurs at Crystal Palace Park, Chislehurst Caves and Crystal Palace Museum. Crystal Palace is also known for its multitude of outlets peddling antiques and vintage furniture. Chapter One (sister restaurant to Blackheath’s Chapters All Day Dining) has a Michelin star and Cinnamon Culture is the only Indian restaurant in Bromley to be named in the Michelin Guide. Chislehurst’s Imperial Arms pub is a restored 18th century pub popular for its Sunday roasts.
More on Bromley: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Camden
The BT Tower is the most visible landmark in Camden, but the area stretches all the way from popular shopping destination, Covent Garden, via Fitzrovia, Regent’s Park, Hampstead Heath and King’s Cross all the way up to Camden Market, the heart of London’s alternative scene. Camden’s famous music and entertainment venues – such as KOKO and the Electric Ballroom – are still going strong. For culture lovers there’s the British Museum, the Roundhouse with its year-round arts and music programme (including the annual iTunes festival), and Tottenham Court Road’s cavernous Dominion Theatre. Fitzrovia teems with trendy eating and drinking spots including up-market bistro Dabbous. Camden’s Hawley Arms made its name as Amy Winehouse’s boozer of choice, but for a low-key craft beer head to Brewdog instead. Making an escape to the continent on the Eurostar? Stop for a cocktail at St Pancras’s luxurious Booking Office before you go.
More on Camden: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
City of London
Round the corner from Museum of London, hidden inside a Brutalist exterior, is Europe’s largest multi-arts and conference venue, the Barbican Centre. The venue includes Barbican Hall, home of the London Symphony Orchestra and the BBC Symphony Orchestra, new commission gallery The Curve, a public library and three cinema screens. Two other notable centres in the borough are Guildhall – seat of the City of London Corporation – and the Guildhall School of Music and Drama. Sir Christopher Wren’s St Paul’s Cathedral is adjacent to modern shopping centre One New Change. The Central Criminal Court of England and Wales, the Old Bailey, sits nearly opposite ‘musicians’ church’ St Sepulchre without Newgate, and towards Fleet Street you’ll find the historic Temple Church. On the 40th floor of Heron Tower is Duck & Waffle, the highest restaurant in the UK.
More on City of London: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Croydon
South Croydon’s Le Cassoulet restaurant closed in 2012 but chef Malcom John still runs French bistro Brasserie Vacherin. Uncle Lim’s Kitchen is the place to go for Hainan chicken rice and lovely Joanna’s up in Crystal Palace is a critically acclaimed local brasserie. West Croydon’s Fox and Hounds pub saw the debut of the Electric Light Orchestra in the seventies and Fairfield Halls has a varied arts programme. Selhurst Park is the home of Crystal Palace Football Club.
More on Croydon: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Ealing
Ealing is often called The Queen of the Suburbs because of its abundance of green spaces – like Walpole Park, home to the annual Ealing Comedy Festival and Ealing Jazz Festival, which is near the famous Ealing Studios where films like The Ladykillers and Passport to Pimlico were produced. Other local attractions include Pitzhanger Manor Gallery and House and the London Transport Museum Depot in Acton. Ealing boasts one of the best pizzerias in London, Santa Maria, and Atari-Ya is a sushi restaurant worth crossing London for. Good Chinese food can be found at Maxim and North China, and Charlotte's Place is a popular local bistro. Ealing's only cinema is the Vue Acton, but it has a thriving amateur theatre, Questors, and The Drayton Court pub hosts regular comedy night The No 5 Club, which was started by Harry Hill.
More on Ealing: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Enfield
Around two thirds of Enfield is given over to green belt land and other open spaces – the vast Lee Valley Leisure Centre includes an athletics centre, ice rink, 18-hole golf course, campsite, indoor bowls club and more. Botany Bay Cricket Club is another sports ground, with a jazz club on the side. Charity children’s theatre company Chickenshed has graduated from the shed it started in in 1974, and now also runs workshops elsewhere in the UK. The non-Haringey half of Green Lanes runs through Enfield with predominantly Greek, Turkish and Cypriot fare at restaurants such as Mozz Meze and Grill and Aksular.
More on Enfield: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Greenwich
Greenwich town centre is a UNESCO World Heritage Site thanks to its historic buildings and Royal Greenwich Park. Perched at the top of the park is the Royal Observatory where you can visit London’s only public planetarium and stand with a foot either side of Longitude 0° 0' 0”. Just outside the observatory there is a sweeping vista down to the National Maritime Museum, last surviving tea clipper the Cutty Sark and the magnificent Old Royal Naval College. Greenwich Market is the most popular option for street food to munch on as you browse the varied independent craft stalls or you can opt for a drink and a hearty meal at Meantime’s Old Brewery. As well as hosting The O2 Arena, one of the world’s most popular music venues, Greenwich is also home to one of London’s least known attractions – The Fan Museum.
More on Greenwich: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Hackney
City workers may have flooded in but Hackney is still a melting pot for creatives as it spans Shoreditch, Dalston, Hoxton, London Fields and parts of Hackney Wick and Stoke Newington. Bucolic London Fields is home to a heated lido and lively Broadway Market. Cultural venues include the Geffrye Museum, which offers a fascinating view of domestic history, the Rio Dalston (a cinema since 1915), and Grade II listed theatre Hackney Empire (built as a music hall in 1901). Village Underground is a more modern gig venue which often stages performances from up-and-coming acts. Top-notch restaurants, bars and pubs are generously scattered across the borough – highlights include Merchant’s Tavern, Hoi Polloi, The Clove Club, Duke’s Brew & Que, White Lyan, Sager and Wilde, Dalston Superstore, Netil House, Oslo, Shacklewell Arms and The Nest.
More on Hackney: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Hammersmith and Fulham
The borough’s most famous landmark is the BBC’s former TV broadcasting hub, BBC Television Centre. Shepherd’s Bush’s nearby super-mall Westfield London, boasts over 250 shops, a range of restaurants and the UK’s biggest cinema (17 screens), Vue Westfield London. Hammersmith's Riverside Studios caters for fans of art house films and hosts comedy shows, theatre performances and art exhibitions to boot. Kensington’s Olympia London offers up a programme of large scale conferences and exhibitions, while the borough’s theatre and music lovers are well-catered for by Shepherd’s Bush Empire, Bush Hall, Hammersmith Apollo, the Lyric Hammersmith and the Bush Theatre. Down towards the river in Fulham, the Harwood Arms was the first London pub to be awarded a Michelin star.
More on Hammersmith and Fulham: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Haringey
Alexandra Palace is one of Haringey’s best-known attractions – it stages conferences and big-name gigs and sits in a 196 acre park affording breathtaking views of London. The restaurants and cafés of Green Lanes reflects the Greek, Turkish, Cypriot and Kurdish communities settled nearby – Antepliler and Gokyuzu are two well-liked Turkish options. Crouch End – dubbed nappy valley – is home to Grade II listed Hornsey Town Hall (a favoured filming location) and there’s a range of cosy cafes like The Haberdashery where you can while away an hour or two. At the edge of Hampstead Heath are the shops, pubs and restaurants of charming Highgate Village; watch some theatre at fringe venue Upstairs at the Gatehouse or take a guided tour of Highgate Cemetery, the resting place of Karl Marx.
More on Haringey: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Harrow
Reflective of Harrow’s immigrant population, the two-screen Safari Cinema shows a mixture of Bollywood films old and new while Vue Harrow sticks mainly to the latest Hollywood releases. Harrow Arts Centre in Hatch End occupies an old school. At its heart is the Grade II listed Elliot Hall auditorium seating 400 people and the programme spans theatre, music, dance and more. From Punjabi joints like Five Hot Chillies to Pakistani Cafes like Mr Chilly, Harrow’s restaurants are renowned for the variety and quality of their Asian dishes.
More on Harrow: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Havering
The Romford War Memorial Social Club, which opened in 1953, was revived in 2012 and re-opened as community theatre Brookside Theatre. Unusually, the Queen’s Theatre in Hornchurch has its own resident professional crew of actors and musicians. Damyn’s Hall Aerodome is the only privately owned General Aviation Aerodrome in Greater London and is the home of three flying schools. It has also recently started hosting outdoor music festivals. For some fresh air, visit Belhus Woods Country Park, part of the Thames Chase community forest.
More on Havering: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Hillingdon
At the two ends of the transport scale, Hillingdon is the site of both Heathrow Airport and Ruislip Lido Railway. Serving 180 destinations, the airport has almost become a destination in itself, boasting restaurants such as Gordon Ramsay’s Plane Food. Visitors to Woody Bay Station by the beach at the start of the Ruislip Lido Railway can find simple refreshments at the Lido’s lakeside café. Transport geeks may also be interested in visiting the British Airways Archive and Museum Collection.
More on Hillingdon: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Hounslow
Well to do residential area Chiswick has some excellent local pubs and restaurants including Michelin-starred Hedone and purveyor of pies and paella, The Duke of Sussex. Local attractions span a neo-Palladian villa, Chiswick House, a Gregorian country house at Osterley Park and Fuller’s Griffin Brewery. You can also see the world’s largest working triple-expansion steam engine at Kempton Steam Museum. The finishing point for the annual Oxford v Cambridge Boat Race is a little way downstream of Chiswick Bridge.
More on Hounslow: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Islington
This borough has becoming increasingly popular with fashionable young professionals thanks to its central location and villagey feel. A wealth of eating establishments line the cobbled streets of Exmouth Market including Caravan, Moro and Paesan. Other notable Islington restaurants include Foxlow, Bistrot Bruno Loubet and Ottolenghi. For a top quality cocktail drop into the Zetter Townhouse bar or 69 Colebrooke Row. Entertainment-wise you could cosy up on a sofa for a film at Screen on the Green or catch a gig at XOYO, The Lexington, Union Chapel or The Betsey Trotwood – Fabric and Egg are the places to go for a wilder night out. Culture vultures should head for the Almeida theatre and Sadler’s Wells, which has a top-notch dance programme all year round.
More on Islington: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Kensington and Chelsea
At one end of the spectrum, Kensington and Chelsea houses independent, super-chic boutiques and luxury department store,Harrods, at the other, Portobello Road Market and the colourful exuberance of the annual Notting Hill Carnival. Somewhere in the cultural middle-ground is Exhibition Road, which draws millions of visitors a year to the Natural History Museum, Science Museum and V&A. Cadogan Hall, the Saatchi Gallery and Earls Court are other cultural favourites and you can find a quirky music and clubbing programme at Notting Hill Arts Club. Fine dining options are seemingly endless with restaurants such as Restaurant Gordon Ramsay, Yashin Ocean House and Medlar. Take respite with a walk around living museum Chelsea Physic Garden, or Kensington Gardens – one of the Royal Parks.
More on Kensington and Chelsea: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Kingston upon Thames
Chessington World of Adventures is one of London’s best-loved theme parks and is also home to a zoo and sea life centre. Kingston’s Banquet Records is a brilliant independent music store, putting on gigs from well-known names at McClusky’s nightclub. Although people often visit Kingston for a spot of retail therapy, it has a thriving arts scene with nights like Crack Comedy Club taking place at the Grey Horse pub, Outside the Box Comedy at The Fighting Cocks, and fringe productions at the Rose Theatre. New Malden is the place to go for authentic Korean food at places like Jee Cee Neh or Korea Garden.
More on Kingston upon Thames: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Lambeth
Lambeth is one of the most varied boroughs when it comes to culture, starting with the Europe’s largest arts centre the Southbank Centre – the complex encompasses the Royal Festival Hall, Queen Elizabeth Hall, Purcell Room, the Hayward Gallery and the Saison Poetry Library. Nearby are cinemas BFI London IMAX and BFI Southbank (the BFI also runs the annual London Film Festival), not to mention the Old Vic and the National Theatre. Heading back west along the river you’ll find the London Aquarium and the London Eye. Every winter a German Christmas market runs along Queen’s Walk from the London Eye up to the Southbank Centre. Further south in Brixton are the well-loved Ritzy cinema, top music venue Brixton Academy, Brockwell Park and community-run Brixton Village with its sprawl of independent shops and eateries.
More on Lambeth: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Lewisham
Bordering Greenwich Park, Blackheath is the largest open space in Lewisham. The quaint village of Blackheath has a weekly farmers’ market and some nice restaurants including Chapters All Day Dining and Buenos Aires Café. Nearby is Brockley Market and one of the area's top eating options Brown’s of Brockley. At the forefront of Deptford’s burgeoning arts scene are Laban, Cockpit Arts and the Deptford Project, and quirky bars like Little Nan’s are improving the area’s evening offerings. The Montague Arms pub and London Particular café are popular with New Cross Locals. Hop on the London Oveground to Forest Hill for the Horniman Museum and check out the over-stuffed Walrus before wandering around the beautiful surrounding gardens.
More on Lewisham: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Merton
Wimbledon has a Windmill Museum but is better known as the location of the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club where the world-famous Wimbledon Tennis Championships take place. Wimbledon Stadium is London’s only remaining dog-racing track and also hosts other racing events. Two of Wimbledon’s most loved eating establishments are The Lawn Bistro (serving classic French cuisine) and Sticks’n’Sushi, which serves Scandinavian-Japanese fusion.
More on Merton: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Newham
One of the key Olympic boroughs in 2012, Newham is the site of the re-christened Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park – for the best view of the Olympic Stadium from outside the perimeter, stop at the Container Café for brunch. The park itself is now open to the public and contains Anish Kapoor’s divisive sculpture ArcelorMittal Orbit, and sports centres the Copper Box, Lee Valley Velopark, the Aquatics Centre and, of course, the stadium. Nearby is shopping mecca Westfield Stratford City, which houses the Great Eastern Market, restaurants such as Café Football, and the Vue cinema, alongside hundreds of shops. Close to Royal Victoria Dock, the ExCel centre hosts annual events such as the London Triathlon as well as large scale exhibitions like the London Boat Show.
More on Newham: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Redbridge
There are 300 acres of countryside to be found at Hainault Forest Country Park and Valentine’s Mansion and Gardens is another pretty place to spend some time outdoors. Wanstead’s authentically French restaurant Provender makes good use of excellent British and French produce. Redbridge Drama Centre is one of the few council-funded drama services in the UK giving young people the opportunity to perform in a professional production and use the on-site television studio and edit suite.
More on Redbridge: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Richmond upon Thames
Hampton Court Palace is a magnificent building and also hosts a year-round programme of events including the annual RHS Hampton Court Palace Flower Show. Autumn is a popular time to go on the canopy walk at Kew Gardens (site of Kew Palace) to see the impressive changes in the colours of the tree leaves. More open space, teeming with birdlife, can be found at London Wetland Centre and you can see the deer roaming free in Richmond Park. Try the rustic Petersham Nurseries Café for carefully sourced seasonal fare in bucolic surroundings or pick a riverside pub if the weather’s on your side.
More on Richmond upon Thames: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Southwark
Stand atop The Shard for an expansive view of London and spot other Southwark landmarks such as HMS Belfast, the OXO Tower and Tower Bridge. Follow your visit with a food crawl around Bermondsey’s side streets, taking in tapas and sherry bars Jose and Pizarro, Maltby Street market under the railway arches (assembled from a range of food and drink suppliers) and finish up at bustling Borough Market. The riverside here is a great draw taking in the Design Museum, Tate Modern and Shakespeare’s Globe theatre. The southern portion of Southwark reaches out past Elephant and Castle (home to music and clubbing venues The Coronet, Ministry of Sound and Corsica Studios) right down to East Dulwich and Peckham. The latter is worth a visit for the views from Frank’s Café on top of the Peckhamplex cinema’s multi-storey car park, and the café, performance space and art gallery housed by the Bussey Building.
More on Southwark: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Sutton
Sandwiched between Croydon and Kingston upon Thames, Sutton only became part of Greater London in the Sixties. The Secombe Theatre stages local and touring productions. Whitehall in Cheam is a timber-framed Tudor house museum run as a community project. The Honeywood Heritage Museum is housed by an Edwardian Grade I listed building next to Carshalton Ponds. For good quality French bistro fare try Brasserie Vacherin on Sutton High Street, named after its sister restaurant in Croydon. 
More on Sutton: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Tower Hamlets
Bookended by the gleaming towers of Canary Wharf and the historic Tower of London, Tower Hamlets is a mongrel mix of ultra new-build high-rises and historic buildings – much of the area’s rich cultural history is documented and archived at the Museum of London. Several popular markets are permanent fixtures here: Billingsgate, Columbia Road flower market and Spitalfields Market have a more formal set up and Brick Lane – striking a path from Whitechapel to Bethnal Green – is home to a more ramshackle weekend market. On Brick Lane you’ll also find record shop Rough Trade East, music venue 93 Feet East and independent coffee shops. Punjabi eatery Tayyabs is a stalwart of the Tower Hamlets food scene and there are newer openings such as Peruvian restaurant, Andina. If it’s all getting too hectic, relax with a cycle along the Regent’s Canal or visit one of the borough's two best green spaces, Victoria Park and Mudchute Farm.
More on Tower Hamlets: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Wandsworth
Wandsworth has the cheapest council tax in London, but the borough has plenty more to commend it – local attractions include the infamous Battersea Power Station, which is currently being re-developed to create a whole new village in Nine Elms where the Northern Line will arrive in 2019. A short stroll away is Battersea Dogs & Cats Home and beautiful Battersea Park. Visit Battersea Arts Centre or the annual Affordable Art Fair for a splash of culture. Crisp Sourdough pizzas are available at a branch of popular pizzeria Franco Manca, and you’ll find fancier fare at restaurants like Gordon Ramsay’s London House and swish bistro Soif. Over in Tooting, Dirty Burger and upmarket grilled chicken joint Chicken Shop have joined Tooting’s excellent curry houses – pop into Tooting Tram and Social for post-dinner drinks.
More on Wandsworth: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Waltham Forest
Walthamstow and Leytonstone are two of Waltham Forest’s most popular areas – a number of notable people were born in Leytonstone including Sir Alfred Hitchcock, David Beckham and photographer David Bailey. The Star of India is a well-loved local restaurant in Leytonstone and the ex-Servicemen’s Club has a loyal following for their weekly live music night What’s Cookin'. Walthamstow Village has some good restaurants, like Eat 17, and the William Morris Gallery is short distance away on the edge of Lloyd Park. Epping Forest borders on the borough in the form of Wanstead Flats, home to a healthy variety of wildlife.
More on Waltham Forest: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Westminster
As well as being the site of some of London’s most famous attractions such as Buckingham Palace, The Houses of Parliament, London Zoo and Trafalgar Square, Westminster is also the home of London’s West End theatre hub with big-name productions being staged in the likes of The Prince of Wales Theatre, the Apollo and the London Palladium. Other cultural hotspots include the Royal Albert Hall, the Royal Opera House and legendary tiny music venue The 100 Club. You'll be spoilt for choice when it's time to refuel, with a huge variety of cuisines represented at restaurants including the Japanese Izakaya-style Bincho Soho, Michelin-starred Indian restaurant Trishna, and hot new eatery Chiltern Firehouse – and don’t forget to take a stroll through bustling Chinatown for dim sum and more. For drinks, Soho is the place to go with new openings such as cocktail and tapas bar Ember Yard or older traditional pubs like The Duke of Wellington.
More on Westminster: news, traffic, weather, property and jobs
Document NSONL00020140414ea4e000xg
