{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2769"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
A fresh immigration headache for the PM
378 words
27 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
14
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
TODAY'S immigration figures are bad news for David Cameron. Net immigration — the number of people entering Britain less the number of Britons leaving — went up to 212,000 in the year to last September, from 154,000 in the same period a year earlier. Of course the figures depend on circumstances, including the number of people emigrating, but for Mr Cameron, who stood in 2010 on a policy of reducing the figure to below 100,000 by 2015, this is manifestly a failure. The issue is now ranked by many voters as more important than the economy, so it matters that overall immigration is now almost back to its levels under Labour.
The news will focus the PM's mind on the issue of EU renegotiation and whether to press for some limits to the Union's key principle of the free movement of labour. It may well find its way into his talks today with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, in which case he is likely to get short shrift. Much of the increase in today's figures is indeed down to increased EU migration, notably from Poland, Spain, Italy and Portugal, though around twothirds of net migration is from outside the EU. Inevitably, problems in the southern eurozone affect those numbers. Meanwhile nearly 24,000 Bulgarians and Romanians came here in the period in question, even before the final restrictions on their right to work were lifted.
Yet many of these EU migrants make a significant contribution to the London economy. Indeed any attempts to reduce immigration levels must take the needs of the economy into account. There is already a visa system for skilled migrants and for employers to transfer employees across borders and recruit foreign graduates of UK universities.
The Government wants, via its Immigration Bill, to make life more difficult for those non-EU migrants who are not entitled to be in the UK, by obliging landlords and banks to check whether tenants and customers are legitimate, and streamlining deportations. Yet the Bill remains stuck in Parliament. The unavoidable impression voters will get from that — and from today's figure — is that ministers have still not got to grips with the issue.
Document NS00000020140227ea2r00069
