{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2249"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
We must expose Ukip as the racist party it really is
Matthew d'Ancona   
1,099 words
21 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
14
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
Senior politicians have fought shy of challenging Nigel Farage. But the capital's voters can tell him where to go
ON THE eve of Ukip's potential triumph in the European elections, it is remarkable to recall just how humble its origins truly were. The Anti-Federalist League was founded in 1991 by the historian Alan Sked to mobilise opposition to the Maastricht Treaty. The group was almost cheerfully marginal, a singleissue anti-EU campaign which occasionally dipped its toe in electoral waters. In 1993, the league became the UK Independence Party — a fractious movement which, in the years that followed, flirted with extinction on several occasions. Remember Robert Kilroy-Silk breaking away to found his own party, "Veritas"? (Whatever happened to Veritas?) In any case, against the odds, Ukip survived under Nigel Farage's leadership, prospered, and now, 23 years after Professor Sked founded his little league, the monster it spawned stands on the brink of an extraordinary electoral breakthrough.
The last lap of these elections — to the European Parliament, in 161 English councils, and 11 new local authorities in Northern Ireland — has been strained and stained by the question of Ukip's alleged racism. I say "alleged" because the party is so comically insistent that it has not a racist bone in its collective body. But let us be candid. If it looks like a duck, swims like a duck and quacks like a duck, the fact that it denies vociferously being tasty if served with orange sauce does not settle the matter.
On Monday's Newsnight, Farage declared himself "hurt" by the accusation. But — whatever the state of his delicate emotions — is he really surprised? It was he who started the ball rolling at Ukip's spring conference in February, when he insisted that parts of Britain were becoming "unrecognisable" thanks to mass immigration ("This is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren.") Last week, in an astonishing LBC interview, he went even further: "I was asked if a group of Romanian men moved in next door, would you be concerned? And if you lived in London, I think you would be."
If this is not racist, then nothing is racist. In his fascinating book, Racism Without Racists, American sociologist Edouardo Bonilla-Silva shows that the decline of overt claims about supposed genetic difference between the races has been replaced by a more subtle prejudices about culture, behaviour, and propensity to crime: what has become known as "symbolic racism".
Ukip exemplifies this modern phenomenon. It claims in its branding that it is a "non-racist" party, just as every institution or employer in the land makes a similar assertion in paragraph one of its mission statement. But Farage's recent remarks have illustrated the agile capacity of bigotry to adapt, camouflage itself and survive.
The Ukip leader himself realised that he had gone too far with his remarks about putative Romanian neighbours and published a full-page advert in the Daily Telegraph, clarifying his position though not resiling from it. He also claimed to have been "tired" — not a reassuring excuse from a leader who surely sees himself in the long, sleepless watches of the night as a future Deputy Prime Minister in a Conservative-Ukip coalition.
A truly desperate bid by his party to prove its multi-ethnic credentials with a carnival in Croydon yesterday ended in farce, as the steel band refused to play, Farage failed to turn up, and the party's organisers declared Croydon a "dump".
Extraordinary, then, to behold the response of senior politicians from the main parties to Ukip's predicament. It has become orthodox — pathetically so — that Farage's party must not be declared racist or accused of stirring up ethnic division, on the grounds that this would implicitly label Ukip's supporters as bigots and dissuade them from returning to the Tory or Labour fold.
Ed Miliband, deploying all the sophistry that his self-proclaimed "intellectual self-confidence" could muster, told Sky that Farage's remarks were indeed "a racial slur" but that the Ukip leader was not a racist. David Cameron, meanwhile, declared to the Daily Mail that Farage's remark about Romanian neighbours "was an appalling thing to say. They [Ukip] are being found out."
But "found out" as what, exactly? The Prime Minister leaves that to our imagination. The polls suggest — or so our senior politicians believe — that "calling Ukip names" is backfiring. So they stop short of speaking the truth.
This is feeble. Identifying and challenging racism is not "name-calling" or playground politics: it is essential to social cohesion. Leadership has nothing to do with timorously refusing to upset the voters. Often, it involves precisely that: confronting the public with the unwelcome truth about the populists stirring up their anxieties and fears. Caveat elector.
Much credit is due to those few who have refused to settle for the generally pusillanimous response to Farage (Labour's David Lammy, Yvette Cooper, and Barbara Roche, for instance). Where have the Conservative modernisers been in all this? It is good that George Osborne is today highlighting the threat Ukip represents to Britain's economic place in the world. "Political parties on the Left and the populist Right have this in common," is the Chancellor's message. "They want to pull up the drawbridge and shut Britain off from the world." But the Tory modernising movement had its roots in an embrace of the world as it is, in all its social complexity and its fizzing diversity. The comparative reticence of the Conservative mods in the face of Ukip's appalling rhetoric has been almost as depressing as the rhetoric itself.
So — as so often in history — it is left to Londoners to speak for the nation. Tomorrow, they will vote for representatives in 32 boroughs, choose four borough mayors, and select eight MEPs to go to Strasbourg. Ukip has a single elected borough councilor, in Havering, although the party claims that 19 further individuals have defected to its banner. One of our eight MEPs is Ukip's Gerald Batten. Two years ago, in an unforgettable Olympic summer, the voters of London reminded the world that this is the truly global city. Tomorrow, they should speak out again.
Matthew d'Ancona is speaking about his book on the Coalition at the Hay Festival this Saturday at 1pm hayfestival.org
As so often in history it is left to Londoners to speak for the nation
Document NS00000020140521ea5l0008v
