{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"429"}
____
  
News
Appeal of Ukip is only negative
532 words
11 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
48
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
NIGEL Farage's biggest problem has always been to get people to take his party seriously. That means showing that Ukip is a genuinely cross-party expression of all that is wrong with British politics. As yesterday's Comment showed, that means talking about more than Europe.
Ukip's chances of success with this still look slim. The first-past-the-post electoral system hits the party hard and it hasn't yet got the kind of strong local base that allowed the Greens to win a seat in 2010.
Much of Ukip's appeal is negative: it can point out the problems but it hasn't yet worked out solutions. Ironically, that's largely because it is so cross-party, it lacks a core ideology. As a result, its vote is likely to be limited.
Simon Usherwood, senior lecturer in politics at the University of Surrey OVER the past year we have explored a wealth of data on who is supporting Nigel Farage and why. We found that Ukip is winning over the "left behind" in Britain: the old, working class, men and those with very few skills and educational qualifications who hold a different set of values from the professional, middle-class majority that runs our politics and media. We estimate that Ukip's potential is about three times the level of support it won in 2013, which was its best year to date. Ukip's rise may be telling us all something far more important about how divided we really are as a nation.
Dr Matthew Goodwin and Dr Robert Ford, authors of Revolt on the Right: Explaining Support for the Radical Right in Britain UKIP feels like a joke people should be bored with by now. But 20thcentury history isn't without clownish malcontents managing to take control of whole countries, on the back of picking out someone to blame unfairly. Our band has a song called Waving Flags, which it's fair to say is "pro-immigration", but it's maybe more about a sense of wonder that people from so far away sometimes want to live here.
Happily, we've been able to sing it with the London Bulgarian Choir, some of whom are women. Ukip has sometimes had trouble with bearers of the double X-chromosome. Come polling day then, please keep your own X far away from Ukip.
British Sea Power UKIP'S success represents the final death throes of Blairite populism, and everyone should welcome that. It can be heard in envious tones among the ranks of the Left: "We need a Ukip of our own."
Challengers to the Tory/Labour dominance of politics are here to stay but whether Ukip lasts depends on whether it sticks to its principles, or is drawn in by the current Westminster climate of homogeny.
Its passage is now fraught with danger, that it becomes a victim of its own success and loses the support on the Right that it has tapped into. Ben Harris-Quinney, The Bow Group
Ukip's rise may tell us something far more important about how divided we are as a nation Dr Matthew Goodwin
Document NS00000020140311ea3b0007l
