{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2418"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion; Columns
Cameron could be scuppered by his own party
Anthony Seldon   
1,121 words
14 April 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
14
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
The PM is not responsible for the Conservatives' woes in the country but he is taking the blame
DAVID Cameron has spent more time as Prime Minister angsting about his own backbenchers than he has about Labour's attack. Conservative backbenchers indeed are far more likely to damage his cause at the general election next year than Labour.
The Maria Miller episode last week brought unrest in the ranks back centrestage again, to the intense frustration of Number 10. The headlines were all about Cameron's leadership, threatening the steady progress since the new year, boosted by Osborne's Budget last month. Here again was the party headlong on the path to self-destruction from friendly fire.
Loyalty was the secret weapon of the Conservative Party for much of the 20th century, while Labour was the party that tore itself to shreds in front of the cameras. All that changed after the Eighties, with first Kinnock and then Blair imposing control from the centre and transforming Labour into a top-down party. Meanwhile, it was the Conservatives who started tearing themselves apart over the fall of Thatcher in 1990, creating a division that is yet to heal. In the space of eight years from 1997, the Conservatives had no fewer than five leaders. The first four — John Major, William Hague, Iain Duncan Smith and Michael Howard —all fell in significant part because of backbench unrest.
If David Cameron was as bad a party manager as some Conservatives and journalists believe, he would not have survived for nearly a decade as leader. The Conservative Party, in common with political parties across the democratic world, is operating under severe duress. It is haemorrhaging membership at a disastrous rate and it lacks an identity around which all its members and supporters can rally.
In truth, there is not one Conservative Party but several, embracing economic liberals, social conservatives, traditional nationalists and progressives of a conservative mindset. Not even Thatcher could ultimately tame these fissiparous forces. Electoral success alone holds the modern Conservative Party together. Cameron's failure to win an outright victory in the 2010 general election weakened him severely.
The Conservative Party in the country, and a hardcore group of MPs, have never forgiven him for not winning against a heavily discredited Labour prime minister at a time of economic crisis brought on by Labour's policies in power. The one thing that a blueblooded Conservative understands and respects is winning. That's why they loved Thatcher. She won three general elections for them. And beat General Galtieri in the Falklands War, in 1982. And Arthur Scargill in the miners' strike in 1984-85, to boot.
Entering a coalition with the despised Liberal Democrats compounded his error in their eyes. His critics wanted him to head a minority government and win a general election a few months later, as Harold Wilson did in 1974. Coalition government meant fewer jobs for Conservatives and a compromise on Conservative policies. While Cameron's supporters believe he didn't do better in 2010 because he was too tame with modernising policies, his detractors think entirely the opposite, blaming modernisation for failing to enthuse the Tory base. Cameron exacerbated the wounds as prime minister by continuing with modernising policies, notably gay marriage, rather than pursuing core vote policies on immigration, tax reduction and Europe that his critics believe would have prevented the apparently ineluctable rise in support for Ukip, from three per cent in 2010 to 14 per cent today. Anger towards Cameron explains why he has failed to secure the support of his backbenchers on a string of policies, including the EU budget vote in October 2012 and on Syria in August 2013, the latter especially wounding because intervention was his personal policy and he pleaded with his party to support him.
The departure of Maria Miller last week lanced a boil. "You could hear the air coming out of the balloon," said a Number 10 source. The Miller episode may become a footnote in history; a much bigger storm will surround the European elections on May 22. Cameron decided to start the campaigning early, believing that he has a strong case to make: that the Conservatives are the only major party offering a referendum, and that their policy of reforming the EU while remaining a member is right for the country. The leadership will argue that both the Clegg line in the two broadcast debates, that the EU can do no wrong, nor the Farage line, that it can do no right, miss the point. Britain needs the benefits of the single market but the EU needs to be reformed, as northern European members are increasingly coming to see. The spotlight will be turned increasingly on Farage for claiming to be the friend of everyman against the professional politicians, while in reality being a long-serving MEP and failed UK parliamentary candidate, and for advocating policies that do not add up financially. Number 10 is phlegmatic. "The Greens did well as a protest against Thatcher in the 1989 European elections, as Hague did against Blair's New Labour in 1999," said a source close to the PM. "Every 10 or 15 years, you get these protests." They believe the Conservatives have the best policies but are not going to beat themselves up if the election goes badly.
The election that counts to them is the one next year, not this one, with the hope that Labour will continue on its present downward trajectory. Offering a plausible Labour pitch for the 2015 general election is not difficult, but neither Ed Miliband nor his advisers are managing to find it. Cameron's team is confident that his leadership will not be challenged this side of the general election: there is no plausible candidate in Cabinet, for all the talk that will shortly bubble up.
Cameron was not responsible for instigating the woes in the Conservative Party in the country and at Westminster but he is taking the blame. The Westminster world will get very excited about the likely Ukip triumph at the European elections but it will matter barely a jot. Cameron may yet win the victory in 2015 he failed to achieve in 2010. Odd that some of his own MPs appear to find that a disconcerting outcome. History will judge his leadership to have been better than his contemporaries thought.
Anthony Seldon is writing the authorised Cameron at 10, with Peter Snowdon, to be published in 2015
If David Cameron was as bad a party manager as some Tories and journalists believe, he would not have survived for nearly a decade as leader
Document NS00000020140414ea4e0003y
