{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1414"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
These migrant figures are good for our economy
Vince Cable   
1,015 words
3 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
14
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
The Tories' stringent target for net migration could damage London's — and Britain's — prosperity
LONDON illustrates the broadly positive impact of immigration on Britain. Thirty-four per cent of the city's population is foreign- born.
In the capital, successive waves of migrants have provoked a negative reaction before being absorbed. Freed slaves, Huguenots and Asian seamen in the Port of London. Jewish refugees from the pogroms of Tsarist Russia. Irish construction workers. Black Caribbeans who manned the buses and the NHS. Sikhs in Southall. Bangladeshis in Tower Hamlets. Asians fleeing Kenya and Uganda. Then, in the 1990s, refugees from the Balkans. Latterly, Polish and Lithuanian workers following EU accession (and French tax refugees). Perhaps Ukrainians next? The immigration debate has seen a subtle shift from arguments about race to arguments about net migration of (mainly white) Europeans. In fact, racism is in welcome retreat. Mixed marriages are now commonplace. The population of white British people who would "mind a lot" about having black boss has fallen from almost 30 per cent three decades ago to under 10 per cent. That figure is still 10 per cent too high, but it shows attitudes are changing.
As for net migration, until recently the number of immigrants roughly balanced the number of emigrants. In the 1960s and 1970s, when immigration was an especially toxic issue, net immigration was actually negative: more people left than arrived. But they had a different complexion. The anti-immigration backlash, captured most notoriously in Enoch Powell's speeches, was essentially about colour and culture.
In the past decade and a half, however, net immigration has averaged about 200,000 per annum. New arrivals from Eastern Europe are not conspicuous in the streets. But the rising numbers have added to anxieties about housing, public services, jobs and welfare benefits. No politician could possibly be unaware of public concern. After five years of economic hardship, people are feeling insecure.
Politicians should start by sticking to the facts. The proportion of foreign nationals in our population from immigration this century is actually lower than in Germany, Sweden, Norway, Belgium, Spain and Switzerland. Roughly two million Brits reside on the Continent, about the same as continental Europeans living here: one of the liberating achievements of the EU.
In the decade since 2001, recent migrants from the EU paid in 34 per cent more tax than they took out in benefits and services. Far from being a mass of unskilled people, a third of European immigrants and 43 per cent of non-European migrants have university degrees, compared with 21 per cent of British adults. And overseas students make up around 17 per cent of the student population of 2.5million and contribute £9 billion to the UK economy — making them one of our leading exports.
The evidence is that, overall, immigrant workers do not displace British workers. Last year 90 per cent of new jobs — almost 400,000 — went to British workers, despite rising immigration. During the recession, youth unemployment — which is a genuinely worrying problem — grew faster in areas with lower immigration rates.
"Benefit tourism" arouses understandable resentment but is very small in practice: fewer than three per cent of jobseekers allowance claimants are from other EU countries.
Inflationary pressures in the London housing market are undoubtedly fuelled by rising numbers of people but the biggest damage is being done by marketing property overseas to people who don't actually live here.
The current political debate centres on net immigration numbers. Almost 80 per cent of the public say they want a reduction, though their ire is directed at asylum seekers and illegal immigrants, not students and skilled workers who make up most of the net immigrants. The policy focus on stemming this flow of skilled people and students does not address the public's concerns and damages our economic recovery.
Last week's immigration numbers caused serious embarrassment for the Conservative side of the Coalition. Net immigration in the year to September 2013 rose to 212,000, making their target of "tens of thousands" look unrealistic. Let me be clear — the Coalition Government has no such target. It is a Conservative manifesto pledge and frankly, if they had any sense, they would drop it. Leading Conservatives such as Liam Fox seem to agree. Either they will have egg on their faces next year as the target is missed, or they will undermine the UK economy as they try to meet it.
The net immigration target makes no sense. Net immigration rises if emigration — Britons leaving the country — falls. Surely that is a good thing? Surely we want British people to stay in Britain? Then, a significant number — around 100,000 "immigrants" — are British people returning from overseas. Surely we don't want to keep them out? One of the biggest categories of "immigrants" is overseas students — 176,000 last year, over a third of the total. They are not immigrants but they are defined as such because they are here for more than a year. Take them out of the figures and the "tens of thousands" target is hit. There has recently been a crackdown on the undoubted abuse of visas by some private colleges but the consequence of tightening the rules has been to drive away bona fide students, especially from India, to the US, Canada and Australia. Universities, and Britain, are poorer as a result.
Among this Government's stated aims is the creation of an open, innovative, exporting economy. To achieve this we need the skills and experience of migrant workers and overseas visitors. But we must also enforce the National Minimum Wage, give young people the skills they need and protect employment rights. Ideally, migrants come here and help us grow and help more Brits into work in the process. Last week's figures suggest that our approach is the right one.
One of the biggest categories of 'immigrants' is overseas students. Take them out of the figures and the 'tens of thousands' target is hit
Document NS00000020140303ea330001l
