{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"353"}
____
  
Home
Airports chaos as IT glitch hits border control causing massive queues
Simon Freeman, David Churchill and Ben Morgan, Rachel Blundy   
705 words
1 May 2014
14:04
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Ministers were today facing calls for an urgent investigation into border security after a computer glitch left passengers queueing for hours at Heathrow and other airports.
The problem, which Home Office officials were still seeking to pinpoint today, forced UK Border Force staff to manually input passport details instead of scanning the documents onto their systems.
Some arriving travellers were forced to wait as long as four hours as a result, leading to frustration and even scuffles, with fights reported to have broken out at Gatwick. Stansted suffered what one passenger described as “the worst queue in history”.
Immigration minister James Brokenshire, who went to Heathrow this morning to monitor the situation, said he regretted that “temporary IT problems” had caused passengers to suffer delays and insisted that staff had been right to ensure that all those arriving in the country underwent proper passport checks.
He added: “We apologise for any delays but security must remain our priority at all times.”
Keith Vaz, the chairman of the Commons Home Affairs Select Committee, expressed concern, however, that security might have been put at risk and called for an immediate investigation to prevent any repitition of the problems.
“The problems with IT which led to these unacceptable delays are a cause for concern. They need to be investigated immediately,” he said. “We also need an assurance that there was no relaxation of border checks that could have led to anyone entering the country who was a threat to our security”.
Related stories
At Heathrow, weary travellers arriving from Europe complained that they had spent as much time getting through immigration than they had spent airborne as staff handed out bottled water to the thousands queuing at passport control.
Olaf Olfasson, 53, a firefighter from Reykjavik, Iceland, was greeted with queues snaking through passport control at Heathrow.
He said: “People didn’t know what was happening. I had to wait for 90 minutes. I would’ve preferred to spend that time having a beer in Soho.”
Long haul passengers were equally disgruntled. Jonny Ma, 30, an interior designer who landed at Heathrow from Hong Kong, said: “It was hell and they weren’t giving any explanation. I waited about two hours to get through immigration and the tube is just stopping in Hammersmith.
“Luckily my friend is coming to pick me up. But it’s taken me about three hours to get here after landing which is a third of the time it took me to fly from Hong Kong.”
Sajan Singh, 36, and Briye Kaur, 30, had flown for 12 hours from Thailand for a week-long stay in the capital and were trying to get to their hotel in Gloucester Road.  Mr Singh said: “Our plane landed at 7pm and we didn’t get through immigration until after 10pm. They were giving out bottles of water to everyone and people were orderly, but it’s ridiculous after a 12-hour flight. The whole system is just a mess.” Lee Twyman, a taxi driver for 29 years, said: “It was like armageddon at one point. It was a nightmare. One fare that would normally cost £50 cost £80.
“The queues at Heathrow were 10-deep. They had it on ‘code red’ because of the amount of people waiting there, which means all the cab drivers come down. It was one of the worst nights I’ve ever seen.”
Other airports were affected. Kay Perry, who flew into Gatwick from Majorca, said: “The queue at the South Terminal went out of the passport control room, up the stairs and along the corridors.
“We had people merging from the north and south terminal. Nobody really knew where they were meant to join the queues so fights started to break out.”
Stansted traveller Dave M tweeted: “Another great Stansted experience – chaos and pointless announcements warning of ‘possible queues’ – very observant.”
Queue lengths were back to normal this morning with the computer problems at Heathrow and other major airports said to be resolved. Officials said, however, that the precise cause of yesterday’s problem had still to be established precisely.
Document NSONL00020140507ea510003u
