{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1813"}
____
  
Comment
Evening Standard comment: Mr Bloomberg’s good sense on immigration
612 words
23 April 2014
13:32
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Mr Bloomberg’s international perspective is valuable: world cities like his, and London, show the way on immigration
Former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s comments on immigration come at an important time. Yesterday Ukip launched a series of election posters targeting fear of immigration. One reads, “26 million people in Europe are looking for woMichael Bloombergrk And whose jobs are they after?”, with a finger pointing at the reader. Mr Bloomberg, chairman of the Serpentine Gallery, takes a very different line: “We definitely need immigrants and that’s exactly true of London and the whole of the UK in particular.”
Mr Bloomberg is right. London, like New York, has benefited enormously from immigration — indeed the inflow of newcomers is an intrinsic part of it being an open world city. A new study predicts that the City will create 41,000 new jobs over the next decade: in terms of nationality, it is one of the most diverse workforces in the country, drawing in talent from across the whole world. Of course immigration can also present challenges: it can increase pressure on public services and housing. But the answer is to meet such practical challenges while reaping the economic rewards of immigration — not to stop it.
At present, the British debate remains constrained by the reluctance of politicians in all three major parties to be clear about migration’s benefits. Yet as the Tories have found with their pledge to cut net immigration below 100,000 by 2015, which they have virtually no chance of meeting, drastic cuts to immigration, especially from Europe, are not practicable in any case. Mr Bloomberg’s international perspective is valuable: world cities like his, and London, show the way on immigration.
Housing the city
Today's ideas on housebuilding from Communities Secretary Eric Pickles represent a potentially important change in housing strategy. Mr Pickles has been setting out plans for £150 million of regeneration spending in last month’s Budget: he predicts major regeneration of run-down areas and estates, leading to a significant increase in inner London’s population. As yet, plans are sketchy, pending a report for ministers from estate agent Savills this summer. But when the worked-out strategy does finally arrive, it needs to be bold.
All the signs are that London’s house-price boom is driven by low supply, made worse by some of the lowest rates of housebuilding in decades. Increasing supply alone is not the whole answer, though foreign buyers are just one factor. But with most commentators predicting that London needs at least 50,000 new homes a year to meet demand, we are going to need more radical solutions. The Government has expressed support for the idea of new “Garden Cities”, though to date there are no firm plans. What is certain is that housing has shot to the top of the political agenda in London in a way that would have been hard to imagine a decade ago: 2016’s mayoral candidates will need to come up with convincing solutions.
Killer junction
Now that Coroner Mary Hassell has sent Camden council a prevention of future death report regarding the roundabout at which three cyclists have died in 10 years, it must act quickly. The report, made public after a challenge by this paper, was sent following the inquest earlier this month into the death of cyclist Francis Golding at the junction of Vernon Place and Southampton Row. Much attention has focused on the Mayor’s responsibility for safer cycling. But most of the capital’s roads are controlled by councils. Camden must do better.
Document NSONL00020140423ea4n001e7
