{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"996"}
____
  
News
Ukip fails to defuse Farage row as advert uses BNP-style slogan
Nicholas Cecil   
417 words
19 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
10
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
NIGEL FARAGE was accused of "stealing language from the BNP" as he was hit by the growing storm over his remarks about Romanians in Britain.
Ukip took out an advert in a national newspaper to try to defuse a row after Mr Farage suggested that Londoners would be concerned if a group of Romanian men moved in next door.
Faced with accusations of "racism", Mr Farage last night expressed "regret" for his controversial remarks.
But today he took out an advert in The Daily Telegraph to defend his arguments that Romanian immigrants are to blame for an increase in crime, particularly at cashpoint machines. The ad includes the sub-headline "All We Want is Our Country Back".
In the advert, Mr Farage insisted that the "vast majority" of Romanians who have come to the UK want to "better their lives and would make good neighbours". But he also said that gangs from Eastern Europe were exploiting the EU's freedom of movement rules.
Liberal Democrat president Tim Farron condemned the words, which are very similar to the BNP's slogan "We Want Our Country Back". "As Farage tries to deal with one blunder, he falls straight into another one. Stealing language from the BNP only inflames community tensions and is the politics of division," he said.
Ukip's website was today still defending Mr Farage's comments about Romanians despite his apology. Mr Farage was forced to fend off a barrage of accusations of racism after an LBC interview on Friday.
Initially, he insisted that he stood by his words, saying that people had a "perfect right" to be concerned if a group of Romanians moved in next door. However, he said last night: "Do you know what, in life sometimes people get things wrong." He told BBC News: "I regret the fact that I was completely tired out and I didn't use the form of words in response that I would have liked to have used.
"I should have just hit back immediately and said, 'Look, understand there is a real problem here — you can't deny it — too much criminality from these gangs has come to London'."
Labour leader Ed Miliband described Mr Farage's original comment as a "slur" on Romanians.
Ukip also denied an accusation from the party's founder, Professor Alan Sked, that Mr Farage had previously used the word "n****r".
Nick Clegg Page 15
Document NS00000020140519ea5j0004g
