{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2811"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Farage launches Ukip Euro campaign
503 words
28 February 2014
00:30
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Nigel Farage will place immigration at the centre of Ukip's forthcoming European election campaign today as it bids to become the biggest British party in the Strasbourg parliament.
Buoyed by a series of strong by-election showings, Mr Farage will tell the Ukip spring conference in Torquay that the party now poses the biggest threat to the "political establishment" seen in modern times.
The Ukip leader has said that it would represent a "political earthquake" if the party manages to "win" elections to the European Parliament on May 22, as many now predict it will.
A combination of low turnouts, a system of proportional representation and a tendency of those who do vote to use them to register a protest against the main parties has meant that Ukip has done well in recent European elections.
In his speech, Mr Farage will say that despite the eagerness of their opponents on oddball comments made by Ukip representatives and candidates, the party now represents a wide swathe of mainstream opinion in the country.
"Any eccentric comment made by any Ukip immediately becomes a huge national scandal, well, they can say what they like; we represent a broadly based body of public opinion in this country that recognises the extent to which our political class have betrayed us," he will say.
He will also seek to cast off Ukip's male-dominated image - which has sometimes seen it characterised as a party of saloon bar bores - by highlighting the rise of women in the party over the past two years.
"There are women candidates at number one and number two on the lists, some even talk about a female takeover of Ukip," he will say.
" The point here that distinguishes us is that we have not used positive discrimination, we have not used all female shortlists, our women have achieved these positions on the European elections lists through merit, which is the example of the kind of society we want to live in."
However his central message will focus on immigration, and the impossibility of British politicians controlling the numbers coming into the country as long as it remains a member of the EU.
"Immigration has now become the number one issue in British politics, we cannot have our own immigration policy and remain a member of the European Union," he will say.
"Since we opened up our borders to Eastern Europe we have an excess labour supply and a distorted market. This has led to a doubling youth unemployment and serious wage compression for those in work.
"All of this is being done with no-one being asked. Eighty per cent of the British people did not want borders to come down with Romania and Bulgaria, but they did, we have lost control and we want to take it back.
"In fact we've sunk so low as a nation, that we now cannot even deport foreign criminals without the say-so of a foreign court."
Document NSONL00020140228ea2s0018n
