{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"999"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
Now money talks louder than ever
Sam Leith   
496 words
19 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
THE latest Sunday Times Rich List tells us that the wealthiest 64 individuals in the UK own as much as the poorest 30 per cent of the population combined. And since the 2008 crash, the aggregate fortune of the richest 1,000 has doubled. A fillip to the argument of French economist Thomas Piketty, who says our problem is returns on capital are greater than economic growth: ie, the way to get rich is to be rich.
I don't know when the very rich got a euphemism. They're called HNW: "high net worth". I assume having the W stand for "worth" rather than "wealth" (ie "value" rather than "price", in the cynic's binary) testifies to the phrase's origins in the wealth-flattery industry.
Euphemism, like net worth, is subject to inflation. Even within the category, Piketty's widening gap is evidenced. In recent years we've encountered the VHNW ("very high net worth") and the UHNW ("ultra high net worth") and if trends continue we can expect MHNW and SHMW — "mahoosively" and "stupendously" — to follow.
What does it do to us to contemplate these people among us, with their ballooning bank balances and the compound interest on their superlatives? Why do we consume facts and figures about them with such appetite? Like the ordinary kind, wealth-pornography evokes complicated and rancid emotions: envy and disapproval and fascination and disgust and, in turn, self-disgust. Give us excess of it, that surfeiting...
In an odd way, ambivalence about rich foreigners parallels how Ukip thinks about poor foreigners. The likes of me deplore Nigel Farage's apparent assumption that your Romanian neighbours will be criminals; but we're not slow to make that assumption about UHNWs.
We wonder if they've accumulated their abnormally sized piles of potatoes through graft or restrictive business practices; through plundering the mineral wealth of ex-Soviet states or the exchequers of African dictatorships. We imagine they conspire to rig markets and avoid tax. This is, obviously, true of some but not all of them.
Ukip types resist statistics indicating immigrants put more in than they take out of the economy; that's not the point, they say — it's about the character of the nation changing. As we contemplate vacant windows in Mayfair and doubleparked Lamborghinis, something similar applies. We're told London's friendliness to international money brings more than it costs us. But we think: they don't belong here. They are making parts of the city no-go areas. And for every taxpaying, worker-employing James Dyson there are five non-dom vampire squids to whom our tax regime's sucking up is a moral stain.
A coin-flip, then? Not quite. UHNWs own media organisations and fund political parties, while Romanian immigrants for the most part don't.
In an odd way, ambivalence about rich foreigners parallels how Ukip thinks about poor foreigners
Document NS00000020140519ea5j0001e
