{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1582"}
____
  
Home
Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage clash over immigration in first televised European Union debate
Alexandra Rucki   
587 words
27 March 2014
08:34
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage clashed over immigration in the first party leaders’ televised debate over the UK’s future in the European Union.
The politicians went head to head in the hour-long event hosted by LBC radio, less than two months before the May 22 elections to the European Parliament.
After winning the toss of a coin Mr Farage invited the Liberal Democrat leader to go first and Mr Clegg made a brief opening address, staring straight into the TV camera as he did in the general election leaders' debates in 2010.
Mr Clegg, who wants Britain to stay in the EU, said the UKIP leader’s comments on the numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians coming into the UK were untrue.
He said: "Actually people who come to our country, they create wealth, they pay taxes, they help sustain our NHS.
“To pull up our drawbridge, we would destroy jobs for everybody in this country and that is something I am not prepared to see happen.
“There aren't even 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians living in Romania and Bulgaria. Let's not scare people by claiming things that are not true which would have the consequence of making us poorer and putting more people out work."
But Mr Farage said 2m Romanians and Bulgarians had already left their countries.
He said: “I am not claiming 29 million have the right to come to Britain, I am saying 485 million people have the total, unconditional right to come to this country.”
The first question raised by the audience asked the politicians to trust the British public to hold a referendum now.
Mr Farage said: "Why don't we trust the British people to make their minds up on what I think is the most important constitutional question we have faced in this country for 300 years: are we to be a self-governing nation or not?"
"I would like this referendum to take place before the next general election."
Related stories
Mr Clegg replied the EU is in a real state of change and said it would be hard to define the referendum.
He said a number of countries have since become democracies after joining the EU and “that is one of the things we can be proud of to have more peace and democracy.”
But the UKIP Leader scoffed at the idea and said the EU has blood on its hands in the Ukraine, as it has been built up to be imperialist and expansionist.
Dismissing Mr Farage's suggestion that the UK would be better negotiating its own trade deals with countries round the world, Mr Clegg said: "It's not the 1950s, we can't turn the clock back.
"We have got new powers on the world stage - Brazil, China, India - and we get more clout by being part of the world's biggest economy."
But the Ukip leader retorted: "You just don't understand the world of commerce and trade.”
Mr Farage said: "People like Nick don't think Britain is good enough. We are just not good enough, we must give away control of all of these things to somebody else who will do it for us. We are too small to survive."
A YouGov poll of 1,003 voters found  57 per cent thought that Nigel Farage had performed best in this evening's LBC debate and 36 per cent Nick Clegg.
Document NSONL00020140326ea3q0025t
