{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1058"}
____
  
Politics
Home secretary will not be allowed to deprive terror suspects of citizenship
Standard Reporter   
499 words
7 May 2014
21:05
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
The Home Secretary will not be allowed to render terror suspects stateless under revised plans proposed by the Government without "reasonable grounds" to believe they can become a citizen elsewhere.
Under a new amendment to the Immigration Bill, the Home Secretary will still be able to strip an individual of their British citizenship and leave them stateless.
But in a concession to critics who claimed Britain would be undermining its international obligations by leaving individuals permanently stateless, Immigration Minister James Brokenshire presented a revised plan to MPs.
Peers threw out the plans when scrutinising the Bill.
Speaking during debate on Lords amendments to the Immigration Bill, Mr Brokenshire said: "It is not right that people who subvert our values and fight against our Armed Forces should invoke our protection and enjoy the privileges of British citizenship.
"There has been much debate, both here and in the House of Lords, about the impact of leaving a person stateless and concerns about those who cannot acquire another nationality.
"Whilst the Government is confident our original proposals would only have affected a small number of people... and also the high hurdle that would need to have been shown, most would have been able to acquire another or their former nationality.
"We are now seeking to address the concerns that have been addressed about leaving individuals stateless permanently in circumstances where they have no recourse to another nationality.
"Deprivation of naturalised citizens... could only take place where the Home Secretary has reasonable grounds to believe that under the laws of a country or territory, an individual is able to become a national of that country or territory."
Asked what would happen if no other nationality was available, Mr Brokenshire said: "If the Home Secretary cannot satisfy herself on reasonable grounds that the individual would be able to acquire the citizenship of another state, she would not be able to utilise this power.
"That is the point."
Pressed by Labour MP John McDonnell (Hayes and Harlington), who suggested the amendment could be interpreted as saying an individual should be able to gain citizenship anywhere in the world, Mr Brokenshire outlined more detail of ministers' intent.
He said: "I think you need to understand the particular issue of concern we have and the gap that has been identified is where someone perhaps has dual nationality and then seeks to surrender their second nationality in order to prevent the deprivation provisions from applying - the Secretary of State's ability to use those powers as they do now for dual nationals.
"Therefore, it will be those factors the Home Secretary would need to consider to be satisfied the relevant test we have set out... is met and will be satisfied.
"It would potentially be tested before the courts, because this would be challengeable before the courts, as to whether the Home Secretary's determination was reasonable."
Additional reporting by the Press Association
Document NSONL00020140508ea5700001
