{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"823"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
It's too early for Tories to think of life without Clegg
Matthew d'Ancona   
1,067 words
26 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
14
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
The PM is clearly frustrated with his Lib-Dem partners but he should not overlook the whole point of coalition
ONE March evening last year, George Osborne went to the National Theatre to see James Graham's superb play, This House — an account of the late Seventies and its political dramas, the frenzy of the whips in a hung Parliament, and the misery of trying to run the country without a Commons majority. If the Chancellor needed to be reminded of why he and David Cameron opted for coalition rather than minority government in 2010, This House provided a pitiless refresher course. The point was not lost on Osborne, who was much impressed.
So it is all the more striking that the Daily Telegraph reported with such confidence yesterday that the Prime Minister is considering a manifesto pledge not to seek a second coalition after the next election. It was clear from the report that Cameron has yet to make a decision on the matter but that he is taking the option seriously. Yesterday Downing Street sources poured buckets of cold water on the story without categorically denying it.
At the very least, there are clearly influential figures in the PM's circle pressing such a course upon him, exploiting his undoubted exasperation with Nick Clegg and the Lib-Dems.
The Telegraph story is important because it communicates the authentic whir and hum of calculation and election planning deep within Number 10. Cameron and Osborne are instinctive strategists, good at the long game: as I revealed in my book, In It Together, they had been planning for coalition with the Lib-Dems months before the 2010 election. It would be out of character if they were not once again hunched over the chessboard in preparation for polling day in 2015, considering all their options in the great multi-dimensional game of electoral politics.
As it happens, I think it would be an act of grave folly to rule out a second coalition. The voters may claim in polls to be weary of bipartisan government but they have enjoyed the economic stability that the Conservative-Lib-Dem alliance made possible. The Tory party is undoubtedly sick of its formal association with Clegg — the "great yellow albatross," as Boris Johnson calls him — but, equally, has enjoyed being in power again after 13 gruelling years of opposition. Modern politics has few immutable, Newtonian laws but one of them is that minority governments are unsustainable: in recent decades, Harold Wilson, Jim Callaghan and John Major (who lost his Commons majority in the Barnsley East by-election of December 1996) have all discovered this bitter fact the hard way.
By coincidence, Major was out batting for his party yesterday in partnership with its chairman, Grant Shapps, as part of a drive to persuade voters that (in the words of the latter) the Tories are "the workers' party and we're on your side". The great failure of Cameroon modernisation has been the Conservatives' inability to attract candidates from less affluent backgrounds and to convince the electorate that the Tory party is more than a club of rich kids from public schools feathering their nests and looking after themselves and their mates.
It is shocking to reflect that, of 124 urban seats in the North and Midlands, the Conservatives hold only 20. In this sense, the party is no longer a truly national movement — a structural reality which, this late in a Parliament, means senior Tories are obliged to consider privately alternatives to the straightforward Commons majority which, at present, appears to be beyond their reach (the most recent polls suggest a 58-seat majority for Labour). Ruling out another coalition would not only narrow Cameron's options. It would muddle his entire political message, implying that he regretted the decision he took in May 2010, and that his partnership with Clegg had been a failure, not to be repeated. The whole point of the original alliance was that extraordinary times required extraordinary arrangements, and that the patriotism of the two parties working in tandem would overcome the fiscal damage wrought by Labour.
Since the Autumn Statement of 2011, furthermore, the task of economic repair has been a two-term project. It mattered to Osborne deeply that Danny Alexander, the Lib-Dem Chief Secretary, also signed up publicly to the programme of cuts stretching into the next Parliament. However deep the frustrations of this experiment in government, it has always been essential to both parties that the Coalition is never presented as a cause for shame or regret.
So were Cameron to rule out another partnership before a single vote has been cast, he would be disowning and dishonouring the very partnership that has kept him in Downing Street and enabled his colleagues to enact radical reform of the nation's schools, welfare system and border control. He would be declaring himself a fool for signing up in 2010 to a system of government he now forswore. None of which makes sense.
Even worse is the argument that underpins Tory loathing of the Coalition. The partnership with Clegg — according to this logic — has trapped the Conservative Party, "cabined, cribbed, confined", for four years. After its glorious emancipation from the Yellow Terror, the Tory tribe will be able to act freely on immigration, Europe, tax-cutting and radical shrinkage of the state. On this basis, a few months of true-blue minority government followed by a snap election will secure the Conservatives the majority that has eluded them since 1992.
To this argument — regrettably commonplace among Conservatives — I am always tempted to borrow Woody Allen's line to Christopher Walken's quietly crazed character in Annie Hall: "I have to go now, Duane, because I'm due back on planet Earth." How detached from reality do you have to be to imagine that millions of people do not even consider voting Tory because the party is insufficiently Right-wing? Time for a reality check. The core problem facing the Conservatives is not their participation in the Coalition. The core problem is the hostility that made the Coalition necessary in the first place.
Twitter @MatthewdAncona
It has always been essential to both parties that the Coalition is never presented as a cause for shame or regret
Document NS00000020140226ea2q00061
