{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"3445"}
____
  
UK
'Foreign criminals staying in the UK longer under the Coalition,' claims Labour
Joseph Watts   
427 words
15 May 2014
10:57
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
The amount of time it takes to deport a foreign criminal has leapt by almost a third since the coalition took power, Labour claimed today.
The party highlighted Home Office figures they said showed it now took over six months to ship a foreign offender out of the UK.
The data revealed that in 2010 there were 143 days between a deportation order and the offender being kicked out, but by 2013 it had increased to 187 days.
Ministers denied criminals were staying in the country longer and claimed the rise occurred because they were securing orders earlier in the deportation process.
The statistics come on the eve of European elections in which immigration is a key issue, with Ukip surging towards possible victory.
Only yesterday a Tory minister admitted the government was not on course to meet a pledge to reduce net migration to “tens of thousands” by 2015.
Shadow immigration minister David Hanson said: “Foreign criminals have no place in the UK.
“If people break our laws they should be deported and the government’s failure to remove people even after they’ve ordered their deportation is inexcusable.”
He added: “The government has taken their eye off the ball and focused on ramping up the rhetoric on immigration rather than taking the basic steps needed to get rid of people who shouldn’t be here.”
The party also claimed fewer offenders were being deported now, 4,667 in 2013, than in the final year of the last Labour administration when 5,342 were pushed out.
However, Immigration Minister James Brokenshire said the government was securing orders earlier than before in the overall process to achieve the earliest possible deportation date.
While he accepted this meant the number of days between an order and deportation increased, he suggested it was incorrect to say offenders were remaining in the country longer than before.
He said: “The by-product of starting the deportation process earlier is that we have to wait longer to enforce a person’s removal, which artificially inflates the view on the average time taken to deport.”
Polls show anti-immigration party Ukip could take the largest vote share in European elections due on May 22.
David Cameron had pledged to cut net migration to “tens of thousands” by 2015, but official figures showed yesterday that the number rose to 212,000 last year.
Tory Minister Anna Soubry said: “At the moment we don’t seem to be on course.”
Document NSONL00020140515ea5f000rt
