{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2199"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Clegg accuses rivals of 'arrogance'
659 words
8 March 2014
17:11
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Nick Clegg has hit out at the Tories over their immigration policies, claiming his coalition partners were "no longer standing up for business" by backing tougher curbs on migrants.
The Liberal Democrat leader also accused both the Conservatives and Labour of "arrogance and cowardice" for suggesting that they could form a minority administration in the event of a hung parliament after the 2015 election.
But he faced criticism from grassroots activists about his focus on the European Union, with one councillor telling him "no one on the doorstep cares".
Answering questions from the audience at the Liberal Democrat spring conference, Mr Clegg singled out Tory Immigration Minister James Brokenshire for criticism, following a speech in which he s aid the wealthy had been the main winners from Britain's openness to labour from abroad, because they had to pay less for tradesmen and services.
He said: " Over the last 24 to 48 hours we have seen in many respect some of the most ugly sides of the immigration debate. It is truly dispiriting to see the Conservative and Labour parties, the two largest parties in British politics, driven, as far as I can see, entirely by panic on this issues.
"You have got a Conservative Party which is no longer standing up for business - quite a big development, that. I think, personally they do so at their peril. The Institute of Directors absolutely slammed the irresponsible speech made by a Conservative minister this last week on immigration.
"And yet the Labour Party who won't stand up against xenophobia. Instead of trying to actually reduce the temperature of the debate, they try and stoke it."
Mr Clegg, whose hopes of remaining in power after 2015 depend on another coalition, attacked both Labour and the Tories over reports suggesting they could rule out any power-sharing deal in the event of a hung parliament.
Reports suggest that David Cameron is privately considering ruling out a coalition and promising to rule at the head of a minority administration if the Conservatives fail to secure an overall majority, and Unite general secretary Len McCluskey has also reportedly suggested that Labour should go it alone even if they fail to win the most seats.
Mr Clegg said there was an assumption within Labour that "government will drop into their lap" and they did not need to work for it.
"I have found it very striking to see this McCluskeyite tendency in both the Labour and Conservative Party who are now going one step further and saying 'even if we don't have a majority, we will govern Britain', which overlooks the slightly old-fashioned democratic principle that you have to win a majority before you have a right to say you will govern Britain.
"All of this just reveals a really unpleasant mix of arrogance and cowardice on the part of the two main parties, the two larger parties in British politics."
Asked why he was not campaigning for an outright Lib Dem win, Mr Clegg said: "I would love to be prime minister", to applause from the audience.
But then there was an awkward pause followed by laughter as he said: "Now let me explain how I'm getting there."
He added: "You can't put coalition on a ballot paper, what you can say is this: the alternative, in other words a Conservative-only government, or a Labour-only government, would in my view be very, very bad for this country indeed."
Councillor Jill Hope, from Northamptonshire, questioned the conference slogan "in Europe, in work", saying: "No one on the doorstep cares."
Mr Clegg told her: "People do care about work, they do care about money in their pockets, they do worry about crime on their streets, they do worry about what to do about climate change.
"You can't do anything about any of those things unless you work with other countries."
Document NSONL00020140308ea38003h1
