{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1455"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
The spectre of Blair has never loomed larger
Amol Rajan   
586 words
13 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
OF THE many moving tributes to Bob Crow this week, Ken Livingstone's struck me as among the most deeply felt. "The only working-class people who still have well-paid jobs in London," the former Mayor observed, "are his members." That remark hinted affectionately at the fact that, to many people, Bob Crow was a creature from another age.
It is going too far to describe him as an anachronism. But it is fair to say that Crow reminded us of the old ways, of an era of stronger unions and mobilised public-sector workers. This was part of our fascination with him: he personified the ideological divisions in which most of our political class were schooled in.
His death not only marks an important moment in Britain's political evolution; it reminds us of the consensual, managerial and sequential nature of Westminster today. Put it another way — we already know the outcome of next May's election. Whoever gets the most votes, the winner will be Tony Blair.
It is true that Ed Miliband is a conventional social democrat, and that David Cameron is a liberal conservative, but such labels ought not to mask what they agree on, which is more than they'd care to admit.
Just this week, one of Blair's major reforms, the minimum wage, was extended — by a Tory Chancellor.
Twenty years ago a statutory minimum wage was anathema to most conservatives. Recently the Government has agonised over referendums on Scotland and the EU. The first of these is a natural extension of Blair's devolution of powers to Scotland (and Wales). Similarly, the legalisation of gay marriage is best understood as the natural extension of Blair's legislation on civil partnerships.
On immigration and welfare reform, Blair's populist instincts — often censored by his party — have now been unleashed. But the area where Blairism is thriving most is education. Michael Gove's schools policy is Blairism on overdrive. Gove has often boasted of his political infatuation with Blair, and the free schools programme he champions is just Blair's academies agenda without the malfunctioning brakes. As for universities, Blair staked his political capital on tuition fees, which were at first hugely unpopular. They won't be abolished any time soon.
Blair makes this last point succinctly in A Journey, his unmissable but curiously edited leadership manual (the phrase "was and is" appears 17 times). A fortnight ago a senior Tory described the book as a "masterpiece you cannot avoid".
One area where Blair's inclinations have not triumphed is Europe. He was strongly in favour of the EU as an institution; Westminster is increasingly sceptical. But Blair's views on Europe do find expression at the top of government, through the politician who most resembles him politically. Indeed, another way of understanding the Age of Blair is that, on current trends at least, whatever happens next May, the winner will be Nick Clegg.
It is true that, coming after 13 years of Labour government, there was bound to be continuity; and it is also true that, with no money and no majority, this government has been limited in its capacity. But these facts can't hide political reality. Coalition Britain is New Labour minus the spare change.
Amol Rajan is the editor of The Independent. twitter.com/amolrajan
On immigration and welfare reform, Blair's populist instincts, often censored by his party, have been unleashed
Document NS00000020140313ea3d0003a
