{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1248"}
____
  
Home
Patricia Hewitt apologises and admits links between NCCL and Paedophile Information Exchange were 'naive and wrong'
Staff/Agency   
602 words
28 February 2014
11:11
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Former cabinet minister Patricia Hewitt has broken apologised for links between the National Council for Civil Liberties and a paedophile group, admitting it was "naive and wrong".
The Labour ex-secretary of state for health took responsibility for the NCCL's links to the Paedophile Information Exchange in the 1970s.
Ms Hewitt was general secretary of the NCCL at the time, and admitted tonight: "I got it wrong on PIE and I apologise for having done so."
Ms Hewitt, who said she had been away for the past 12 days while the controversy was raging in the the press, said any suggestion that she had condoned or supported the "vile crimes" of child abusers was completely untrue.
However she acknowledged that she should have done more to protect the integrity of the NCCL from the activities of PIE, which was allowed to join the organisation as an affiliate member.
Related stories
"NCCL in the 1970s, along with many others, was naive and wrong to accept PIE's claim to be a 'campaigning and counselling organisation' that 'does not promote unlawful acts'," she said.
"As general secretary then, I take responsibility for the mistakes we made. I got it wrong on PIE and I apologise for having done so.
"I should have urged the executive committee to take stronger measures to protect NCCL's integrity from the activities of PIE members and sympathisers and I deeply regret not having done so."
In particular she said that PIE member Tom O'Carroll should never have been allowed to join the NCCL's gay rights sub-committee.
Ms Hewitt said that a proposal by the NCCL to reduce the age of consent had not been hers, although she acknowledged that it had been the policy of the organisation and the executive committee.
"I do not support reducing the age of consent or legalising incest," she said. "As the NCCL archives demonstrate, I consistently distinguished between consenting relationships between homosexual men, on the one hand, and the abuse of children on the other."
She defended the roles played by Labour deputy leader Harriet Harman and her husband Jack Dromey - who is also a Labour frontbencher - who were both prominent figures in the NCCL
"When Jack Dromey, as NCCL chairman in 1976, vigorously opposed PIE at the NCCL AGM, he did so with the full support of the executive committee and myself as general secretary," she said.
"Harriet did not join the NCCL staff until 1978. She was one of two legal officers, neither of whom was a member of the executive committee."
Ms Hewitt said that there were still lessons to be learned about the need to protect children from sexual abuse but said that she was proud of the achievements of the NCCL during her time as general secretary.
"NCCL in the 1970s played a leading role in anti-discrimination and equality campaigns. We helped to secure the Sex Discrimination Act, anonymity for rape victims and an end to discriminatory immigration rules against British women with a foreign husband. We also built support for equalising the age of consent for homosexual men - a change eventually made in 1998," she said.
"Although the evil of child sexual abuse is now properly recognised, as a society we still have a long way to go in protecting children, tackling the sexualisation of girls and supporting the survivors of sexual abuse. I hope the lessons that are being learnt from the mistakes of the 1970s will contribute to those goals."
Document NSONL00020140228ea2s002xl
