{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2987"}
____
  
Business; Opinion, Columns
I plan to leave my food empire in good health, says the KitKat king
James Ashton   
1,411 words
9 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
54
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
INTERVIEW PETER BRABECK-LETMATHE nestle Hands-on Austrian plots a nutritional push for the Nescafé giant in his final three years
SOMEHOW the chairman of Nestlé, the world's largest food company, has found time for helicopter lessons. "Sometimes you need something to distract yourself a little bit," says Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, 69, the pin-sharp Austrian who sits atop an empire that feeds and waters millions with brands such as KitKat, Nespresso and San Pellegrino.
A clue to his new-found downtime is easy to spot. In place of his mane of grey hair is a shiny bald head, the result of treatment Brabeck-Letmathe has been undergoing for a "curable illness" that Nestlé assured investors last month would not stop him working.
"I feel fine. The only thing I was supposed not to do was fly very long distances," he explains. For a global executive used to criss-crossing the world, that is the equivalent of being housebound. Hence learning to pilot a chopper. Oh, and he flew the plane into London that meant he could make Nestlé's meeting with dozens of charities and non-government bodies in a St Paul's hotel hours before we sat down.
Healthcare — and not just his own — is on Brabeck-Letmathe's mind. If he achieves anything before retiring in 2017 after nearly 50 years with the business, it will be to set Nestlé on track to being a nutrition company. "We are not throwing away our main business but if you want to be a major consumer player in the world as we are today you also have to start to build the future," he says.
So how can a chocolate and coffee company talk about nutritional benefits? Brabeck-Letmathe points to efforts to make its snacks healthier, such as by reducing the saturated fats in a KitKat or developing a coffee that contains five times the antioxidants of green tea.
A bigger prong is Nestlé Health Science, a division to bridge the gap between food and pharmaceuticals which is trying to discover treatments for gastrointestinal conditions and to combat the effects of chemotherapy. Then there is Nestlé Skin Health, which develops creams and acne treatments, created after the company recently agreed to buy out beauty firm L'Oréal from its 30-year Galderma joint venture.
"I call this the agreement of freedom, for us to do what we have dreamt about," says Brabeck-Letmathe, who sits on the board of L'Oréal, oil giant ExxonMobil, and Credit Suisse, and also chairs Formula One.
Talk of this shift coincides with Nestlé's worst first-quarter sales performance since 2009 as emerging markets remain soft, and frugal Europeans trade down to cheaper brands — a reminder that although it has annual sales of Swfr92 billion (£62 billion), the company still needs to hunt for higher-margin goods.
But the chairman traces the turning point back to 1995, when the longstanding correlation between the population's calorie intake and the extension of life expectancy broke off. "It is not any more the quantity of the calories, it's the quality of the calorie," he adds.
That is typical of Brabeck-Letmathe, a strategist who has been happy to hive off slow-growth divisions such as dried pasta as he battles with grocery giants such as Procter & Gamble, Unilever and Danone. He berates me for suggesting that his Nespresso coffee-capsule system — now a middle-class staple — has been an overnight success. "It didn't burst into the market, it took us 25 years to get there," he says with a loud laugh. He advises me that Nestlé's other coffee system, Nescafé Dolce Gusto, is faring even better.
"It's close to Swfr1 billion turnover. After six years, Nespresso was not even at Swfr50 million." That is worth noting, given that Nestlé faces a powerful new competitor now that Mondelez and DE Master Blenders are merging their coffee arms to unite brands such as Carte Noire with Senseo. Nestlé these days is as much about the machinery as the food. Brabeck-Letmathe hopes the group's BabyNes gadget can do for infant formula what Nespresso did for coffee — a bold move for a company still associated with that baby-milk scandal.
For a boss with a global perspective, Brabeck-Letmathe's biggest concerns appear to be on the home front. He lambasts as "short-termist" new corporate governance rules in Switzerland demanding that directors are elected every year, saying that moving decisions from the board to investors, who are mainly overseas, meant "the power has moved outside Switzerland".
But against the backdrop of the Astra-Zeneca takeover battle, surely no one would ever be able to buy out Nestlé? "Why not? Oh, I could see it happen.
It is something one should never take for granted. I am sure the Swiss government would be screaming and yet it is not a Swiss company." Another referendum, which voted to introduce an immigration quota within three years, threatens Nestlé's research base, which is 60% in Switzerland and 75% populated by foreigners. "We are not going to lose one of our scientists," he says. "If we are not allowed to do this in Switzerland, we take the people with the projects abroad."
Brabeck-Letmathe is keeping a close eye on Britain's own position, explaining that in the case of a withdrawal from the European Union, "there is no doubt that this would have an impact" on Nestlé's £400 million of exports from here each year. The company, which bought chocolatier Rowntree Mackintosh in 1988, opened a mineral water bottling plant in Buxton, Derbyshire, last year and has poured £300 million into a nearby coffee factory.
"If you look at the history of Europe, to unify it in the way we have been doing is such a strong achievement," he explains. The Continent is better together, he says, adding that events in Crimea should act as a warning that conflicts can take hold "much faster than we ever have thought".
The young Brabeck-Letmathe was attracted to Nestlé because he thought it could take him to Latin America.
In post-war Austria, 75% of gross domestic product was tied up in state hands. "I was not the only one [leaving]," he says. Arriving in Chile just before the Marxist Salvador Allende was elected president — "politically a very interesting time" — Brabeck-Letmathe proceeded to scale the company, returning to its Vevey headquarters in 1987. His relationship with chief executive Paul Bulcke — which "couldn't be better" — took off when they worked together in the region.
"We speak Spanish to each other even today. He is Belgian, I am Austrian." Brabeck-Letmathe reveals he stood aside as chief executive early so that Bulcke could have a longer run at the role.
"I have always said a chief executive is successful when his successor is as successful as he was." Good advice which organisations from Tesco to Manchester United could heed. Such is Nestlé's long-term planning that it is expected that Bulcke will step up as chairman in 2017. So who does that leave as chief executive? "I think [Bulcke] knows. At least I know," he says, before correcting himself: "It's not for me, it's for the board [to decide]." But just in case you worry that one man exerts too much power over the company, he leaves me with food for thought.
"At Nestlé, everyone can be replaced in 24 hours," he says. "So if, on the way back, my plane crashes you will have a new chairman in this position in 24 hours." No wonder this pilot is so keen to keep his hands on the controls.
LIFE AND TIMES CV MILESTONES 1968 Nestlé ice cream salesman 1970 Chile national sales manager 1981 Nestlé Ecuador chief executive 1987 culinary products senior vicepresident 1997 chief executive 2005 chairman and chief executive 2008 chairman PERSONAL LIFE Married with three children and four grandchildren. Relaxes by mountain climbing and playing the piano "but only when I am alone".
BEST ADVICE I'VE RECEIVED "Fritz Gerber, the former chairman of Roche, told me never to believe that you are as good as the media say you are in the beginning — but you are not as bad as they will say you are at the end."
Document NS00000020140509ea5900055
