{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1995"}
____
  
Comment
Sarah Sands: We must bring a human scale to technology
901 words
29 April 2014
12:09
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Terrorism and crime are embedded in the internet, so where does that leave data confidentiality? Civil liberties and national security have to be reconciled
Privacy is a theme of our times. Enthusiastic reviews of the James Graham play, Privacy, at the Donmar record the audience realisation that technology has robbed us of the private sphere. Theatre critics tend not to be hired to run IT departments but it is still shocking that a smartphone is basically a tracking device. The issue is whom you wish to trust with your personal data. Ethical debate has not kept pace with technology, nothing has. 
My youthful focus group lists internet good guys as friends, family (with parental clauses), “the people”. On the black list are big corporations, government and, of course, our secret services.
Technological idealists assume you can have people without institutions because the internet exists beyond borders. It is its own ideology and it replaces everything that has gone before it.
I take a liberal view that humanity prevails over ideology for better or worse. “The people” can be a force for good or wickedness. Technology therefore must exist within a familiar social and moral framework. Ties to family, community and country still matter.
The director of the play, Josie Rourke, first wanted to look at privacy in relation to Leveson and the press but alighted upon the far greater ramifications of the internet. The press is feeble by comparison. Nor do we carry jihadist videos used for radicalising young Muslim men. We do not print hard pornography. We have rather Fifties conversations on newspaper production desks about which expletives are permissible in direct speech. We continually self-censor according to society’s norms.
Eventually, internet evangelists will have to address the societies below. Tax allegiances were the first battle. Security may be the next. Terrorism and crime are embedded in the internet, so where does that leave data confidentiality? Civil liberties and national security have to be reconciled.
Then there is convenience versus privacy. A comic/sinister character in Privacy is the man who invented the Tesco Clubcard and can therefore predict shifts in our lives. Yet he cannot perfect the system. We always have free will. Behavioural science has long been used but it is flawed. No one at the National Security Agency saw irregularities in Edward Snowden. His decision to bypass counsel, take everything he could lay his hands on and go on the run could not have been predicted.
I should declare an interest; I have a cameo role in Privacy, as an overly breezy editor who is not indignant that our secret services are keeping up with the latest technology. If I had a plot a fortnight on my watch, I would be too. Instead of treating technology with reverence and fear we need to apply the humdrum foundations of our democracy to it. For once, we need to think small rather than infinite.
Win ugly and you stay ahead
Jose Mourinho has been accused of playing “ugly” football against “beautiful” Liverpool. It is not a natural association with Chelsea’s adorable-looking manager but it may start a general fashion. Ed Miliband is deciding whether to adopt “beautiful” politics, full of radical, risky ideas, or just dig in.
Tube unions and management are both in ugly mode at the moment. I am looking at some ugly journalism to get through the Tube strike. Get the papers out, no matter what. Meanwhile, commuters grit their teeth and get to work. Ugliness can be another term for perseverance. Ugly can be good.
Boundaries pushed in the name of Islam
The threat of radical Islam comes and goes in public opinion. After the murder of Lee Rigby in Woolwich we were outraged but the waters of civilisation close and we continue about our business. Meanwhile, should we tolerate political Islam — such as the Muslim Brotherhood or Hamas  — as a version of democracy or see it as part of the narrative of extremism?
Both David Cameron and Tony Blair have expressed fears about the relationship between political Islam and violent extremism. Blair has been predictably trashed for it as a tyrant-loving, warmongering rich man but his speech last week was characteristically tough and profound. The distinction between those who violate the law and those we simply disagree with has to be examined.
When I see a girl waving a jihadi flag outside the Saudi Embassy I feel more than disagreement. I think it is a threat to everything I hold dear, particularly the rights of women.
Boom time for builders
Taking the Chancellor’s advice that we must fix our roofs while the sun is shining, I have tried to find a roofer. There are apparently none available in London. The bad winter and conversion frenzy, spurred on by house prices and an unwillingness to pay stamp duty, mean builders are on the latest gold rush.
A developer told me recently that daily rates for bricklayers are at pre-recession levels and we cannot train them fast enough. The only solution is a massive wave of immigration. The developer also told me that we are in it for the long haul.
Banks are now looking at mortgages to suit our increasing lifespan. Their actuaries calculate babies born today will live until they are 150. Utopia?
Twitter: @sandsstandard
Document NSONL00020140430ea4t000b6
