{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1996"}
____
  
Comment
Charles Leadbeater: It’s small things that make our big city what it is
1,028 words
29 April 2014
12:29
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Empathy for our fellow citizens and human-scale spaces are what give London its special attraction
Some of the best recipes are made of two simple ingredients: bacon and eggs, fish and chips, gin and tonic. It’s not so different with cities. It’s a combination of two factors that determine their success or failure: systems and empathy. Today’s Tube strike reminds us of the importance of both. A city without an Underground system will become deeply frustrating. What will get people through is a degree of mutual understanding and civility, people helping one another out. Systems oil cities. Without effective power, transport, health and education systems, cities fall apart. But it’s empathy that makes cities human.
London’s population is growing quickly. That will certainly mean we need new systems — new homes, offices, power lines and train tunnels. But as London rushes to get bigger, taller and faster, we need to make a special effort to protect the city’s capacity to be slow, social and convivial. As cities clamour to become smart and high-tech, London should realise its strengths lie in being friendly and hospitable. A city of short-term lets and zero-hours contracts will not sustain the lasting relationships which feed care, compassion and creativity.
Empathy is the dark matter of city life: invisible yet ever present, it holds the place together. It is present in the countless minor acts of civility that make more city life bearable. Fellow feeling gets the city through crises: most famously during the Blitz, more recently after the 2011 riots and today’s Tube strike. Foreign immigrants become citizens through a legal process; they become Londoners by playing their role in its culture of everyday self-governance. The collective creative genius of city life runs on empathy.
System-heavy cities — from the modernist metropolis of the 1950s to many of the new cities rising in the Middle East and Asia — tend to look impressive and seem busy but they often feel dead. London, instead, must create systems that are designed to support relationships.
The Olympic Games were a prime example of how that can be done. The venues, accommodation, stations and parks were built on time and to high standards. Despite widespread scepticism, the city did not grind to a halt. Yet the real success of the Games was that millions gathered in an atmosphere that was warm, generous and celebratory, largely due to the 70,000 volunteer games makers, a rare example of empathy out in the open at scale. To make that recipe work, over and over again, not just for a special event, London needs systems that are shared, soft and small.
The systems of the future, especially for housing, will have inventive forms of shared living at their heart to make London liveable for people on modest incomes. The decline in car ownership and the spread of car clubs is just one example of this new culture of sharing. London will be more successful the more we can devise shared solutions for housing, transport, childcare and energy.
Large systems are more humane if they are softer at the edges where they come into contact with people. Canary Wharf is overpowering because the towers front straight onto the street. Significantly, Canary Wharf’s owners want the new extension, Wood Wharf, to be much more like a normal part of the city, with houses as well as offices, small companies as well as large and independent retailers as well as chains. London’s new generation of tall buildings must be thoughtfully designed to invite social life to develop around them at ground level. Cities need places where a mix of people will linger and mingle. These are not vast, cold, monumental spaces but smaller, denser, more intimate places, where people feel they can relax with one another.
People should always be in walking distance of such a social oasis. In Hackney the canal has become a “low-line” for cycling and walking with a string of restaurants and cafés. London should do more to celebrate, connect and develop its smaller, empathetic spaces.
London’s alleys are a hidden asset, whether through Clerkenwell or connecting Bermondsey to Waterloo. We should create on-street “parklets”, shaded, green spaces where perhaps 10 people could sit and gather. The Boris bikes model could be applied to chairs and umbrellas, to allow people to create ad hoc places to sit during the summer.
To animate these spaces London should follow the example of Portland, Oregon and allow communities to create low-cost public art at intersections, to add a sense of personality to an area. This kind of art creates what Bonnie Honig, the American political philosopher, calls “objects of public love”. The Routemaster bus is an object of public love and so too is the Millennium Bridge. Benches, gardens, parks, fountains, even outdoor exercise gyms, can all provide a focus for people to come together. London needs to be sprinkled with small objects of public love.
Much of London’s success as a global city coincides with an explosion of food entrepreneurship, which has created myriad smaller places for people to gather. The phenomenal spread of coffee shops is one expression of the demand for conviviality. Coffee shop chains such as Costa and Eat are systems: they deliver reliable, repeatable fast food to large volumes of people. Yet they also provide a space to sit, talk, hold a meeting, read a book.
Being a Londoner used to mean coming from the city. Now the defining characteristic of a modern Londoner is someone who revels in difference. People are drawn to London because they see in the city an unfolding drama, compelling, uplifting, hopeful, which they want to be part of, the story of the cosmopolitan, civil, self-governing world city. The key to that is empathy. In our rush to get busier, smarter, faster, taller, we must never forget that.
Charles Leadbeater’s essay The London Recipe: How Systems and Empathy Make The City, is published today by Centre for London.
Document NSONL00020140430ea4t0006s
