{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"3430"}
____
  
Politics
Ed Balls: EU must be made to work better for Britain
David Hughes   
560 words
15 May 2014
22:53
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Leaving the European Union would be "reckless, foolish and deeply damaging" but major changes are needed in the way it is run, shadow chancellor Ed Balls said tonight.
Setting out Labour's demands for reform in Brussels, Mr Balls said he wanted the EU to be focused on creating jobs and growth, with national parliaments being given a veto over European legislation and controls to prevent benefits tourism.
A referendum on the UK's membership of the EU was "unlikely" if there was a Labour government after 2015 and Mr Balls claimed David Cameron's promise to hold one by the end of 2017 was creating "huge uncertainty" for business.
Mr Balls' comments came as party leader Ed Miliband said a "damaging and divisive debate about leaving" the EU was not a Labour priority.
Writing as part of a series by party leaders on the Conservative Home website, Mr Miliband said: "I recognise that people do not want more power transferred to Brussels so, in the unlikely event of such proposals being made, we would offer an in/out referendum.
"But I have also stated clearly that our priority is not a damaging and divisive debate about leaving which would risk three million British jobs and thousands of British businesses.
"Instead, my priority is taking action here at home and in Europe to make people's lives better with action on jobs, fairer rules on immigration to stop undercutting of wages, and combating tax avoidance."
Mr Balls set out Labour's plans for Europe in a speech to the Greater Manchester Chamber of Commerce.
He said: "Europe needs to work better to respond to public concerns, deliver better value for money for taxpayers and secure rising prosperity.
"The EU must be made to work better for Britain - and that is why Labour is setting out a clear agenda for reform.
"First, we need the EU to be better focused on creating jobs and growth. An EU Commissioner focused on growth, and an independent audit of the impact of any new piece of EU legislation on growth, would be key to helping re-focusing the Union on this key task. And we need to drive forward the completion of the single market in digital, energy and services.
"Second, our reforms will help ensure that EU citizens seeking work here contribute to our economy and society. So we will extend the period of time that people from new member states have to wait before being able to come to the UK to look for work.
"We will work to stop the payment of benefits to those not resident in this country, consult on changing the rules on deporting someone who receives a custodial sentence shortly after arriving in the UK, and have called on the government to double the time that an EU migrant has to wait before being able to claim the basic Job Seekers Allowance.
"And third, any agenda for change in Europe must also address people's concerns about how power is exercised at a European level.
"So we have called for national parliaments to have a greater role in EU decision making by being able to 'red-card' any new EU legislation before it comes into force; for serious reform of the EU Commission."
Document NSONL00020140515ea5f0040h
