{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1263"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Britain 'frankly unrecognisable'
785 words
28 February 2014
14:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Britain has become unrecognisable in recent years and is no longer a community fit for passing to our children and grandchildren, Nigel Farage claimed today in a rallying cry to his party ahead of the European elections.
The Ukip leader said Britain had lost control of its borders in his spring conference speech in Torquay. He said immigration would dominate the polls in May.
And Mr Farage told the conference: "80% of us in this country believe open door immigration is irresponsible, against the interests of the people in this country and that it must stop.
"We have seen since 2004 a doubling of youth unemployment, we have seen since that time wage compression - people doing jobs now taking home less money than they were 10 years ago.
"All of this has happened because we now have a totally distorted labour market in Britain, because of the massive oversupply that has come to us from eastern Europe.
"It's ordinary folk, it's ordinary families that are paying the financial price. But what about the social price of this?
"The fact that in scores of our cities and market towns, this country in a short space of time has frankly become unrecognisable.
"Whether it is the impact on local schools and hospitals, whether it is the fact in many parts of England you don't hear English spoken any more.
"This is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren."
The Ukip leader said none of the three traditional parties had any answers for the British people, claiming they "did not lift a finger" to stop freedom of movement restrictions on Romania and Bulgaria ending in January.
He highlighted yesterday's immigration figures which showed a big increase in net migration, during a keynote address which drew frequent applause and a standing ovation.
Mr Farage said: "It isn't directly Romania and Bulgaria that I'm necessarily concerned about. What I'm really concerned about is the fact in the eurozone, in the Mediterranean there is no sign or prospect of any significant recovery at all.
"In fact, it is most likely the majority of Romanians who come to Britain don't come from Romania - they will come from Italy and Spain where there are already a million Romanian migrant workers.
"If the eurozone goes as badly over the next few years as I still believe that it will, we face the prospect of the largest migratory wave that has ever come to this country and we have three political parties who are not prepared to do anything about it."
Mr Farage said people who supported open door immigration were welcome to back the Conservatives, Labour or the Liberal Democrats on May 22.
But he told his delegates: "If you believe we should govern our borders, if you believe we should control immigration, if you believe we should have a sensible immigration policy where we have not just quantity control but we have quality control as well, if you believe we should model our immigration system along the lines of a country like Australia, then vote Ukip on May 22."
He added: "Let's make patriotism a respectable political idea in Britain again."
Mr Farage said his party represented the biggest threat to the political mainstream for a generation.
He said: "Our ruling classes have lost confidence in this country and that is why they have sold us out and it's cost us money, it's cost us influence and it's cost us self-respect."
Broadening his themes on the failure of the existing political establishment, Mr Farage said the current regime had proved itself "unfit" during the floods crisis which hit Britain.
He called for a public inquiry into what went wrong at the hands of the Environment Agency and criticised the handing of powers to quangos which are "generally run by former failed politicians".
Mr Farage said: "It is astonishing to me the Environment Agency's priorities for nearly 10 years have been to maintain the EU habitats directive, to put the interests of wading birds, molluscs, beetles and water voles above the interests of farmers and householders on the Somerset Levels.
"They even effectively been stopped from dredging because that is now classed as industrial waste and costs a lot of money."
Mr Farage said that, because insurance payouts would not cover all the losses, money from the international development budget should be redirected to compensate victims of the floods because it is a "strange unnatural disaster".
He added: "Surely this is a time when the principle of charity begins at home needs to be put into practice."
Document NSONL00020140228ea2s003uy
