{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2252"}
____
  
News
Coalition row as Shapps tries to shift blame for 'Go Home' ads
Joe Murphy   
512 words
21 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
6,7
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
Top Lib-Dems accuse Tory chairman of rewriting history on van messages
TORY chairman Grant Shapps sparked a Coalition row with the Lib-Dems today by claiming they may have commissioned "Go home" ad vans aimed at illegal immigrants. In an interview with the Standard, he said the notorious adverts — branded racially insensitive — had been "absolutely nothing to do with the Conservative Party".
When asked if a Tory minister at the Home Office had commissioned them, the party's campaign chief responded: "I don't know. Was it a Liberal? A Conservative? It possibly wasn't commissioned by a minister at all.
"It doesn't seem right to me to say something done by the Government is done by a political party. There's no chance of us ever commissioning something like that as a party, ever."
But Lib-Dem ex-Home Office minister Jeremy Browne accused Mr Shapps of an "outrageous attempt to rewrite history". He said: "What Grant Shapps is saying now is a complete misrepresentation of what happened." Mr Shapps spoke in Harrow where he toured the first Hindu infants school in Britain, at a site local Tories want for the first Hindu secondary using the Government's free schools programme. Harrow, where six in 10 voters are from minority communities, is a key Tory target in tomorrow's local elections.
"If the Conservatives win in Harrow it will be with more people from minorities than not," said Mr Shapps. The Tory chairman said he was proud his party had made strides in recruiting ethnic minority members but conceded some branches had not been welcoming enough. "I don't think it's job done," he added.
The "go home" ads were launched in London last year and featured posters, on two vans, showing a picture of handcuffs and the slogan: "In the UK illegally? Go home or face arrest." Asked if the ads had been launched to counter the Ukip threat, Mr Shapps said: "Hold on there, this was not a Conservative ad van, this was something probably approved by some bureaucrats in Whitehall that I have never met. This is absolutely nothing to do with the Conservative Party."
But Lib-Dem president Tim Farron stormed: "This is a bit rich. The vans were a Conservative idea and were promoted publicly by Conservative ministers. They're not on the streets now because Lib-Dems stopped them."
Mr Browne said he was kept in the dark about the "Go home" campaign, adding: "It was part of a programme of initiatives that were each approved and defended by Mark Harper, then the Conservative immigration minister.
"Grant Shapps is giving different messages to different audiences. He is trying to reassure voters minded to defect to Ukip, while trying to appeal to other voters of a more liberal disposition."
Editorial Comment Page 14 Matthew d'Ancona Page 14
'This was not a Conservative ad van. This was probably something approved by some Whitehall bureaucrat' Grant Shapps Tory chairman
Document NS00000020140521ea5l00065
