{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"3648"}
____
  
News_Front_Page
russia: charles is outrageous
Nicholas Cecil   
393 words
22 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
3; National
1,2
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
UNPRECEDENTED ATTACK ON PRINCE WHO COMPARED PUTIN TO HITLER FUTURE KING'S COMMENTS DON'T REFLECT WELL ON HIM SAYS MOSCOW
RUSSIA unleashed an unprecedented attack on Prince Charles today, accusing him of "unacceptable, outrageous and low" behaviour by comparing its President Vladimir Putin to Hitler.
Moscow said the comments, if reported correctly, "do not reflect well" on the heir to the throne. It even accused Charles of being part of a western "propaganda campaign" over the Ukraine crisis.
Russia's foreign ministry and its embassy in London condemned the Prince of Wales as its deputy ambassador to Britain, Alexander Kramarenko, was due to meet a senior Foreign Office official to demand "official clarification" of the alleged remark.
Charles's comment came on a tour of the Museum of Immigration at Halifax in Nova Scotia, Canada, where he and the Duchess of Cornwall paid tribute to Second World War veterans and their families.
Jewish museum volunteer Marienne Ferguson, 78, told him how she and her family had fled the Nazis during the war and he reportedly responded: "Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler."
Britain has criticised Moscow over Russia's annexation of Crimea and intervention in eastern Ukraine. The Kremlin did not initially respond to the furore Continued on Page 2 Charles row Continued from Page 1 over what Charles had said. But Russia's foreign ministry said today: "If these words were truly spoken, without doubt they do not reflect well on the future British monarch.
"We view the use of the western press by members of the British Royal Family to spread the propaganda campaign against Russia on a pressing issue, ie the Ukraine situation, as unacceptable, outrageous and low."
The embassy statement left no doubt its diplomats believe Charles did make the allegation. Ahead of the Foreign Office meeting, it said: "The outrageous remarks made by Prince Charles will be among the questions raised. The embassy asked the FCO for official clarifications on that yesterday."
Clarence House has refused to confirm or deny whether Charles made the remarks, stressing it was a private conversation. It declined to respond to Russia's statements.
At the meeting the Foreign Office was expected to refuse to be drawn into commenting on what the prince allegedly said in private about Mr Putin.
Document NS00000020140523ea5m00001
