{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"3256"}
____
  
Home
Immigration: Number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in Britain falls
493 words
15 May 2014
09:09
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
The number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in Britain has fallen since employment controls on citizens of the two countries were lifted at the start of the year, official figures revealed today.
The Office for National Statistics said that 140,000 people born in either Romania or Bulgaria were working here during the first three months of 2014 — down 4,000 on the figure at the end of December last year.
The surprise fall comes despite concerns that large numbers would come here following the expiry of restrictions which had limited the right of people from the two Eastern European nations to work here.
Supporters of migration said the statistics showed that “alarmist” claims by UKIP leader Nigel Farage and others that Britain would face a big influx of migrants were wrong.
But critics hit back by pointing to further figures released today showing that the Romanian and Bulgarian presence had already risen sharply before the restrictions ended with an extra 28,000 people from the two countries joining the British workforce since March last year.
That suggests that most had used an exemption from the previous restrictions, under which self-employed migrants were already allowed to work here, to come to Britain for jobs such as taxi driving and building work.
Related stories
As an immediate political row broke out over the statistics, Danny Alexander, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, said that the figures gave “the lie to UKIP’s scaremongering on immigration”.
He added: “The very modest number of Romanians and Bulgarians coming to work in Britain this year is in stark contrast to the inflammatory rhetoric of earlier this year.”
Tim Finch, from the Institute for Public Policy Research think-tank, said that the number of Romanians and Bulgarians had risen over the past year, but that “scare stories” about a surge of arrivals in the New Year had been proved wrong. “The panic about a big influx of Romanians and Bulgarians was completely ill-founded,” he said. “It just hasn’t happened.”
Sir Andrew Green, the head of the campaign group Migration Watch, said he stood by his estimate that 50,000 Romanian and Bulgarians would come to this country each year and that the overall figures showed a continuing flow inwards.
Meanwhile, today’s statistics also show that the number of East Europeans from the eight countries, including Poland, that joined the EU in 2004 has soared dramatically with an extra 74,000 workers from the nations arriving to work since the start of 2014.
That takes the current total of people from the eight countries working here to 802,000 — a 17 per cent rise in the past year. The overall number of foreign workers in the country now stands at 2.77 million, equivalent to 9.1 per cent of the workforce. That compares with a total of 928,00 foreign workers in 1997.
Document NSONL00020140514ea5e0015s
