{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"3184"}
____
  
Business; Opinion, Columns
Today's 'cash in hand' Britain is hitting the Treasury hard
Russell Lynch   
604 words
10 April 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
63
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
economic analysis
HOW often have you paid cash to a plumber or builder? Boris Johnson has done it. So has Nick Clegg. Even David Cameron has apparently.
All three would quickly, of course, aver that they've never paid cash with the intention of securing a discount by avoiding VAT, which Treasury Minister David Gauke told us was "morally wrong" in 2012.
Unsurprisingly, the British public — finances squeezed by half-adecade of wages running behind inflation — appears to have ignored Gawke's strictures.
The grey economy — that's transactions legal in themselves but unreported to dodge taxes, unlike drug dealing or prostitution — appears to be thriving.
It's interesting that in the year or so since the recovery's really been flying, some tax receipts haven't been taking off in the same fashion. Stamp duty has been fattened by a frothy housing market, but in February VAT receipts to the Treasury stood at £9.2 billion, a mere £400 million higher than the beginning of 2011 when the main rate was hiked to 20% by the Chancellor.
This week, Charles Goodhart — a former Bank of England rate-setter — and Jonathan Ashworth at Morgan Stanley have taken a look at the phenomenon of the huge rise in self-employment since the end of 2007 and argue that one of the key drivers has been the growth in the grey economy, working alongside other factors including immigration and older workers staying in the job market for longer.
The self-employed have accounted for more than 80% of all employment gains since 2007 to account for 15% of total employment, but recorded income from the self-employed as a share of GDP has fallen, which seems odd.
Some of this might be explained by under-employment, but the economists also point out how much easier it is for them to move into the "grey economy" to take advantage of increased demand as VAT rates rise.
"Given the option of saving 20% from an economic transaction, such as a personal service, with little likelihood of getting caught, we think it improbable that the opportunity would not be taken in many instances," they argue.
Measuring the grey economy of unrecorded transactions is by definition extremely difficult.
However, Morgan Stanley reckons it has expanded far more rapidly than the official economy over the past five years — from around 12% to 16% of GDP — by measuring a rising demand for cash, the anonymous medium used in the lion's share of all grey economy transactions.
Demand for currency as a share of overall GDP spikes higher from 2011, when the rise in VAT to 20% took place. The economists also note a sharp rise in tax-fraud cases, suggesting a greater tendency towards avoidance.
There are other structural issues for weak overall tax receipts in recent years, such as the faster growth in low-paid work which depresses income tax revenues, as well as a damaged financialservices sector.
But let's say Morgan Stanley is right and around 4% of GDP has jumped off the grid into the grey economy via self-employed workers. The implication is that the so-called "productivity puzzle" — where employment has surged but the rate of actual output barely grown — might not be as acute as thought, because the actual output of the self-employed is being under-recorded.
In the longer term that's good news for the economy: in the meantime it's bad news for the Treasury's coffers.
Follow me on Twitter @russ_lynch
Document NS00000020140410ea4a00061
