{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2778"}
____
  
Comment
Evening Standard comment: A fresh immigration headache for the PM; The Immigration  Bill remains stuck in Parliament. The unavoidable impression voters will get from that — and from today’s figure — is that ministers have still not got to grips with the issue
636 words
27 February 2014
11:59
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Today's immigration figures are bad news for David Cameron. Net immigration — the number of people entering Britain less the number of Britons leaving — went up to 212,000 in the year to last September, from 154,000 in the same period a year earlier. Of course the figures depend on circumstances, including the number of people emigrating, but for Mr Cameron, who stood in 2010 on a policy of reducing the figure to below 100,000 by 2015, this is manifestly a failure. The issue is now ranked by many voters as more important than the economy, so it matters that overall immigration is now almost back to its levels under Labour.
The news will focus the PM’s mind on the issue of EU renegotiation and whether to press for some limits to the Union’s key principle of the free movement of labour. It may well find its way into his talks today with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, in which case he is likely to get short shrift. Much of the increase in today’s figures is indeed down to increased EU migration, notably from Poland, Spain, Italy and Portugal, though around two-thirds of net migration is from outside the EU. Inevitably, problems in the southern eurozone affect those numbers. Meanwhile nearly 24,000 Bulgarians and Romanians came here in the period in question, even before the final restrictions on their right to work were lifted.
Yet many of these EU migrants make a significant contribution to the London economy. Indeed any attempts to reduce immigration levels must take the needs of the economy into account. There is already a visa system for skilled migrants and for employers to transfer employees across borders and recruit foreign graduates of UK universities.
The Government wants, via its Immigration Bill, to make life more difficult for those non-EU migrants who are not entitled to be in the UK, by obliging landlords and banks to check whether tenants and customers are legitimate, and streamlining deportations. Yet the Bill remains stuck in Parliament. The unavoidable impression voters will get from that — and from today’s figure — is that ministers have still not got to grips with the issue.
Safe in Scotland?
Financial giant Standard Life has been based in Scotland for 189 years, so when it says that it is making provision for shifting much of its operations to England in the event of independence, or at least if there are not satisfactory arrangements for a common currency and fiscal union, it should be taken seriously. This is the first major Scottish firm to threaten to leave if Scotland becomes independent. It has thereby dealt a blow to Alex Salmond’s case that an independent Scotland would be economically viable; we can assume that other financial institutions would follow Standard Life’s lead.
This matters for the political debate, which is powerfully influenced by Scottish voters’ view of whether they would actually be better off with independence. All the signs are that they would not.
Welcome, Angela
The German Chancellor, Angela Merkel, visits London today — a most welcome guest. She may not be a head of state but she is still the uncrowned queen of Europe, with more influence over the direction of the EU than any other leader. David Cameron, then, has everything to gain from friendship with Mrs Merkel. A century after the start of the First World War is a good time to show that today  Germany is not just an ally of Britain but a good friend.
Related stories
Document NSONL00020140227ea2r002xn
