{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1932"}
____
  
Comment
Nick Curtis: The guilt trip returns for the middle class; New Tory immigration minister James Brokenshire  has blamed the middle class for 'mass immigration' through our demand for Polish builders, Portuguese cleaners and Latvian lapdancers
1,005 words
7 March 2014
12:18
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
It’s highly unlikely I’ll ever do anything interesting enough to warrant writing an autobiography, which is a pity, as I’ve got a great title: Hot Shame. Every fevered embarrassment of my 47 years — from an own goal on the school football field to woeful romantic blunders — is a hair-trigger away from clammy, mortifying reactivation. And underlying them all is the steady metronome-tick of guilt at being born middle-class.
It’s the insistent, culpable beat of knowing you’ve won life’s lottery: that you can take a certain level of education, income and comfort for granted and probably — hopefully — never know the grim reality of the food bank or the sheer tiresomeness of running a country estate (or, indeed, the country).
For a while, it seemed the sin could be mitigated or even extirpated completely: John Prescott, no less, declared that “we are all middle-class now" in 1997 and in 2010 David Cameron identified himself with the “sharp-elbowed" bourgeoisie. We’d got to a stage recently where we could happily give the phantom menaces of the benefits scrounger or the Romanian migrant a good verbal kicking, while remaining blithely silent about the 80-plus employees of largely government-owned RBS who received pay deals of more than £1 million after making an even bigger loss (£8.2 billion!) than last year.
But unknown to us, the stealthy demonisation of the middle class had resumed, and the operation switched from covert to overt this week. New Tory immigration minister James Brokenshire — has there ever been a better example of nominative determinism? — blamed us for “mass immigration" through our demand for Polish builders, Portuguese cleaners and Latvian lapdancers. Suddenly the skeleton of the insidious campaign became visible.
Related stories
Do you think the diet-fad campaigns against sugar and now protein are aimed at the families living off £1 a day, whom Rachel Johnson visits in BBC1’s forthcoming Famous, Rich and Hungry? No, they’re aimed at people like me and Rachel Johnson. The ramping up of the state-vs-private education debate by columnist/politician tag team Sarah Vine and Michael Gove is a hand grenade lobbed onto the middle-class dinner table. Worst of all is the axing of BBC3 from terrestrial TV, which triggers an acute attack of headachy, bien-pensant self-hatred as we hear ourselves arguing that, actually, it’s rilly rilly important to be able to get stuff like Gavin and Stacey on Freeview.
We don’t really suffer from recession, or malnutrition, or the sharper end of the immigration debate, us middle-class folk. Our role in these all-in-this-together times is akin to that of a professional mourner or a sin-eater, taking on the nation’s collective guilt and declaiming it to the world. But mostly, of course, to each other. Call us the culpa nostra.
The nerds are all a-Twitter
Twitter, which looked like such a nice, cosy, friendly forum when it launched, is now revealed to be an ultimate-fighting arena, where even the most decorous and quiet of old-lady onlookers can suddenly find herself ringside, belting someone over the head with a chair.
This, effectively, is what happened when a bunch of sci-fi nerds united to prevent sci-fi nerd Jonathan Ross hosting the sci-fi nerd awards, prompting his sci-fi nerd wife Jane Goldman to delete her Twitter account. (Their daughter Honey Kinney was also involved: I don’t know if she’s a sci-fi nerd but given the genetic odds, it’s likely.)
What’s so weird about this is that sci-fi nerds (and I speak from experience) are usually the most inclusive and giving of communities, on account of being widely derided by everyone else. If Twitter makes them divided and nasty, it can do it to anyone. Clearly, the network was created by some evil alien hive-mind bent on destroying the human race. Today Jonathan Ross, tomorrow the world.
Let the Army train us in basic manners
Three cheers for Major General James Cowan, the army officer who hit the headlines for supposedly banning sandwiches in the mess because they are “barbaric". His letter to this effect — which also contained musings on thank-you letters (good), polite small talk (good), and sitting next to one’s wife at Burns Night (bad) — was meant as a joke, according to an army spokesman. But like all the best jokes, it’s funny because it’s true.
When I shared a flat with two male friends, all of us masters of procrastination, we realised that what we needed was a drill sergeant. Perhaps what our slovenly nation needs is this thoroughly modern major general to knock it into shape and remind it of its manners. He should be promoted to Decorum Czar, and pronto.  
The next big thing? No
Are trainers with heels the next big thing? That’s the question on everybody’s lips, apparently, after Anna Dello Russo was spotted wearing a pair of yellow-and-black, spike-heeled plimmies created by designer Jeremy Scott and Adidas at Paris Fashion Week. She even tried to ride a bike in them.
Dello Russo, editor-at-large for Vogue Japan, is known for being “fashion forward", which means she always looks as if she has been dressed by evil children. The fashion world keeps her around as a sort of lab rat or mine canary, on which to test out the most demented bits of schmutter to see if they are toxic.
Similarly, news organisations with an iffy style story or social trend to report will hedge it with a questioning “is x the new y?" tagline. The answer is always, invariably, “No, it isn’t". Next!
Twitter: @nickcurtis
Document NSONL00020140307ea37002eg
