{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1723"}
____
  
Comment
Rosamund Urwin: A media storm won’t cleanse British sexism
1,013 words
17 April 2014
13:41
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Sexism has a multitude of manifestations.  Not being Yemen doesn’t make Britain an equal opportunities Elysium
In a game of sexist top trumps, would Britain emerge victorious? Would we see off every other nation, beating Yemen with its lone female MP, India with its record on rape or Saudi Arabia where law-makers think women are such delicate flowers that they couldn’t possibly get behind a wheel? No, of course we wouldn’t. So we can all just ignore the meddling, mad woman from the United Nations who claimed that the UK was the most sexist country in the world, right?
Except that she didn’t actually say that. Professor Rashida Manjoo, the UN’s special rapporteur who is currently jetting around the world to research violence against women, simply said that sexism is more overt in the UK. She was comparing Britain with a small pool of countries she has visited on this trip, which admittedly include Bangladesh and Somalia. Her comment referred to the media portrayal of the sexes and the marketisation of women’s bodies.
“Have I seen this level of sexist culture in other countries?” Manjoo asked. “It hasn’t been so in your face... I’m sure it exists but it wasn’t so much and so pervasive.” Arguing that sexist culture is more out-in-the-open is not the same as saying it is at its most severe. Sexism has a multitude of different manifestations, many of which are much more covert than up-skirt shots in newspapers or the Sun’s Page 3. Those are overt by intention: a topless 21-year-old is half there to sell papers to men, half to annoy feminists like me.
What was telling, though, were the screeching denials from (mostly male) commentators about Manjoo’s misconstrued statement. “How dare she generalise and accuse ALL Brits of abusing women!” was a typically hyperbolic response. The British boys’ club that she had spoken of closed ranks. So instead of engaging in a discussion about the position of women in Britain today, these men simply listed the countries that were worse. Not being Yemen doesn’t make Britain an equal opportunities Elysium.
This confected media storm distracted from all the issues Manjoo was raising. Her report set out the extent of violence against women in Britain, the way austerity measures are affecting services for victims of domestic abuse, and the way legal aid cuts are disproportionately hitting women from ethnic minorities. Clearly, these don’t make such good headlines. Worst of all, it emerged Manjoo had been denied access to the Serco-run Yarl’s Wood immigration detention centre — despite repeated requests. Given that a 40-year-old woman died of a heart attack there last month, it needed a visit. 
The rest of the world may not need the UK to teach Misogyny: 101 seminars —other countries are good enough at it themselves. But nor is Britain the best of all possible worlds for women.
How I’d make the weather
Yesterday, the final trailer for the next X-Men film — the confusingly named Days of Future Past — was released. This is supposed to be the mothership, the film that will make up for two Wolverine movies. It certainly looks good. Explosions! Evil robots! Jennifer Lawrence kicking a man in the face!
It also seems terribly angsty.
I know that X-Men is really a civil rights parable, but why do so few characters, on getting their powers, think, “This is the most awesome thing that could happen to me — my party trick is sorted for life”?
I have spent many hours working out which power is best: Storm’s ability to control the weather. You can become invisible by casting a fog around you, fly thanks to the wind and zap people with lightning. But best of all, you could put a little rain cloud above the head of anyone irritating you and make it follow them around all day.
The S&M side of London property porn
There's a game you can play on Rightmove. The aim is to stumble upon the worst property on sale there — the kind that even Kirstie Allsopp couldn’t find a kind word for — and see how estate agents have talked it up. “Everyone will be well jel of your SW4 postcode!” one wrote of a dingy studio flat (asking price: £110,000). “That’s all the essentials ticked off,” another said of a 10ft by 11ft hovel where the kitchen was just a sink (£85,000). Both presumably came with a bruised cat in the corner who’d been unsuccessfully swung.
They are emblematic of the madness of the London housing market. But searching for them, I fear, is property poverty porn. It’s the opposite of salivating over the kind of home that makes 24-year-old blondes fall in love with septuagenarian billionaires — this is revelling in relief that your home isn’t quite that pokey. It’s also a masochistic exercise, a reminder of how little our money can buy. If this is Fifty Shades of Grey with houses, we’re definitely Ana, and Foxtons is whip-wielding Christian Grey.
The worst thing of all, of course, is that some poor soul will end up living there.
Print still has pulling power
After the Women Who Eat on Tubes furore, I bring you the much lovelier Man Making Puppet on Train. Richard Hay was photographed on Tuesday constructing a model of a mini man out of a copy of the Evening Standard and the picture went viral. Hay, an actor and puppet director, was catching up on work on the way to a rehearsal for The Hole in the Night, which will be performed at Enfield’s Dugdale Centre on May 25.
It wasn’t just an accidental ad for his craft, though: it showed the enduring power of print. You can’t build a puppet out of an iPad.
Twitter: @RosamundUrwin
Document NSONL00020140417ea4h001jn
