{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"246"}
____
  
Business News
Business leaders in early interest rate rise warning
Russell Lynch and Jim Armitage   
376 words
12 May 2014
08:47
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
The CBI business group has warned interest rates will rise much earlier than expected next year as the UK’s recovery outstrips expectations.
The CBI now predicts 3% growth this year, up from earlier estimates of 2.6%.
It believes the Bank of England will be forced into its first interest rate rise since July 2007 at some point in the opening three months of next year – earlier than the second quarter move previously guided by the Bank, and before May’s general election.
The CBI also warned politicians against jeopardising the rebound with pre-election soundbite policies.
Katja Hall, chief policy director at the CBI, said: “Political positioning must not be allowed to stifle investment, whether it’s an unrealistic immigration target, unjustified interventions into specific markets, flirting with leaving the EU, delaying vital long-term infrastructure projects or restricting labour market flexibility.
“Pre-election pledges should not deter overseas and home-grown investors and entrepreneurs, nor limit a future government’s ability to deliver prosperity in the UK.”
John Cridland, CBI director general, added that politicians must not “jeopardise” a recovery. “Businesses recognise the realities of election time but want all parties to ensure their policies make a positive difference. Politicians must be wary of the risk of headline-grabbing policies that weaken investment, opportunity and jobs.”
The CBI now expects unemployment to drop to two million by the end of next year. Business investment is forecast to grow at near-double digit rates this year and next. 
Meanwhile in the United States, Atlanta’s representative at the Federal Reserve central bank said he expected its quantitative easing stimulus programme would end this year. Dennis Lockhart said the world’s biggest economy will expand at about 3 per cent in 2014, probably leading the Fed to stop its bond-buying in October or December.
The Fed has already cut back its vast QE programme of buying bonds, last month trimming the purchases by $10bn (£6bn) for the fourth straight month.
Lockhart told an audience in Dubai: “Conditions will develop by the middle of next year, at which time we can conceivably begin a gradual process of raising [interest] rates.”
Document NSONL00020140512ea5c00029
