{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1925"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
The guilt trip returns for the middle class
Nick Curtis   
510 words
7 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
IT'S HIGHLY unlikely I'll ever do anything interesting enough to warrant writing an autobiography, which is a pity, as I've got a great title: Hot Shame. Every fevered embarrassment of my 47 years — from an own goal on the school football field to woeful romantic blunders — is a hairtrigger away from clammy, mortifying reactivation. And underlying them all is the steady metronome-tick of guilt at being born middle-class.
It's the insistent, culpable beat of knowing you've won life's lottery: that you can take a certain level of education, income and comfort for granted and probably — hopefully — never know the grim reality of the food bank or the sheer tiresomeness of running a country estate (or, indeed, the country). For a while, it seemed the sin could be mitigated or even extirpated completely: John Prescott, no less, declared that "we are all middle-class now" in 1997 and in 2010 David Cameron identified himself with the "sharp-elbowed" bourgeoisie. We'd got to a stage recently where we could happily give the phantom menaces of the benefits scrounger or the Romanian migrant a good verbal kicking, while remaining blithely silent about the 80-plus employees of largely government-owned RBS who received pay deals of more than £1million after making an even bigger loss (£8.2 billion!) than last year.
But unknown to us, the stealthy demonisation of the middle class had resumed, and the operation switched from covert to overt this week. New Tory immigration minister James Brokenshire — has there ever been a better example of nominative determinism? — blamed us for "mass immigration" through our demand for Polish builders, Portuguese cleaners and Latvian lapdancers. Suddenly the skeleton of the insidious campaign became visible.
Do you think the diet-fad campaigns against sugar and now protein are aimed at the families living off £1 a day, whom Rachel Johnson visits in BBC1's forthcoming Famous, Rich and Hungry? No, they're aimed at people like me and Rachel Johnson. The ramping up of the state-vs-private education debate by columnist/politician tag team Sarah Vine and Michael Gove is a hand grenade lobbed onto the middle-class dinner table. Worst of all is the axing of BBC3 from terrestrial TV, which triggers an acute attack of headachy, bien-pensant self-hatred as we hear ourselves arguing that, actually, it's rilly rilly important to be able to get stuff like Gavin and Stacey on Freeview.
We don't really suffer from recession, or malnutrition, or the sharper end of the immigration debate, us middle-class folk. Our role in these all-in-this-together times is akin to that of a professional mourner or a sin-eater, taking on the nation's collective guilt and declaiming it to the world. But mostly, of course, to each other. Call us the culpa nostra.
We don't really suffer from recession, or malnutrition, or the sharper end of the immigration debate
Document NS00000020140307ea3700031
