{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2530"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Cable hails free movement in EU
876 words
6 March 2014
00:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Liberal Democrat Business Secretary Vince Cable is set to anger his Conservative coalition colleagues today as he hails free movement in the European Union (EU) and attacks immigration "scare stories".
Speaking on the same day Tory i mmigration minister James Brokenshire delivers his inaugural speech in his new role, Mr Cable will tell an audience at the Mansion House the UK economy will be held back if the country is seen as "closed for business".
While the Business Secretary is largely repeating views previously expressed, the timing of the speech is likely to frustrate his Conservative partners.
Both speeches are delivered amid growing pressure on Downing Street to publish an official report suggesting the impact of immigration is less than feared and ongoing concerns over the Government's dogged commitment to its target of bringing net migration down to less than 100,000 by the next election.
Earlier in the day, Mr Brokenshire, who took on the immigration portfolio last month after Mark Harper stepped down amid controversy surrounding the immigration status of his cleaner, will reject claims that a rapid increase in EU migration is good for the country.
Prime Minister David Cameron and Home Secretary Theresa May have both made clear their determination to renegotiate key elements of Britain's relationship with the EU including changes to free movement within the region.
In a nod to former Labour minister Peter Mandelson, Mr Cable is tonight expected to say: " I am intensely relaxed about people coming to work and study here and bringing necessary skills to Britain - provided that they pay their taxes and pay their way."
Lord Mandelson once famously said he was "intensely relaxed about people getting filthy rich as long as they paid their taxes".
Mr Cable will add: " I start from a fairly simple, basic economic proposition embedded in the EU Single Market: free trade - that is, the free movement of goods, services and labour - is good. This is particularly true about the free movement of people bringing skills in demand."
Mr Cable will state that nine out of 10 new jobs went to British workers last year despite net immigration rising significantly, pouring cold water on concerns that foreigners who come to the UK take work from Britons.
He will also attack views that migrants come to Britain to "sponge off our wonderfully generous welfare system or free ride on the NHS", adding that "facts are thin on the ground".
"There are a host of reasons to be a tourist to the UK, but its benefits system is not one of them. And we are tightening the rules," he is expected to say.
Mr Cable will champion the UK's "strong advanced manufacturing sector" and unbeatable professional business services", as well as "a higher education sector that remains the envy of the world" and "cutting edge science".
"But none of these advantages can be fully exploited if we put up a sign saying 'Closed for business'" he will add.
Mr Cable will admit there are "abuses to be dealt with" but adds " we just have to stop treating people coming to work here as if they are a problem".
"We need to kill all the scare stories," he will say.
The Business Secretary will reassert warnings from the Office for Budget Responsbility (OBR) that a marked drop in immigration from the EU would mean an increase in the budget deficit and a slower reduction in public debt.
Mr Brokenshire is likely to face questions over claims the Government has suppressed publication of a civil servant study that concluded the "displacement" effect from immigrants on employment in the UK was less severe than previously thought.
Ministers have repeatedly cited research by the Government's official advisers, the Migration Advisory Committee, that found 23 British workers are left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals but the subsequent study is understand to show a much lower figure, according to BBC Newsnight.
While Labour called for the report to be published immediately, Number 10 denied it had been held back and said it was simply "not ready".
Last week, migration experts and rival politicians accused the Government of losing its grip on immigration policy as official figures revealed the net flow of migrants into the UK surged year-on-year by more than a third to 212,000 in the 12 months to September 2013.
A leap in the numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians was partly behind the rise, as 24,000 citizens from the eastern European countries arrived in the UK in the period, nearly three times the 9,000 in the previous year.
Mr Brokenshire is expected to say: "In the past year net migration from the EU has doubled and this figure is, frankly, just too high.
"Some have tried to claim that this rapid increase is somehow 'good' for the country. Well, just like the Home Secretary, I disagree.
"For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services - but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country.
"We are changing that and building a system that benefits all."
Document NSONL00020140306ea3600105
