{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1442"}
____
  
News; Teasers
Young Brits 'would rather watch X Factor than be security guards'
Josh Pettitt ; Anna Davis   
1,705 words
4 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
10,11
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
Lammy and Farage clash over why so many unskilled jobs go to migrants
THE GREAT IMMIGRATION DEBATE Evening Standard AN 'X FACTOR generation' of young Londoners are missing out on jobs to immigrants because they would rather watch reality TV than work, a major debate on immigration heard.
Tottenham MP David Lammy made the claims at the Evening Standard forum as London leaders locked horns over the divisive issue.
A panel including Ukip leader Nigel Farage, ex-Labour cabinet minister Tessa Jowell and Mr Lammy debated immigration days after it was revealed net migration had soared to 212,000, despite David Cameron's promise to cut the figure to tens of thousands by 2015. Mr Lammy, who has thrown his hat into the ring to be Labour's next mayoral candidate, said the debate over immigration had become "very toxic in places".
Asked why British-born workers turned down fruit-picking and jobs in coffee shops, he said: "They don't want to be security guards. They want to watch the X Factor."
Mr Farage hit back, saying: "Tony Blair was the first politician to start deriding on mass Britain's young people and it goes on, even Boris Johnson does it today.
"It is quite wrong to say all British youth are lazy, useless and feckless and a lot of them now find themselves actually discriminated against in the country of their birth in terms of getting access to the labour market."
David Goodhart, author of two books on immigration, who has been credited with opening up the debate on the issue, said there was "a degree of unfair competition" from immigrants.
He said: "We are talking about countries at different levels of economic development to Britain, who have different work ethics, who have different work expectations.
"It's simply a fact we have evolved to a certain level where people are used to a certain welfare support in their life and of course we need to reform the welfare state."
Around 800 people turned out for the London Needs More Immigration debate at the Guildhall.
The scale of foreign influx into the country was at the heart of the debate, with Evening Standard columnist Melanie McDonagh saying: "There's unlimited demand for places here. There's a finite amount of resources available for people. Where does it stop?" Mr Farage called for tighter "quantity and quality controls". But Simon Walker, director general of the Institute of Directors, backed calls for more immigrants. The 60-year-old claimed the welfare state puts Britons off applying for lower-paid jobs.
Mr Walker said: "The reason that every Caffè Nero and Starbucks in London tends to employ foreigners is not because they are choosing to employ foreigners, it's because young British people don't apply.
"That's because we have a system that encourages them not to apply.
"It's not for less money, if people are being paid below the minimum wage then crack down on the businesses that are doing it... Crack down on the businesses, don't blame immigrants as a knee-jerk reaction, it's wrong."
Ms Jowell supported more immigration, but warned of "anxieties". The veteran MP said: "We all have a part to play in sustaining a culture of mutual respect.
"Londoners deserve political leadership that recognises the anxieties that come with change."
Editorial Comment Page 14 NIGEL FARAGE Ukip leader THERE is no question that London has been the most open, welcoming and tolerant city in the world for centuries. A very generous city indeed — my family were political refugees from France. They were Protestants who came here around about 1720.
So much of London's success is as a merchant trading capital. There have been groups of migrants that have come to London, have loved the entrepreneurial spirit and done incredibly well. That is to London's great credit.
Of course if you run a jewellery store in Bond Street or you are an estate agent in Notting Hill or you run a big pizza chain or perhaps you own the largest — I have got to be very careful here and not get sued — private car hire company in London then all immigration regardless of size and scale is a really, really, good thing because you are able as a big employer to take on very large numbers of people at dirt-cheap money.
So, okay, there's an economic benefit for people in that position, but if you take the overall economics there's an awful lot of people being hurt in London by uncontrolled mass immigration and they are the people at the bottom of society.
DAVID GOODHART Director of think tank Demos and author of The British Dream THIS scale has not been good for the ordinary people of London, most of whom belong now to ethnic minorities. There are three reasons for that.
First reason is that large-scale immigration benefits the better off and disadvantages poorer Londoners. Secondly it interferes with national SIMON WALKER Director general, the Institute of Directors LONDON'S economy relies on immigration. Our creative and cultural industries are enriched by it. Our health and care services would barely exist without them.
We would all happily see the back of some bankers, but the truth is an international workforce is vital to the City of London, which is in turn vital to the British economy.
Two thirds of London businesses say there's a shortage of job applicants with the right skills, 40 per cent of them say they cannot get domestic applicants with the right experience.
London's technology and innovation business must have access to global skills if they are to compete.
social contracts between employers and employees and between rich and poor. We have obligations to fellow citizens, we have a stake in each other's success and failures — that's what it is to be a citizen of a modern welfare democracy.
Mass immigration cuts across that. If you are an employer in Tottenham why employ a local, poorly-educated lad when you have the pick of southern and eastern European graduates? Thirdly, there is a link between the scale of inflow and the scale of absorption and integration into a city like London that prides itself rightly on being a successful multi-racial city. But it is also quite segregated, a patchwork of different ethnicities in many places, and this will get worse with more immigration.
MELANIE MCDONAGH London Evening Standard writer and columnist NOBODY here is actually against immigration. I would prefer to put it in different terms. There's the Mae West approach to immigration [shared by] David Lammy, the Institute of Directors and Tessa Jowell versus the Aristotlean approach which is my own.
The difference I would sum up as follows. The Mae West idea was that too much of a good thing was wonderful and Mr Aristotle, I would recall, said "Moderation in all things including good things". So nobody is suggesting you should send back the Governor of the Bank of England, for instance.
The actual respectable figures concerning immigration show that there are marginal or slightly negative benefits in respect of immigration to growth. At the bottom end of the scale, the very bottom of the scale, the influx of lots of migrants naturally decreases wages. At the upper ends of the scale they have the beneficial uplifting effect on wages because they increase the flexibility of the labour market.
DAVID LAMMY MP for Tottenham LONDON is a city that has overcome the Plague, it has overcome the Great Fire, it has overcome the Blitz and in fact it was the Blitz that led to London at its toughest point not drawing up a drawbridge and saying you should not come here, but actually opening its doors.
When Nigel says that London is full, remember that we are only this year reaching London's population in 1939. So when we talk about immigration and we talk about the problems that we have in London let's not blame the immigrants for the jobs, let's go out and create them; let's not blame immigrants for the housing crisis that we have here in London, let's blame the politicians who refused to build houses over successive years.
Let's have the vision that we need, the vision that others had, if our support system is under pressure, the vision that they had to build the Tube system 150 years ago that's what it means to be great, that's what it means to be London, that's why we won the Olympics and that's why, when that young woman who picked up her Oscar for 12 Years A Slave said that this means that anywhere in the world your dreams are valid. That's the London that I stand for.
TESSA JOWELL Former cabinet minister and MP for Dulwich and West Norwood LONDON'S success depends on it continuing to be an open, global and tolerant city, driving the economy of the rest of our country.
For more than 400 years immigration has shaped the identity of our London and that's why London is now home to 270 nationalities.
Imagine London transport without immigration, imagine buying our coffee on our way to work, retail, the City, architecture and the arts of our great city.
So I say this evening, is it really time to pull up the drawbridge and roll up the welcome mat? No it's not.
But we all have a part to play in sustaining a culture of mutual respect. Our city where everyone is expected to speak our language, obey our laws and pay his or her taxes and abide by rules.
Londoners deserve political leadership that recognises the anxieties that come with change; that inspires confidence that rules will be applied and that they will be kept.
This coalition government, I would argue, has failed dismally to rise to this challenge.
'A lot of British youth find themselves discriminated against in the country of their birth in terms of work' Nigel Farage
Document NS00000020140304ea340003k
