{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1441"}
____
  
News
Miliband? He's a slimy bore but Cameron is pompous, say women
Nicholas Cecil   
325 words
4 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
9
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
WOMEN think of Ed Miliband as "boring" and "slimy", while they regard Nick Clegg as "spineless", according to a survey.
Polling by Conservative peer Lord Ashcroft asked voters for the first word or phrase that came to mind when they thought of the political leaders.
The millionaire former Tory deputy chairman separated the words mentioned by women and not by men, and vice versa, in the 20 most frequent responses.
The polling suggested women were bemused and irritated by the Labour leader, with the six unique words in their top 20 being "nothing", "boring", "who?", "unsure", "slimy" and "annoying".
Men, meanwhile, had concerns over ideology and aptitude, using words such as "unions", "out of his depth", "geek" "red", "inexperienced" and "socialist", according to Lord Ashcroft.
But Lib-Dems should not be smirking — the unique female words for their leader Mr Clegg included "spineless", "wet" and "soft", while men used the terms "two-faced", "lapdog" and "opportunist". Lord Ashcroft quipped: "Another strategic dilemma for the Deputy Prime Minister to ponder."
David Cameron seems to do better among men, with their specific list for him including "Eton", "good", "Tory" and "determined".
His unique female words included "Conservative" and "family", but also "pompous" and "incompetent".
While Conservatives may see their leader as nudging ahead on this unscientific analysis, Lord Ashcroft's overall findings were less positive.
He said: "The Conservative Party's problem... is not that it is not attracting enough women; it is that it is not attracting enough of anybody."
He also found men and women gave the same top three answers when asked what the most important issues facing the country were — getting the economy growing and creating jobs, controlling immigration and managing the economy.
But the genders differed on the fourth most important task, with men saying cutting the deficit and debt, while women opted for improving the NHS.
Document NS00000020140304ea340003f
