{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"784"}
____
  
News
Tycoons 'could bid at least £2.5m in auction for UK residence visas'
Martin Bentham   
402 words
25 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
8
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
FOREIGN millionaires should be able to submit "sealed bids" to win residence visas for Britain and the chance of fast-track citizenship, an official report said today.
Under the scheme, overseas tycoons would pay a minimum of £2.5 million each to enter an auction for one of 100 elite "investor" visas.
The highest bidders would gain the right to live here and an accelerated right of settlement allowing them to qualify for a passport after five years.
Some of the visa fees would be paid into a National Lottery-style fund to support good causes. The plan was recommended today by the Home Office's migration advisory committee in a series of proposals for reforming the existing investor visa system. At present, about 500 migrants a year are given residence visas in return for investing a minimum of £1 million. Today's report warns, however, that because most of the money is invested in gilts — which amount to loans which the migrants can recoup — there is little benefit to the nation.
The committee also says that there is minimal evidence of gains from the migrants' overseas connections, added employment, business creation or philanthropic donations.
To improve the situation, the report recommends that the minimum investment be doubled to £2 million and that ministers should consider barring the use of gilts and require migrants to put their money into funds supporting small business or good causes. Those using this route would secure the right of settlement after five years and the chance of a passport after six.
But the report also recommends an additional elite route involving sealed bids submitted for about 100 visas a year. These would bring a right of settlement after two years and the chance of a passport after five.
Announcing the plans, committee chairman Professor Sir David Metcalf said he had "healthy scepticism regarding the value to UK residents of high net worth individuals coming to the UK". He added: "The committee has recommended some straightforward reforms that we believe make it much more likely that UK residents will benefit while continuing to show that Britain is open for business."
Ministers will now decide whether to implement the proposals.
THE GREAT IMMIGRATION DEBATE Evening Standard Guildhall EC2, 6.30pm, March 3. Free but ticket-only. Register at standard.co.uk/immigrationdebate
Document NS00000020140225ea2p0002y
