{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1850"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Cable to attack 'scare stories'
738 words
6 March 2014
12:21
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
There is "relatively little evidence" to suggest migrant workers replaced Britons in jobs while the economy was strong but there is evidence for "some labour market displacement" during the recession, a Government report has concluded.
The report's publication comes amid a fresh coalition row over immigration policy between Liberal Democrat Business Secretary Vince Cable and his Tory colleagues.
It also found there was little evidence of an impact from European Union migration on the employment of British workers, although it was a "relatively recent phenomenon" and "this does not imply that impacts do not occur in some circumstances".
Ministers have repeatedly cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) published in 2012 and covering the period from 1995 to 2010 that found 23 British workers were left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals from outside the EU.
But the new analysis stated that " when data from part of the period of economic downturn (2009 and 2010) were omitted, the impact of non-EU migration was not found to be statistically significant".
It added that the MAC w as careful to highlight a "tentative association" identified in the data rather than a "causal interpretation" and "t his should be emphasised in any interpretation of this report's results".
The report emerged as Mr Cable prepared to hail free movement in the EU and attack immigration "scare stories".
Speaking on the same day Tory i mmigration minister James Brokenshire delivered his inaugural speech in his new role, Mr Cable will tell an audience at the Mansion House the UK economy will be held back if the country is seen as "closed for business".
The analysis of immigration evidence said: "Overall, our assessment is that there is relatively little evidence that migration has caused statistically significant displacement of UK natives from the labour market in periods when the economy has been strong.
"However, in line with some recent studies, there is evidence for some labour market displacement in recent years when the economy was in recession."
It added that "where displacement effects are observed, these tend to be concentrated on low-skilled natives".
The evidence suggests that the labour market can adjust to increased net migration when the economy is strong, but during a recession and when net migration remains high as in recent years, there is a slower adjustment and "some short-term impacts are observed".
The analysis, compiled by officials from the Home Office and Mr Cable's Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, added: "To date there has been little evidence in the literature of a statistically significant impact from EU migration on native employment outcomes, although significant EU migration is still a relatively recent phenomenon and this does not imply that impacts do not occur in some circumstances.
"The evidence also suggests that where there has been a displacement effect from a particular cohort of migrants, this dissipates over time - that is any displacement impacts from one set of new arrivals gradually decline as the labour market adjusts."
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg accused the Tories of dragging their feet over reintroducing exit checks on how many people were leaving the country, suggesting they were too "preoccupied" with Mr Cameron's target of reducing annual net immigration to tens of thousands.
"I remain very frustrated that the Home Office and Conservatives in the Home Office are not moving as quickly as they should do to reintroduce exit checks, which is something I personally insisted was in the coalition agreement, so we know who leaves," he said.
"My own view is the Conservative Party has this self-declared numerical target of net immigration.
"I've always said to them the problem is it is a target over which they do not have full control, because it depends partly on how many people leave this country, how many Brits leave this country.
"The number of Brits leaving this country is now at the lowest level it has been for many many years."
"I think they have become very very preoccupied with that."
Mr Clegg said it was crucial to restore "tattered and battered" public confidence in the way the immigration system was run, but stressed the number of EU nationals working in Britain was equivalent to the number of Britons working in Europe.
"Our NHS would collapse overnight if we didn't have people coming in from elsewhere," he added.
Document NSONL00020140306ea36002xl
