{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2787"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Merkel praises 'important ally'
2,672 words
27 February 2014
16:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Germany sees Britain as an "important ally" in the work of changing the European Union for the better, Chancellor Angela Merkel has told MPs and peers at Westminster.
In a speech which will be closely scrutinised for evidence of Berlin's willingness to co-operate with David Cameron's plans to renegotiate Britain's EU membership, she said: "We need a strong United Kingdom with a strong voice inside the European Union."
Speaking partly in English and partly German in an address in the Royal Gallery of the Palace of Westminster, Mrs Merkel offered a staunch defence of the EU's record in delivering "almost half a century of peace, freedom and prosperity" and said that the 28-nation bloc - battered by the economic crisis and the instability of the euro - can still serve as "a model for other regions of the world".
But, in comments which appeared to offer encouragement to the Prime Minister's hopes of securing sufficient reform to allow him to campaign for continued EU membership in the in/out referendum he has promised for 2017, Mrs Merkel made clear that she accepts the need for the European Union to change and suggested that differences between London and Berlin may amount to no more than "details".
"Our ideas of how the future European Union ought to look like may vary on the details but we, Germany and Britain, share the goal of seeing a strong, competitive European Union join forces," she said.
The German chancellor put forward no concrete proposals for reform of the EU's rules, but accepted the need to deal with "mistakes" in the policy of free movement of EU citizens and said that "unnecessary red tape" from Brussels needs to be subject to regular reviews and scrapped when it is holding the continent back from competing globally.
She said: "We need courage to bring about a change for the better today just as much as it was needed decades ago. We need to continue to write the success story of European unification for today.
"The challenge we face is nothing less than the question whether Europe will be able to assert its values, its interests and its economic strength that brings prosperity to its people durable also in the 21st century.
"We must renew Europe in keeping with the times so that it may fulfil its promise of peace, freedom and prosperity also for future generations."
And she added: "We have to tackle the great challenges of our times together. Individually and on our own I am deeply convinced we will achieve less than if we stand together - l ess as regards defending our common values and less as regards preserving and maintaining the prosperity of our citizens in this global competition.
"This will only work, however, if we make the European Union a better place.
"I, as German chancellor, see Britain as an important ally in this endeavour."
Mrs Merkel's visit to London - also taking in talks with Mr Cameron over lunch in 10 Downing Street and tea with the Queen at Buckingham Palace - comes at a time when the Prime Minister is coming under pressure to spell out what powers he hopes to repatriate from Brussels in the renegotiation promised if Conservatives win next year's election.
She joked that her speech would disappoint both those who hoped it would "pave the way for a fundamental reform of the European architecture which will satisfy all kinds of alleged or actual British wishes" and those who expected she would "deliver the clear and simple message that the rest of Europe is not prepared to pay almost any price to keep Britain in the European Union".
However, she left no doubt that Berlin wants the UK to remain a key member of the EU, telling her audience: "United and determined we can defend our European economic and social model in the world.
"United and determined we can bring our values and interests to bear in the world. United and determined we can serve as a model for other regions of the world.
"This and nothing less than this should be our common goal.
"I regard it as the task for our generation.
"In order to attain this goal we need a strong United Kingdom with a strong voice inside the European Union.
"If we have that, we will be able to make the necessary changes for the benefit of all."
Mrs Merkel acknowledged British concerns over abuses of free movement within the EU, but insisted that this right must be upheld.
She said: "A Europe without borders is one of the greatest achievements of European unification.
"All member states, all citizens benefit from this.
"But it is also true that, to maintain and preserve this freedom of movement and gain acceptance for it from our citizens, even today, we need to muster the courage to point out mistakes and tackle them."
In a highly personal speech, Mrs Merkel said that as a former citizen of socialist East Germany she was a "living witness" to the possibility of "change for the better" and recalled the pleasure of her first trip to London within months of the fall of the Berlin Wall.
She paid tribute to British troops who have served in Germany, and said that Germany was "grateful" to the UK and its other European partners for placing their trust in it following the Second World War and "the break in civilisation" represented by the Holocaust.
Speaking in the anniversary year of the outbreak of the First World War, she said: "This is a special year of commemoration for Britain, where you remember your dead, your losses and the untold suffering that Germany brought through these wars to you.
"As German chancellor, I bow my head before the victims of these horrible wars.
"What would have become of Europe if the people of this country - your country - had not put up such courageous resistance, part of the time standing all alone? What would have been the consequences if you had not found the strength to protect your way of life and to keep alive the hopes of all the nations of Europe for a better future in freedom?
"The United Kingdom has no need to furnish proof of its commitment to Europe and its basic values."
Mrs Merkel cautioned against the assumption that the EU's function as a bulwark against future wars is now "obsolete".
Although war between members of the 28-nation bloc is now "inconceivable", she pointed to the Balkan Wars of the 1990s and to the current unrest in Ukraine as examples of the continued danger that political differences can end in bloodshed.
Mrs Merkel was only the third representative of the German government to be invited to speak to both Houses of Parliament since the Second World War, following chancellor Willy Brandt in 1970 and president Richard von Weizsaecker in 1986.
Commons Speaker John Bercow said the rare honour was "amply justified", describing the German chancellor as "Europe's anchor, the essential force for stability at a time of immense turmoil and potentially catastrophic change".
The Confederation of British Industry's chief policy director, Katja Hall, said: "Chancellor Merkel made a persuasive case that it is in our shared interests for the UK to stay in the EU.
"Both countries recognise Europe must reform to stay competitive and get the growth and jobs we need.
"That means the EU being more outward-looking and strengthening the Single Market, including safeguards for members outside the eurozone.
"We need reform for the whole EU, with a Commission that better respects national boundaries, and for that to happen the Government must continue building partnerships in European capitals."
Terry Scuoler, chief executive of manufacturers' organisation the EEF, said: "British business will view this as a welcome speech which sets out in a clear manner the key role Britain must continue to play in Europe. Chancellor Merkel's comments reinforce the benefits of our membership of the EU.
"Manufacturing businesses agree that Britain must remain an active partner inside the union, calling for reforms to support business growth, jobs and wider prosperity.
"The rest of Europe knows the benefits of Britain being in the EU, as does the majority of UK businesses. What we need to see now is our senior politicians of all parties grasping the nettle and leading an informed, coherent debate to ensure the British public are fully informed of the benefits of EU membership in terms of investment, jobs and future prosperity."
A spokesman for pro-reform thinktank Open Europe said: "The German chancellor was never going to set out a specific, detailed offer to the UK.
"However, Merkel was very clear that Europe needs to change economically and politically in order to make its way in a much more competitive global economy and that the UK will be an important ally in making that happen.
"The door for EU reform is very much open. David Cameron has to start articulating a clear plan to take to the EU negotiating table."
MPs from the European Mainstream group of pro-EU Conservatives hailed the speech.
Nicholas Soames said: "In an excellent speech, the chancellor reminded us of the historic value of the EU. As we commemorate the centenary of the First World War, her timely reminder about the recent Western Balkan wars reminds us of the proximity of conflict.
"We owe it to Churchill and Adenauer to live up to that historic promise to live in a peaceful, democratic and prosperous Europe".
And Laura Sandys said: "In her excellent and wide-ranging address, Chancellor Merkel made it clear how much she values a 'strong UK with a strong voice' in the EU. I was very pleased to hear her recognise the fact that by working with our allies, such as Germany, the UK is not only influential in Europe, but plays a key role in making the EU more flexible and competitive for the 21st century."
Talks between Mr Cameron and Mrs Merkel over lunch at 10 Downing Street were dominated by the issue of the future of the European Union.
Mr Cameron said they had agreed that Europe "needs to change if it is to succeed in the modern world", while the German Chancellor said she believed they shared "a lot of common ground" over the EU.
Seated alongside Mrs Merkel at a press conference in Number 10, Mr Cameron said today's talks were part of an "ongoing discussion" which would continue with other European leaders in the weeks and months to come to come.
"In a Europe of 28 countries, it is hardly surprising that the process of finding and reaching agreement requires time, patience and hard work," said the Prime Minister.
"I want Britain to be a positive player in a reformed European Union and I know that Angela wants a strong Britain in that reformed European Union. My objective is clear - I want to be able to say to the British people, in a referendum that will take place by the end of 2017, that we've sufficiently reformed the EU that they should vote to stay in it. But be in no doubt, it will be an in/out referendum."
The PM said he and Mrs Merkel had discussed "ideas like how to cut the excessive interference and meddling by European institutions in our national life" and "how to guarantee the interests of those who are in the single market but not the euro".
Mr Cameron said: "We both agree that Europe faces an existential economic challenge and it needs to change if it is to succeed in the modern world.
"The overriding task of the European Union today is to help secure the prosperity and the well-being of its citizens. That requires a more open outward-looking, flexible and competitive European Union. We want to work together with our fellow leaders to deliver that change."
And he added: "There are further changes needed for the eurozone - those are changes Britain supports. And there are changes that we need for Britain, to protect our interests in the single market and to secure the support of the British people for our continued membership."
Mrs Merkel said: "There is a lot of common ground here. You may imagine that we did not get into technicalities here. We talked about overriding goals of growth - we need growth, we need more jobs."
Mr Cameron added: "Angela and I both want to see change in Europe and we both believe change is possible.
"I believe that what I am setting out, the sort of changes that Britain wants to see to build confidence in our membership of this organisation, are possible, deliverable and doable, and we will hold that referendum before the end of 2017 and give the British public a choice."
On freedom of movement and action to tackle "benefit tourism", he said: "I have great confidence that the sort of changes we are talking about are achievable and will be achieved over the coming years."
Mrs Merkel described herself as a "great champion" of freedom of movement, but added: "If we were to see freedom of movement has as a consequence that each and every one who is seeking a job in Europe has the possibility to come to Germany and will receive an equal amount of benefit as someone who for a long time has been employed in Germany... then that would not be the interpretation of freedom of movement that I would have.
"Is immigration into social security possible? No country in Europe will be able to withstand such an onslaught, because we have very different social security systems. We can only have the same level of social security if we try to generate growth and jobs, but not by having immigration into social systems.
"That is just as much of a headache for us in Germany as it is for the British people. We have to look at it. Can we change our German laws or do we need more of a specification as to what we mean by freedom of movement? If we say we want freedom of movement for jobs but no immigration into social security systems in Europe, then I think we need to come to a definition."
Mrs Merkel said it should be possible to find "solutions" to the different interests of countries inside and outside the eurozone.
"All these issues need to be addressed openly and candidly," she said. "I believe in this. It's not a piece of cake, it's going to be a lot of work, but we've already worked quite hard on other issues.
"If one wants Britain to remain in the EU - which is what I want - and if one at the same time wants a competitive Union that generates growth, one can find solutions."
Mrs Merkel said the European Council had previously shown itself able to overcome apparently "insurmountable" differences to achieve reform.
"I firmly believe that what we are discussing here is feasible, is doable," she said. "I think it's most important first to define political goals."
Mr Cameron, who announced that he will visit Germany in a couple of weeks' time to join Mrs Merkel in opening a digital trade fair in Hanover, assured the chancellor that he will not invite her CDU party's domestic political rivals Alternative for Germany to join his ECR grouping in the European Parliament.
"We have a sister party in Germany, the CDU/CSU," said Mr Cameron said. "We are not looking for a new sister party. That's why I don't anticipate that situation arising at all."
Mr Cameron sought to make light of the friction sparked with the CDU when he took the Conservatives out of the main centre-right EPP grouping in Brussels by joking: "As I said to Angela, if she wants to join our group, she's always welcome to."
Document NSONL00020140227ea2r0048t
