{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"468"}
____
  
News
Tax battles help fuel 30% rise in human rights cases
Paul Cheston   
318 words
12 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
18
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
THE number of court cases involving the Human Rights Act has risen by 30 per cent in the last year, according to a new report.
Tax cases are driving the figure up, although human rights issues are raised the most in criminal and immigration cases. Other relatively new areas of human rights litigation include commercial cases involving businesses and even planning applications.
The latest figures come from Thomson Reuters legal business, which supplies information to businesses and professionals. They found that human rights arguments, which became UK law in 1998, were part of 367 cases in the last year compared with 283 in 2011-12.
The number of tax cases raising these issues doubled from 12 to 25 in the same period. In addition, 32 human rights cases in the last year were brought by businesses and human rights arguments were used in 10 planning application cases last year. The most common ones in commercial cases are based on Article 1, the right to "the peaceful enjoyment of … possessions" and Article 6, the "right to a fair trial".
Counsel often argue that a decision by a public sector body has unfairly deprived investors of their money and that a judicial decision has been made without a proper or fair process.
The increase in human rights litigation against the taxman has been put down to HMRC's more aggressive compliance and tax investigation work since the credit crunch. A taxpayer who was fined for submitting their PAYE accounts too late argued that the penalty breached their right to property. Barrister Tom Hickman, author of Human Rights: Judicial Protection In The UK, said: "As HMRC increases its powers and penalties for failing to comply with the tax system, some taxpayers may feel the only way to challenge the tax collector is by using the Human Rights Act."
Document NS00000020140312ea3c0008b
