{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"443"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Miliband sets EU poll conditions
769 words
11 March 2014
22:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Ed Miliband has drawn battle lines with the Tories over Europe by effectively ruling out a referendum on British membership - unless there are moves to transfer fresh powers to Brussels.
The Labour leader insisted he was determined to reform the EU if elected in 2015, and pledged a legal lock that would guarantee an in-out vote if Westminster was asked to hand over more control.
But he made clear that he believed that was "unlikely" to happen in the next parliament.
The comments, in an article for the Financial Times, come ahead of a speech on the economy he is due to make tomorrow.
Mr Miliband acknowledged that people had "concerns" about the EU and said Labour's "agenda for change" would seek to return "more control to national parliaments".
"It is important to emphasise that there are no current proposals - from either the EU or any member state - for a further transfer of powers from Britain," he said.
"Therefore it is unlikely there will be any such proposals in the next parliament.
"But the British people know that the history of the EU, as well as uncertainty about precisely what a changing Europe and further integration in the eurozone might involve, means that a further transfer of powers remains possible.
"So in a speech today I am announcing that the next Labour government will legislate for a new lock: there would be no transfer of powers from the UK to the EU without a referendum on our continued membership of the EU.
"This would not just be a referendum on the narrow question of whether to allow a transfer of powers from Britain to Brussels; as we have seen in other countries, such votes are too easily ignored. This position, setting out the conditions in the next parliament under which a Labour government would hold an in/out referendum, offers the British people a clear choice at the next election."
Mr Miliband launched a stinging attack on David Cameron for being "driven by weakness" to appease right-wingers and promise an in-out referendum by 2017.
"David Cameron has committed the Conservatives to a major renegotiation of Britain's relationship with Europe on an arbitrary timetable for a 2017 referendum about Britain leaving the EU," he wrote.
"But he is a prime minister who cannot tell us the nature of his renegotiation strategy or even if he will campaign to keep Britain in Europe...
"Mr Cameron's position, riven with doubt and driven by weakness, means his priority after 2015 would not be tackling the cost of living crisis or creating jobs and prosperity. Instead, a Conservative government would be dominated by an all-consuming and damaging obsession within his party about whether Britain should leave the EU.
"You do not need a crystal ball to predict the consequences of such a state of affairs; you only need to read the history of John Major's government.
Mr Miliband added: "Labour's position on Europe, by contrast, is clear and principled: we strongly believe Britain's future is in the EU.
"And my priorities for government after the next election are very different from those of the Conservatives.
"Labour will focus on dealing with the cost of living crisis by building a better economy so that people can look forward to a better future for their children. An arbitrary timetable for a referendum on leaving Europe would damage our ability to deliver on these priorities."
However, Mr Miliband said he recognised the "reputation of the EU is, with reason, at a low ebb".
"If Britain's future in Europe is to be secured, Europe needs to work better for Britain. And Britain needs to work more effectively for change within the EU," he added.
The Opposition leader called for swift action to complete the single market, and for the EU to "address anxieties about immigration".
"We need fairer rules on what happens when people move here from another country and action to prevent a race to the bottom, where workers already here have their pay or conditions undercut," he said.
"A Labour government would work with our EU partners to lengthen the existing transitional arrangements for countries joining the EU so that their citizens have to wait longer before gaining rights to work here.
"There should be reforms to rules allowing people to claim child benefit or child tax credit when their children live abroad.
"And we should look at ways to make it easier to deport people who have recently arrived in this country when they commit crime."
Document NSONL00020140312ea3b000e0
