{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"145"}
____
  
Home
Friends of deported student, 19, devastated as she arrives in Mauritius with no one to greet her
Anna Dubuis   
450 words
3 April 2014
08:23
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Friends of student Yashika Bageerathi today said they were devastated after the teenager was deported from the UK to arrive in Mauritius with no one to greet her.
The 19-year-old’s removal went ahead after a last-minute bid last night to secure an emergency injunction failed.
Before the Air Mauritius flight took off from Heathrow she had one last emotional call with her mother who is remaining in London with Yashika’s younger brother and sister.
Lynne Dawes, headteacher of Oasis Academy Hadley in Enfield, said: “Yashika was sat with four security guards around her even though she has never resisted. She was being strong, but she was so shocked and absolutely devastated.
“We made an arrangement that as soon as she gets there she calls us, before she goes through customs or immigration. She has no family members she can contact but we are trying to make some arrangements.”
Yashika, who was due to take her A levels next month, came to the UK with her family in 2011 to escape a relative who was physically abusive and claimed asylum last summer.
Her classmate Paulo Luis, 19, said he and the other students, whose campaign against her deportation amassed 177,000 signatures, would continue to fight for her.
He said: “The government failed to take into account the voice of the people.  Everybody is so angry. We are not going to give up, I know we won’t let it go. We still love her and will do our best to keep in touch with her and bring her back.”
Yashika had been held at Yarl’s Wood immigration detention centre in Bedfordshire since March 19.
This was the third plane she was booked on after she was refused on two previous flights.
More on this story
British Airways was the first to allegedly refuse her a week ago and then Air Mauritius did the same on Sunday but yesterday the airline said it had “no other choice” but to accept her as a passenger.
In a statement, Air Mauritius said it had not been in a position to take her previously as not all conditions had been met.
But following a ‘directive’ from the UK authorities on Tuesday, the company said it had to comply.
It added: “Air Mauritius regrets this situation, but as all airline companies cannot but abide by decisions taken by relevant authorities.”
Yesterday Yashika’s MP David Burrowes said he had received a request from MP Keith Vaz for her to give evidence before the Home Affairs Select Committee next month.
Document NSONL00020140402ea42001jy
