{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1182"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Why grow up anywhere else but London?
Nick Curtis   
515 words
21 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
TURNCOATS! Quislings! Milquetoasts! Pantywaists! I'm talking to you — YES, YOU — the 52 per cent of Londoners polled by YouGov this month who think it preferable for a child to grow up outside the capital. It's not even an atavistic spasm aimed at protecting your actual or putative children from smog, stabbings or damaging exposure to Boris Johnson: no, you were specifically asked to imagine yourself as an infant again and said you would rather relive your formative years somewhere other than the greatest city in the world.
Well, screw you then. London doesn't don't need you or your comfort-blanket fantasies of bucolic security — you're not yearning for Liverpool or Salford or Milton Keynes, are you, but some generic, rose-cottage Midsomer with no underclass or non-white people? Feel free to sling your collective hook. There are plenty of willing immigrants, both British and international, waiting to take your place at the court of this great, bejewelled strumpet of a metropolis… Whoa, déjà vu! I wrote that exact same sentence back in November 2012 in response to another YouGov poll, in which exactly the same percentage of Londoners yearned to live somewhere else. Spooky. Different questions elicited slightly different answers this time — respondents complained about "too fast" population growth, the housing crisis and the problems of being old in the capital, whereas the cost of living here was the main preoccupation two years ago. But still, the depressing truth seems to be that at any given time, half the population of this endlessly fascinating place — with its Olympic Park and its theatres, its tech start-ups and its galleries, its cultural diversity and its hectic, thrumming pace — is locked in a frowny Groundhog Day loop, wishing it could leave.
This is a woeful failure of ambition and imagination. There are few things in my life that I regard as a complete success or a source of pride. One of them is my marriage. The other is that, however mediocre my intellect and abilities, I have survived in the most stimulating and competitive environment devised by man. I get the same vibe from colleagues and friends, arrivistes and those like me who won life's lottery by being born here, who feel they have wrestled with London and won.
Are children's lives really better served by green space rather than urban friction and opportunity? Is it really better to be old and infirm in a small, scattered community? Would you prefer to own a large house and have nothing to leave it for, or rent a small flat and have all of London on your doorstep? If the answer to any of these is yes, then please, free up some jobs and some housing and some hospital beds by leaving. The rest of us, the proud 48 per cent, will stand by our slogan: London till I die.
Half the population of this fascinating place is locked in a frowny Groundhog Day loop, wishing it could leave
Document NS00000020140321ea3l0006q
