{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1179"}
____
  
Comment
Nick Curtis: Why grow up anywhere else but London?
991 words
21 March 2014
10:19
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
The depressing truth seems to be that at any given time, half the population of London wishes it could leave... well, screw you
Turncoats! Quislings! Milquetoasts! Pantywaists! I’m talking to you — YES, YOU — the 52 per cent of Londoners polled by YouGov this month who think it preferable for a child to grow up outside the capital. It’s not even an atavistic spasm aimed at protecting your actual or putative children from smog, stabbings or damaging exposure to Boris Johnson: no, you were specifically asked to imagine yourself as an infant again and said you would rather relive your formative years somewhere other than the greatest city in the world.
Well, screw you then. London doesn’t don’t need you or your comfort-blanket fantasies of bucolic security — you’re not yearning for Liverpool or Salford or Milton Keynes, are you, but some generic, rose-cottage Midsomer with no underclass or non-white people? Feel free to sling your collective hook. There are plenty of willing immigrants, both British and international, waiting to take your place at the court of this great, bejewelled strumpet of a metropolis…
Whoa, déjà vu! I wrote that exact same sentence back in November 2012 in response to another YouGov poll, in which exactly the same percentage of Londoners yearned to live somewhere else. Spooky. Different questions elicited slightly different answers this time — respondents complained about “too fast” population growth, the housing crisis and the problems of being old in the capital, whereas the cost of living here was the main preoccupation two years ago. But still, the depressing truth seems to be that at any given time, half the population of this endlessly fascinating place — with its Olympic Park and its theatres, its tech start-ups and its galleries, its cultural diversity and its hectic, thrumming pace — is locked in a frowny Groundhog Day loop, wishing it could leave.
This is a woeful failure of ambition and imagination. There are few things in my life that I regard as a complete success or a source of pride. One of them is my marriage. The other is that, however mediocre my intellect and abilities, I have survived in the most stimulating and competitive environment devised by man. I get the same vibe from colleagues and friends, arrivistes and those like me who won life’s lottery by being born here, who feel they have wrestled with London and won.
Are children’s lives really better served by green space rather than urban friction and opportunity? Is it really better to be old and infirm in a small, scattered community? Would you prefer to own a large house and have nothing to leave it for, or rent a small flat and have all of London on your doorstep? If the answer to any of these is yes, then please, free up some jobs and some housing and some hospital beds by leaving. The rest of us, the proud 48 per cent, will stand by our slogan: London till I die.
Related stories
Misses and a hit with the organ
The flipside to all the benefits of living in London is the constant FOMO, Fear of Missing Out, from which I’ve decided randomly to absolve people. You don’t need to watch the very mediocre Blithe Spirit with Angela Lansbury unless it’s to see how much Janie Dee looks like Benedict Cumberbatch in drag (it’s a shared femininity, I hasten to add). The Vikings exhibition is a bit boring. The best burger in London is just a burger. Stay in. Play with your cat. It’s OK.
But there are exceptions. Although I don’t know my hautboy from my spitzflute, I went to the first concert since it was repaired of the Royal Festival Hall’s huge organ. Alongside the music (including a Bach duet with the exuberantly virtuosic trumpeter Alison Balsom), I felt properly transported back to the sense of hope and discovery when the Hall opened in 1951, and the organ first played in 1954. All this, and opportunities for innuendo too. Priceless. 
An app to tell your friends where to go
For every action a reaction, for every poison an antidote. So after the multiplication of social networks comes Cloak, which maps the position of your friends using location data from those networks, so that you can avoid them.
It may even be possible to get specific alert klaxons: I imagine the voice of Stephen Hawking blurting “Look out, it’s that w***er Dave” from your phone, which could be embarrassing if Dave is really close. Next, inevitably, there’ll be stealth apps, allowing bores to hide themselves from Cloak, sneak up on you and shout: “When’re we gonna have that drink then, eh?”
So it’s time to roll out the idea my friend Liz Wilson and I had for a service called youneedtelling.com. You go to our website, tell us what annoys you about your friends, colleagues or partner, and we go around to their house and tell them, anonymously. Any visionary millionaire would-be backers reading this? No?
Rally around the Rolexes
Comrades, to the barricades! The purveyors of vintage Rolexes must be saved! Actually, I think it’s going to be a little bit hard to rally mass support for the independent jewellers and watch dealers of the Burlington Arcade, who fear they will be priced out by rising rents that only big brands can afford.
The 1819 arcade is lovely but a visit usually goes like this. 1 — saunter in.
2 — spot nice item from corner of eye. 3 — check price. 4 — scoop eyeballs back in. 5 — buy single Ladurée macaroon as consolation.
Once, one of their silly panto doormen told me it was “forbidden” to wheel a pushbike through. Not a populist cause, as I say.
Twitter: @nickcurtis
Document NSONL00020140321ea3l000xl
