{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1727"}
____
  
Home
Top judges face backlash after ruling Jamaican killer can't be deported as he is gay
Paul Cheston, Nicholas Cecil   
402 words
17 April 2014
11:49
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Senior judges came under fire today after ruling that an illegal immigrant who murdered a London schoolboy less than a year after arriving in the UK cannot be deported because he is gay.
The 29-year-old killer, who cannot be named for legal reasons, has been released from jail after the Court of Appeal said that sending him back to Jamaica would violate his human rights as a homosexual.
The man, referred to only as JR, was “party to murder” at the age of 16 when he and another schoolboy knifed Abdul Maye, 15, to death over a £10 debt outside Little Ilford Comprehensive School in Manor Park, north London, in 2001.
He was sentenced to detention at Her Majesty’s pleasure in September 2002, and was freed from prison in June 2012.
Ever since his release, Home Secretary Theresa May has been battling to have him sent home.
But JR, who has an IQ of just 63, successfully appealed the Home Secretary’s decision to deport him to the First-Tier Tribunal which accepted he was homosexual and that he would be at risk of ‘inhuman or degrading treatment’ if returned to Jamaica.
The Upper Tribunal refused a challenge to that decision brought by Mrs May last year after hearing JR’s mother give evidence that she “knew all along” that her son was gay.
Now Lord Justice Kay, sitting with Lord Justice Lewison and Sir Stanley Burnton at the Court of Appeal, has blocked the Government’s latest attempt to have JR deported.
Mrs May accepted that, if JR was genuinely gay, he could not be deported, but the Home Office argued his eleventh hour assertion of homosexuality should have been rejected “on credibility grounds” as “he had made no mention of it” during a previous asylum application.
Enfield North Conservative MP Nick de Bois said: “I have no doubt that the British public would back the Home Secretary on this one.”
Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons home affairs committee, stressed the Government had a “problem” removing foreign national prisoners and called on the Home Office to urgently clarify what constitutes acceptable evidence in cases where sexuality is an issue.
The Home Office said it was “extremely disappointed” with the court’s decision and was considering appealing.
Document NSONL00020140417ea4h0015u
