{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"328"}
____
  
Features
Meet the *ipsters
Nimrod Kamer   
1,037 words
2 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
38,39
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
The beard has peaked but hipsters are still multiplying, with new tribes of urban adults popping up all over town,
HIPSTERISM is a subculture of men and women typically in their twenties and thirties who value independent thinking, counter-culture, granny pants, fetishism of the authentic, chopping wood, etc. Unfortunately it is over and passé — so done that the mere mentioning of hipster makes every hipster quiver with disdain. Apparently there's nothing more misguided than admitting you're hip. Without an asterisk. Being a hipster in 2014 is a no to self. Most of us don't even have a self to promote in the first place.
Still, offbeat kids and urban adults are eager to be integrated into groups. Anything that ends with *ipster or even *pster will do, as long as it doesn't have the letter H. Hipsterdom is ready for new isms, ones that combine quiche and indie pop, fixed-gear bikes as well as shoegazing, Nathan Barleys and Shoreditch Twats. Niche subcategories have popped down, made of many boutique agendas. New hashtags are now ready for the clipboards. Staying ahead of trend is the new FML (eff my life).
What do we talk about when talk about irony? I dug out London's freshest downand-comer meltpots poets, a collection of frontline cutting-ledge *ipsters from different religions, political and fashion backgrounds. We chatted on buzz and truthiness at the centre of it all: Hackney Central Overground station. I was surprised none of them were wearing skinny jeans or fake crocs.
JEWPSTER Jewish hipster. Could've been called Jipsters but that has connotations of gypsies and the yolocaust. Typical Jewpsters are into bark mitzvahs, a bar mitzvah-style ceremony for their dogs. Also they pretend not to know Israel or the Middle East exist, to see how others react. They would claim to be Jew-ish (halfway-ish Jews) and semisemitic.
You say potato, the Jewpster says fifty shades of kosher. All Jewpsters are circumcised and even jewpster ladies can walk around without foreskins. They apply jew diligence everywhere.
As a known Jewpster, me (29) and my family eat Pakistani food with a bitter note of selfacrimony in Whitechapel and visit the Waspchapel Gallery with fellow Waspters.
Jewpsters love hi-vis jackets with rundown Star of David signs printed on them. They always complain though for the lack of Star of Davids on their phones' emoji keyboards, even though their version of the star has an extra triangle in it for lolz.
NIPSTER Nouveau hipster. Hipster version of the nouveau riche. Tumblr and Pinterest are full of them. Even now, somewhere in Lewisham there's a Nipster sitting quietly at his desk, ashamed and morose, trying to retweet himself. Nipsters are the Whole Foods of vintage, as they'll buy the one quinoa sandwich they know will make them gas for 10 days. They hate the media in social media, often stating that not tweeting is the new blogging.
Some Nipsters think they kidnapped dubstep as a form of breakdance. The idea of hipsterism is either nouveau to them, or they're just nouveau by being over it, like postzionists Jewpsters. Nipsters will admit that carbon is their favourite consumption, sarcastically. They'll shop at M&S only when feeling Marxist.
Joel Benjamin, 25, is a hairstylist and DJ who is a Nipster, with a head for business and a body for sin. He says he grew up in Tottenham, as fellow Manor House peeps didn't get his style of pastel pink chinos, penny loafers, bright socks, plaid shirt, a bowtie and cord blazer. He'd get called gay and white back then. Benjamin recently took care of VICE magazine's editor's wife's wedding hairdo. Many Nipsters I met believe wholeheartedly that Axl Rose died in 1994.
#MIPSTERZ Muslim hipsters. This hashtag is well established since a few Muslim girls led by Layla Shaikley uploaded a video of themselves skating around while wearing funky hijabs, tagged #Mipsterz, Z included. Mipsterz caught on. There was even a backlash, right before the story in the Atlantic, The Surprising Lessons of the "Muslim Hipsters" Backlash.
They recently made rings with the word engraved on them, and many follow-up YouTubes, including one where leaned-in male Mipsterz singing to Pharrell's song Happy. Some say Mipsterz has the potential to emancipate Muslim females. Others, like Zone 4 diva mipsternon-mipster Dina Toki-o, point out that Muslim ladies need no salvation, and might just rather be regular hipsters without the Muslim tag.
I met self-proclaimed Mipster Nusaiba Mohammad, 21, who is competing in a global hijab style competition. She studies textile design and is a stylist. She reckons #Mipsterz fits her bill perfectly, being hip and devout at the same time.
"Life is shish, meal with it", was a tweet posted by Mipster stronghold restaurant Mangal 2, as many shishsters still go to Edgware Road to smoke shisha mirthfully, fully aware that it isn't the coolest place, but doing it anyway, nudge nudge, like self-fulfilling prophecy cliché. Many Mipsterz don't react well to recent hipster fads such as beard transplants, #normcore and camouflage long-johns.
UKIPST£R Ukip hipsters. The original hipsters were obviously liberal, and white, and ran blogs such as Stuff White People Like and Wikipedia pages such as Hipster racism. This led to a re-reading of Norman Mailer's The White Negro: Superficial Reflections on the Hipster. In the UK these tensions culminated inside the mind of local Dalston Ukipster Larry Jarry. He's a fan of the New York McCainsters, who voted in 2008 for the Republican nominee ironically, for spite, as an over the counter-culture move, sticking it to their friends who voted for Obama. For chic reasons alone, Ukipsters live in east London among Turks and Muslims, and say they'd love to see Britain leave the EU as a fashion statement.
This Ukipster, Larry, 26, enjoys picking fights with his Faragehating mates in an attempt to agitate and exasperate them, daily, along the Regent's Canal. For the average Ukipster, having an immigrant neighbour is the new calling your dad gay.
Document NS00000020140502ea5200061
