{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"3301"}
____
  
Home
Ukip youth activist leaves party because of 'terrifying' new direction
Robin de Peyer   
454 words
14 May 2014
22:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
One of Ukip's most prominent British Asian supporters has dramatically quit the party after accusing it of descending into "racist popularism".
Sanya-Jeet Thandi, who has been a member of Nigel Farage's anti-EU party since she was 18, accused it of taking a "terrifying" direction.
The youth activist, who is a student at the London School of Economics, has previously been put forward to defend the party's policies on television news.
But in a damning critique of its policies, she cited Ukip's controversial poster campaign warning of the impact of immigration from the European Union on British jobs as evidence that it "deliberately attracts the racist vote".
Unveiled before key European elections this month, the posters warn that 26 million people from the EU are seeking to take British workers' jobs.
"As a British-born Indian supporter of Ukip I should be proud that the party I joined at 18 has grown to challenge the Conservatives and Labour so strongly," she wrote in the Guardian.
"In reality, however, the direction in which the party is going is terrifying: Ukip has descended into a form of racist populism that I cannot bring myself to vote for.
"This week I decided to leave the party and I will abstain from voting in the upcoming European elections. I urge other Ukip supporters to do the same," she added.
Related links
Her decision will come as a blow to Nigel Farage as he seeks to restore his party's credibility after a series of high-profile racist comments made by Ukip candidates in recent weeks.
Ms Thandi highlighted comments made by candidate William Henwood, who was forced to resign from the party after suggesting Lenny Henry "should emigrate to a black country".
Polling ahead of the elections, on May 22, suggests Ukip could come out on top amid distrust of Conservatives, Labour and the Liberal Democrats.
"I understand that British politics in the 21st century has become a dirty game of populism, but Ukip is straying further and further from the policies that attracted so many of its original supporters, instead cynically pursuing ever more aggressive anti-immigrant rhetoric," Ms Thandi wrote.
"After preaching about 'common sense' and standing up as the 'people's party', it is ironic that previously fundamental policies like taxation and promoting a small state are being ignored in favour of going after the votes of those who think Lenny Henry 'should emigrate to a black country'.
"Ukip is exploiting the stupidity of ignorant anti-immigrant voters for electoral gain. While the party deliberately attracts the racist vote, I refuse to be associated with them."
Document NSONL00020140513ea5d0035x
