{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1444"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
At work, shop or home, London will be different
Sarah Sands   
500 words
4 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
WHEN I worked at a newspaper with a large, older, rural readership, a highly prized advertisement was of a cutprice chicken covering an entire broadsheet page. Supermarkets depended upon the family Saturday shop and the way to lure customers was through the Sunday roast.
In London, it works differently. More couples work. The "almost" ready-made supper is popular. The spirit is willing to cook but the flesh is tired. The other idiosyncrasy is that while we are time-poor we like infinite choice. It is a corollary of the capital's cosmopolitan population.
So making food shopping workfriendly is a leap for humankind. The Evening Standard knows that the way to reach the working population is primarily through Tube and rail stations. Picking up the Standard on the way home is part of London life. Research by this paper shows that for commuters this is the happiest time of the day. They are relaxed and willing to absorb information. They like to plan their evening's food, drink and entertainment.
This is the moment then for supermarkets to befriend commuters. Not by BOGOF offers or billboard-sized photos of chickens but with something beguiling and bespoke. The reduction in Tube ticket offices is going to herald a change in our lives. The offices will be replaced by showcase stores and a click-and-collect system of picking up groceries at the end of the journey. Tesco sees this as the great workers' revolution. If it works in London, it could also be replicated in the other great world cities. It is yet another example of how London has to be treated as a case apart from the rest of the country. We are a working city on a scale that does not exist elsewhere. The retail model increasingly will be that you buy at showcase shops in London and the stock is stored at warehouses outside the capital.
Just as supermarkets are adapting to the demands of the London population, so must infrastructure and housing. Last night the Evening Standard debated whether we need more immigration. To attract more of the talented and dedicated workforce of the world, we must provide the right sort of housing for them. Estate agent Strutt and Parker has identified the GloMads — Global Nomads — who acquire "menu furnished" rented apartments. For poor but brilliant artists, academics and students, should we not ringfence social housing? Broadly, what makes a working city run well is a lack of bureaucracy (including complicated visas), a minimum of road closures, a great service economy and provision for the disadvantaged. Supermarkets note that convenience matters more to Londoners than cash incentives (unlike the rest of the country). The only subsidy that is make or break is transport fares. Keep fares low and watch a working city thrive.
Tube ticket offices will be replaced by showcase stores and a click-and-collect system of picking up groceries
Document NS00000020140304ea340005x
