{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2372"}
____
  
Features
Hardly for hillbillies...
Anthea Masey   
1,367 words
16 April 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
28,29
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
Hugh Grant brought stardom to its streets — but surprisingly there are deals to be had in this celebrity neighbourhood. spotlightnottinghill
NEXT month sees the 15th anniversary of the release of Notting Hill, the film tracing the highs and lows of a love affair between shambolic bookshop owner William Thacker, played by Hugh Grant, and the world's most famous actress Anna Scott, portrayed by Julia Roberts.
It's a charming fairy tale, set at a time in the late Nineties when characters such as Thacker and his flatmate Spike, played by Rhys Ifans, could still afford to live in Notting Hill — at a pinch Notting Hill's journey from farmland to one of the world's most exclusive neighbourhoods is a tale of shifting fashions and the vicissitudes of the property market. In the 1820s, taking inspiration from John Nash's houses in Regent's Park, architect Thomas Allason planned grand mansions surrounding a circus. However, a financial crisis in 1825 saw the project shelved and it was 15 years before the Notting Hill we know today began to emerge. Allason's gift to London was a series of terraces with direct access to private gardens. The heart of Notting Hill is formed by these concentric circles of terraces at the top of the hill in Ladbroke Grove, with St John's church at the summit.
After the Second World War houses previously lived in by families with a retinue of servants were sold and divided into flats, and in the seedier corners of the neighbourhood the notorious slum landlord Peter Rachman bullied and exploited his tenants in the Fifties and early Sixties. Many of the Windrush generation of immigrants from the Caribbean settled locally and in 1958 provocation from a group of Teddy Boys led to London's first race riots. In the wake of the unrest, the Caribbean community set up Notting Hill Carnival. Staged every August bank holiday, it is now the largest street festival in Europe.
Gentrification followed as a generation of architects, designers and artists — led by David Hockney, who lived in Powis Terrace during the Sixties — discovered Notting Hill. It has continued, to the point where house hunters today need the budget of a millionaire pop star, such Adele or Damon Albarn, both of whom bought locally.
WHAT THERE IS TO BUY With some of London's finest homes, Notting Hill has joined the prime property market. There are grand white stucco houses in Pembridge Villas and Pembridge Square but the houses with direct access to the 15 communal gardens in the terraces radiating out from the summit of Ladbroke Grove, where it meets Stanley Crescent and Lansdowne Crescent, have come to epitomise Notting Hill. Most of the larger houses are still divided into flats, some laterally across several buildings. There are also smaller mews houses and "right-to-buy" flats in the Latimer Road area and north of Westway around Golborne Road.
Estate agent Maddie Lewington from Douglas & Gordon says the very best houses are approaching £3,000 a square foot, with lesser values for flats.
The most expensive house for sale now is a seven-bedroom Lansdowne Crescent property, on the market for £13.25 million (homesandproperty.co.uk/lands). At nearly 5,000sq ft, it is valued at about £2,700 per square foot. The cheapest house is a three-bedroom modern semi in Wesley Square close to Westway (homesandproperty.co. uk/westway) selling for £1.1 million, or about £1,100 a square foot.
The most expensive flat is a four-bedroom maisonette in a former artist's studio with a roof garden in Lansdowne Road, on the market with (homesand property.co.uk/landsdowne) for £9 million, valuing it at about £1,800 a square foot. The cheapest is a studio flat in Hurstway Walk, in a council block near Latimer Road Tube station with a lovely communal garden, for sale (homesandproperty.co.uk/hurst) at £225,000, or £672 per square foot — a bargain for the area.
The area attracts: homegrown buyers predominate in Notting Hill though European buyers are increasingly interested, especially French and Italian. Staying power: the cost of trading up from a one- or two-bedroom flat to a family house is often unaffordable, forcing many to look further afield these days to areas they wouldn't have considered previously, for example Acton, where prices are far lower and there is the potential to add value. Open space: Holland Park, the largest local park, has a children's playground, a café, areas of woodland, tennis courts, a cricket pitch, a Japanese garden and hosts an annual summer festival of opera. Avondale, a local park in Walmer Road with a formal garden and children's playground, is experimenting with a unique floral lawn, replacing an area of grass with lowgrowing plants such as chamomile, thyme and mint.
LEISURE AND THE ARTS The Gate Theatre in Pembridge Road is a 70-seat experimental fringe theatre that helped the early careers of some of the country's leading young directors and writers.
There are three local cinemas — the Coronet and the Gate in Notting Hill Gate, and the Electric Cinema in Portobello Road. The Museum of Brands, Packaging and Advertising in Colville Mews is the place to indulge in nostalgia for the products of one's youth. The Leighton House Museum in Holland Park Road, which was the home of the leading Victorian artist Frederic, Lord Leighton, is the only purpose-built studio house open to the public in the UK. It is currently holding an exhibition of paintings by Jamaicanborn Notting Hill artist Rudi Patterson, who died last year.
The Kensington Leisure Centre, including the swimming pool, is being redeveloped as part of the Kensington Aldridge Academy project to open a new secondary school in Silchester Road in September.
Travel: Notting Hill has five Tube stations: Notting Hill Gate is on the Central, Circle and District lines; Holland Park is on the Central line; Westbourne Park, Ladbroke Grove and Latimer Road are on the Circle and Hammersmith & City lines. All stations — with the exception of Notting Hill Gate which is in Zone 1 — are in Zone 2, and an annual travelcard to Zone 1 is £1,256.
Council: Kensington & Chelsea council is Conservative-controlled, and Band D council tax for the 2014/2015 year stands at £1,066.79 — plus an extra charge for those living in the garden squares. This charge, collected with council tax, varied in 2013/2014 between £40.34 a year in Emperor's Gate and £338.43 in Clarendon/ Lansdowne Roads.
HAVE YOUR SAY NOTTING HILL @NHMayfair annual Notting Hill May Fair. Village life — with maypole and coconut shy — in heart of NH. This year May 17 Lansdowne Cr.
@nadiou Vessel gallery, best staff and exquisite items.
@nottinghilllife great #bars such as @Negozioclassica for #wine, @Portobello_Star @TrailerH & @MONTGOMERYLDN for #cocktails.
@hannah_macey out & about with your dog — #NottingHill luxury concept store @MungoMaud on Ledbury Road, a slice of dog heaven!
@Redwing_PR we are big fans of @theshed_resto. Amazing English tapas all from Sussex & it has fab tractor bonnet bar! Yummy organic brekkie @daylesfordfarm.
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE THIS Notting Hill park was built on top of an ocean — of what? Find the answer at homesandproperty.co.uk/ spotlightnottinghill £1.65 MILLION A DUPLEX conversion apartment in Linden Gardens, with three en suite bedrooms, openplan living areas and kitchen. Through Foxtons. Visit homesandproperty.co.uk/linden £2.7 MILLION A FLAT across the top floor of a stuccoed villa in Pembridge Square, with four bedrooms, two patios, an eat-in kitchen and a study. Through Bective Leslie Marsh.
Visit homesand property.co.uk/ pembridge £875,000 A ONE-BEDROOM first-floor flat with a balcony overlooking communal gardens in Leinster Square, W2. Through Marsh & Parsons.
Visit homesandproperty.co.uk/leinster £550,000 CLOSE to Notting Hill Tube, this one-bedroom buy-to-let flat in Ladbroke Square has a tenant for the next year. Through John D Wood.
Visit homesandproperty.co.uk/ladbroke
Document NS00000020140416ea4g0003a
