{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"3642"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Base immigration on people, services and numbers
Shaun Bailey   
1,079 words
24 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
14
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
The EU must allow us to ensure migrants are adding to, not further straining, our economy and public services
FIRST off, I am going to offend you. How do I know this? We are talking immigration and there are few more emotive topics. With the European elections looming, the perceived threat to all the main parties from Ukip and the backdrop of an economy in a fragile recovery, it seems that being tough on immigration is gaining momentum.
This paper's debate on immigration next Monday is a useful contribution to discussion of the subject. There are realities about immigration which we have to face up to and this will be an opportunity to address them.
At the outset, let me acknowledge that London owes an awful lot to its cosmopolitan character. The sense that London is a welcoming city makes the capital attractive to overseas investors. London will always need some immigration and most migrants come here to work, and work hard.
Yet any sane conversation about immigration has to acknowledge the costs of immigration as well as its benefits. For many Londoners, particularly poor Londoners, it can seem that the costs outweigh the benefits. This would matter less if the numbers weren't so big. Granted, the Government has managed to reduce net migration and this is very welcome. But the numbers coming here are still large — net migration was 182,000 in the year to last June — and they add to the numbers already here. Under Labour, nearly four million people came here and a million British people left — that's a net influx of nearly three million. Many of them gravitate towards London so the pressure on resources here is disproportionate.
Why do I say immigration affects the poorest Londoners first and hardest? They are the people who are competing with European and other migrants for the same jobs, services and housing. Most come here to work rather than claim benefits. None of this is of any comfort if you are London-born and unable to find work or housing. Because the newcomers can often afford to work for low wages due to their temporary status, or their acceptance of lower living standards, they force wages down for the poorest paid. That has an effect on young British people — many of what used to be starter jobs now go to new arrivals.
What's more we all have to pay for the public services and benefits that new migrants enjoy. There is a feeling among Londoners that we are providing a health service for the entire world. We have a non-contributory welfare system, yet the numbers seeking healthcare can seem like a never-ending queue. It does not feel fair for new immigrants to use freely what Londoners pay for.
Of course the example of the NHS illustrates the paradoxical nature of immigration. I have to point out that our NHS would not be viable without its large numbers of foreign-born workers. Indeed many parts of London's economy would not work if not for migrant workers.
What about housing? The pressure on housing in London is well-documented and clearly, immigration plays a part in that. Some will say that the impact for public housing is small; however, if you are in need of housing but cannot get any, you start to turn on your neighbour, and people who look different are the easiest to blame. So European migrants who are more able to blend in do not face quite the same pressure as migrants from elsewhere but still pose the same issues for our infrastructure.
London is a city of every race. Avoiding racial tension is crucial. It is also of central importance to our international standing. We need clarity with any immigration policy, based on people, numbers and services.
The greatest bar to such a policy is the European Union rule whereby any EU citizen can live and work in any member state. That means we have no say in how many people come here. It is something David Cameron is trying to address in the renegotiation talks.
This is a problem faced by other prosperous EU states as well as Britain, and it may be that the Prime Minister will have support from other governments in trying to make the system more flexible. It is a difficult balance to strike — this country must not appear overly emotional, still less protectionist, when it comes to free movement in Europe — but these rules must be changed if people are to feel that the Government controls immigration numbers.
We cannot have too severe a restriction on people coming in and out of London, however. This would affect the bottom line of London plc. As a city we have benefited from the free movement of goods and capital across Europe and the world and we cannot expect this without some movement of people.
Yet reform is in the interests of the EU; it would make the Union seem relevant to its citizens. If we do not have concessions from the EU on the rules about free movement, it will alienate more than just British people — this is an issue faced by others in the EU.
It's true, of course, that migration is a two-way process. Many Britons want to live and work abroad too: there are large expatriate communities from here to Dubai. But even allowing for that, net migration figures are still a long way off Government targets.
The immigration bill, for all its problems, is looking in the right direction: a cap on maximum numbers and a restriction on access to benefits is where much of the answer lies. Immigrants need to know when they can and cannot come here, and we need to know they are adding to, not further straining, our economy and public services. There is no silver bullet, no single answer to the problem, but this bill will help by making Britain seem less of a soft touch than before.
A more coherent immigration policy, properly implemented, will help all communities.
The Standard and the City of London are hosting a major public debate, Does London Need More Immigration?, next Monday. Info: standard.co.uk/immigrationdebate
The European Union rule whereby any EU citizen can live and work in any member state means we have no say in how many people come here
Document NS00000020140224ea2o0006c
