{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2843"}
____
  
News
Farage: Britain cannot control immigration policy while in the EU
Joe Murphy   
393 words
28 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
6
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
UKIP leader Nigel Farage today seized on the surge in immigration for his European elections campaign amid recriminations among Conservatives over the handling of the issue.
"Immigration has now become the number one issue in British politics," he was expected to say in his keynote speech to the party's spring conference in Torquay.
"We cannot have our own immigration policy and remain a member of the European Union."
A 30 per cent rise in net migration left the Prime Minister's pledge to cut numbers to the "tens of thousands" looking untenable yesterday.
Conservative backbenchers are criticising Mr Cameron and Home Secretary Theresa May for building up unrealistic expectations that the Coalition would substantially reduce immigration.
One told the Standard that it had been a mistake for the pair to boast repeat-edly that their policies had brought about a cut of a third, because the figures had always been likely to move up as well as down.
"No 10 are now telling us that we should carry on telling voters that we want to cut net immigration to the tens of thousands," said the MP. "But it doesn't wash with people to say we want to do something if we cannot deliver."
Speaking ahead of his speech, Mr Farage said the Coalition had bred cynicism, with overblown promises that could not be kept because of EU freedom of movement rights.
"It doesn't matter what Cameron says ... the British Government have zero control over the number of people coming to Britain," he said. Mr Farage will urge supporters to "tell the political class where to go" by voting Ukip in the May 22 European and local elections, and will predict "an earthquake in British politics".
The ex-City trader will hail the rise of women in his party, joking that "some even talk about a female takeover".
Green leader Natalie Bennett, meanwhile, demanded the right to take part in a TV debate with other leaders.
"We represent views that absolutely must be at the table in those debates," she said. Her conference was starting in Liverpool this afternoon.
Natalie Bennett interview Page 29
'No 10 says we should carry one telling voters we want to cut net immigration… but it doesn't wash with people' Conservative backbencher
Document NS00000020140228ea2s0002w
