{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2770"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
To prosper, London must have immigrant talent
Mark Boleat   
583 words
27 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
15
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
AS A 16-year-old immigrant from Ukraine, Jan Koum was forced to queue with his mother for food stamps when he moved to California. Today he is one of the world's most famous tech entrepreneurs after WhatsApp, the popular messaging service he co-founded, was taken over by Facebook for $19 billion last week. He joins a long list of Silicon Valley immigrant success stories including Max Levchin, Ukrainian-born co-founder of PayPal, and Google's Russian-born co-founder, Sergey Brin.
At a time when immigration, particularly from Eastern Europe, is the most contentious of British political subjects, it is worth noting what these individuals have achieved across the Atlantic. They show that people from different backgrounds bring new ideas to the table. In Koum's case, his experience of state monitoring in Soviet Russia led him to create a new way of communicating to people back home in privacy.
In the tech sector — and many others such as finance and science — bringing together different ways of thinking is critical to doing business. London's Tech City, like Silicon Valley, needs access to the best global talent if it is to develop cutting-edge software. We all want the next Facebook, Twitter or WhatsApp to emerge from and reach its full potential in London. An immigration policy and a visa system that enables the best to come to the UK are essential to achieving this.
That is why some of the rhetoric and scaremongering being used by critics of immigration risks damaging our future economic prospects. What is needed — and will hopefully be provided by this paper next Monday at Guildhall — is a sensible, fact-based debate over what migrants bring to the capital, while also acknowledging their impact on communities and services. A row where only the loudest are heard — as screened by one broadcaster recently — fails this test.
There are real arguments on both sides. Several London boroughs have had a rapid influx of immigrants, which puts pressure on schools, housing and health services.
Policymakers should clamp down on those immigrants who come to Britain to take rather than contribute. But the overwhelming majority of immigrants come here to make a better life for themselves and their families through hard work, and in so doing are of huge benefit to Britain. Closing our borders or Swiss-style immigration quotas are not viable or sensible solutions.
A defining characteristic of London is its internationalism. Census data shows that more than 100 different languages are spoken in almost every borough and the capital provides access to markets across the globe. This is a key reason why international businesses choose to locate here.
We need to be plugged into highgrowth markets in Asia and Latin America more than ever. These connections are crucial for our firms to be able to compete on the global stage.
The evidence is clear. After all, Silicon Valley does not hold the monopoly on immigrant success stories. One of the most successful gaming companies of recent years is London-based King, which is behind the wildly popular Candy Crush Saga: its CEO and co-founder is an Italian.
Mark Boleat is policy chairman at the City of London Corporation. The Standard and the City of London are hosting a major public debate, Does London Need More Immigration?, next Monday.
Closing our borders or Swiss-style immigration quotas are not viable or sensible solutions
Document NS00000020140227ea2r0006p
