{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"367"}
____
  
News
Chaos at Heathrow as IT glitch hits border control
Martin Bentham, Simon Freeman ; David Churchill   
395 words
1 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
3; National
11
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
MINISTERS were today facing calls for an urgent investigation into border security after a computer glitch left passengers queuing for hours at Heathrow, Stansted and Gatwick.
The problem, which Home Office officials were still investigating today, forced UK Border Force staff to manually input passport details instead of scanning documents onto the system. Some travellers had to wait up to four hours, with fights reported at Gatwick.
Immigration minister James Brokenshire, who went to Heathrow this morning to monitor the situation, said he regretted that "temporary IT problems" had caused delays but insisted staff had been right to ensure all those arriving underwent proper passport checks. Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons Home Affairs Select Committee, expressed concern, however, that security might have been at risk and called for an immediate investigation.
"The problems with IT which led to these unacceptable delays are a cause for concern," he said. "We need an assurance there was no relaxation of border checks." At Heathrow, some travellers complained that they had spent as much time getting through immigration as they had in the air.
Olaf Olfasson, 53, a firefighter from Reykjavik, Iceland, said: "People didn't know what was happening. I had to wait for 90 minutes. I would've preferred to spend that time having a beer in Soho."
Jonny Ma, 30, an interior designer who landed at Heathrow from Hong Kong, said: "It was hell and they weren't giving any explanation. I waited about two hours to get through immigration."
Sajan Singh, 36, and Briye Kaur, 30, had flown for 12 hours from Thailand for a week in the capital. Mr Singh said: "Our plane landed at 7pm and we didn't get through immigration until after 10pm. They were giving out bottles of water to everyone but it's ridiculous after a 12-hour flight."
At Gatwick, Kay Perry, who had flown in from Majorca, said the queue at the South Terminal "went out of the passport control room, up the stairs and along the corridors".
"Nobody really knew where they were meant to join the queues so fights started to break out."
Queues were back to normal this morning with the computer problems said to be resolved. Officials said the exact cause was still to be established.
Document NS00000020140502ea5100002
