{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"352"}
____
  
Comment
Evening Standard Comment: Labour’s new deal for ‘generation rent’
607 words
1 May 2014
13:51
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
Labour’s rent controls could make life easier for renters, but they won't be enough to solve London's housing crisis
Labour's proposals today for rent control are a bold move. The latest plank in Labour’s cost-of-living strategy, the controls would bring three-year tenancy agreements, preventing landlords from evicting tenants as a way of jacking up rents. They would stop agents charging letting fees. And they would introduce a mechanism to put a ceiling on rent increases, perhaps linked to average rent rises. The policy will be national but its significance is especially great in London — hence Labour leader Ed Miliband’s launch of the plan today in Redbridge.
The plans have drawn swift condemnation from the Conservatives. There are suggestions that the controls could discourage landlords from renting, thereby reducing the overall supply. But most landlords have little choice but to rent out mortgaged properties. The housing market coped with certain rent controls before their abolition in the Eighties. Moreover, in the present environment, with rents soaring in London especially, the move is likely to win popular support.
What it will manifestly not do is solve the cause of the housing crisis — low supply. We need to build more rented accommodation, especially affordable social housing: that is the best way to tackle over-inflated rents and renters’ difficulty in finding places to live. Yet all home building — rented and otherwise — remains at very low levels in London and elsewhere. Labour’s rent controls could make life easier for renters. But we need more homes for an expanding London to function properly in the decades ahead. Only building more will deliver that.
Ukip in the dock
This paper’s investigation of some of Ukip’s candidates for London local councils in this month’s elections should give pause to those who downplay criticism of the party’s alleged racism. A string of Ukip London candidates have made questionable comments and interventions that downplay the extremism of the BNP and EDL. For example, Brent candidate Heino Vockrodt, ironically a German immigrant, described members of the EDL as “honest normal people… they get an unfair press”. The revelations follow a string of recent embarrassments for the party over some candidates’ racist and just plain eccentric statements on Twitter and elsewhere, as well as previous rows over sexist remarks by Ukip MEP Godfrey Bloom.
All parties have local activists and politicians who embarrass themselves on social media. But the extent of the gaffes by Ukip suggests a particularly lackadaisical approach to candidate selection. Ukip leader Nigel Farage’s response to such charges has been, improbably, that the party has been infiltrated, and that it can’t be expected to have the levels of organisation of the major parties. In other words, whatever its pretensions, Ukip is not a serious party, albeit one with a charismatic leader. Londoners are perfectly entitled to cast protest votes. But they should be under no illusions as to some of the characters they will be backing should they vote Ukip. At best, Ukip is not capable of exercising meaningful public office; at worst, these are not candidates worthy of public life.
Goodbye, Paxo
Politicians may breathe easier with the news that their chief TV inquisitor, Jeremy Paxman, is to retire from Newsnight next month. We will miss his grumpiness, gurning and terrier-like pursuit of squirming ministers. But the real question is who will succeed him? It takes a rare TV journalist to keep London watching after 10.30pm. We hope the BBC find him — or her — soon.
Document NSONL00020140507ea5100082
