{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"1369"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
PA headlines at 7am
1,034 words
2 March 2014
07:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
HAGUE HEADS FOR KIEV CRISIS TALKS
Foreign Secretary William Hague will travel to Kiev today to meet Ukraine's interim leaders as the crisis in the former Soviet country escalates ever closer to war.
Pressure is mounting on Vladimir Putin after Russia yesterday authorised military action on Ukrainian soil, but so far the president has ignored the widespread international condemnation of his country's aggression.
In a 90-minute telephone conversation last night US president Barack Obama warned Mr Putin that Russia had flouted international law and urged him to pull forces back to bases in Crimea.
(POLITICS Ukraine)
DITCH IMMIGRATION 'NONSENSE' - FOX
David Cameron must ditch the pledge to bring net migration down to tens of thousands and instead focus efforts on curbing the number of low-skilled workers heading to Britain to stave off the threat from Ukip, a former defence secretary has said.
Liam Fox warned the Prime Minister he would be guilty of "dangerous complacency" if he failed to address the damage Nigel Farage's party could do at the ballot box.
In an interview with The Sunday Telegraph, the Eurosceptic called for the party to drop the "statistical nonsense" and develop a "clearer narrative" on immigration.
(POLITICS Immigration)
LORD OWEN IN LABOUR PARTY DONATION
Former SDP leader Lord Owen has made a donation to Labour coffers and praised the "brave and bold" reforms of the party's links with trade unions pushed through by Ed Miliband.
The peer served in a number of high-profile government roles for Labour, including foreign secretary, before leading the breakaway "gang of four" over differences on Europe and defence after a bruising party conference in 1981.
After far-reaching changes to Labour's structure were overwhelmingly agreed at a special conference in London, Lord Owen revealed he has given up his crossbench status in the House of Lords to make a contribution of "over £7,500" to his former party, but will remain independent.
(POLITICS Labour)
IGNORANCE OF IRA LETTERS 'RISIBLE'
Former secretary of state for Northern Ireland Peter Hain has said it is risible for key politicians to claim they had no knowledge so-called comfort letters were sent to IRA on-the-runs.
In a week when controversy over the scheme threatened to pull down Stormont's devolved government, the Labour MP said it was clear for anyone who wanted to see that the assurances were not get out of jail cards, immunity or amnesty.
The political crisis was sparked when the trial of John Downey for the 1982 Hyde Park bomb spectacularly collapsed last week in London.
(POLITICS HydePark)
BORIS PLAYS DOWN 'TORY RIFT' CLAIM
Friends of Boris Johnson have sought to play down claims of a feud within the Conservatives amid suggestions the Mayor of London was the victim of a dirty tricks campaign at the hands of Chancellor George Osborne.
Mr Johnson is understood to be surprised by reports that he had been urged to stand in the general election and has insisted he will serve out his term in City Hall.
Allegations of a rift flared up after reports in The Times yesterday that Mr Osborne had personally delivered a message to Mr Johnson that he should fight in 2015, a move observers said was an attempt to call his bluff.
(POLITICS Tories)
UK TALENT HOPES FOR OSCARS GLORY
The great and the good of the film industry are gathering in rain-soaked Los Angeles for the Oscars with the prospect of UK success.
British hopes largely lie with Steve McQueen's 12 Years A Slave which picked up nine nominations including best film, best actor for Chiwetel Ejiofor and best director.
The film, based on the true story of a free New Yorker kidnapped and sold into slavery in the deep south of the United States, faces the force of Gravity and competition from crime caper American Hustle at this year's bash.
(SHOWBIZ Oscars)
CAR MURDER PAIR STABBED TO DEATH
Two men who were found fatally injured in a car were stabbed to death, police have said.
Police were called by paramedics to Montague Road, Leytonstone, north-east London, just before 1am yesterday. Both men were pronounced dead at the scene.
Post-mortem examinations found that one, aged 21, died after being stabbed in the neck while the other, aged 20, died from stab wounds to the chest, shock and haemorrhaging, Scotland Yard said.
(POLICE Double)
GILLIGAN SHOT AT CHRISTENING PARTY
Notorious gangster John Gilligan has been shot while celebrating a family christening at his brother's house.
The drug lord and chief suspect in the murder of journalist Veronica Guerin was targeted at the home in the Greenfort area of Clondalkin, near Dublin at about 7pm yesterday.
It is understood the 61-year-old was with family and friends in the house when two masked gunmen tried to force their way in.
(POLICE Gilligan)
TESCO CAUGHT UP IN NEW TUNA ROW
Supermarket giant Tesco has been caught up in a new row over sustainable tuna after it emerged it was stocking a cut-price brand which campaigners claimed harmed other wildlife
Greenpeace said that after pledging to make sure all its own brand tuna was sustainably caught in 2012, Tesco had started to stock "Oriental & Pacific" tinned tuna which the green group claimed was "dirty" because it is caught in a way that can kill sharks, rays and turtles.
Tesco was ranked in a "must try harder" category of a tuna league table drawn up by Greenpeace over the action the company is taking to make sure tinned tuna is sustainably caught.
(ENVIRONMENT Tuna)
TORY MP: MY EXPENSES ORDEAL IS OVER
A Conservative MP has said he is pleased after his legal wrangle with the parliamentary expenses watchdog was resolved.
The Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (Ipsa) had launched legal action to recover £54,000 from Stewart Jackson, who claimed taxpayer cash to pay mortgage interest on a property in his constituency.
Mr Jackson was one of 29 MPs told to hand over a total of almost £500,000 to Ipsa to cover a proportion of the increased value of properties funded by their expenses.
(POLITICS Expenses)
Document NSONL00020140302ea32001gt
