{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"2448"}
____
  
Comment
Sarah Sands: At work, shop or home, London will be different; Tube ticket offices will be replaced by showcase stores and a click-and-collect system of picking up groceries
946 words
4 March 2014
11:32
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
When I worked at a newspaper with a large, older, rural readership, a highly prized advertisement was of a cut-price chicken covering an entire broadsheet page. Supermarkets depended upon the family Saturday shop and the way to lure customers was through the Sunday roast.
In London, it works differently. More couples work. The “almost" ready-made supper is popular. The spirit is willing to cook but the flesh is tired. The other idiosyncrasy is that while we are time-poor we like infinite choice. It is a corollary of the capital’s cosmopolitan population.
So making food shopping work- friendly is a leap for humankind. The Evening Standard knows that the way to reach the working population is primarily through Tube and rail stations. Picking up the Standard on the way home is part of London life. Research by this paper shows that for commuters this is the happiest time of the day. They are relaxed and willing to absorb information. They like to plan their evening’s food, drink and entertainment.
This is the moment then for supermarkets to befriend commuters. Not by BOGOF offers or billboard-sized photos of chickens but with something beguiling and bespoke. The reduction in Tube ticket offices is going to herald a change in our lives. The offices will be replaced by showcase stores and a click-and-collect system of picking up groceries at the end of the journey. Tesco sees this as the great workers’ revolution. If it works in London, it could also be replicated in the other great world cities.
It is yet another example of how London has to be treated as a case apart from the rest of the country. We are a working city on a scale that does not exist elsewhere. The retail model increasingly will be that you buy at showcase shops in London and the stock is stored at warehouses outside the capital.
Just as supermarkets are adapting to the demands of the London population, so must infrastructure and housing. Last night the Evening Standard debated whether we need more immigration. To attract more of the talented and dedicated workforce of the world, we must provide the right sort of housing for them. Estate agent Strutt and Parker has identified the GloMads — Global Nomads — who acquire “menu furnished" rented apartments. For poor but brilliant artists, academics and students, should we not ringfence social housing?
Broadly, what makes a working city run well is a lack of bureaucracy (including complicated visas), a minimum of road closures, a great service economy and provision for the disadvantaged. Supermarkets note that convenience matters more to Londoners than cash incentives (unlike the rest of the country). The only subsidy that is make or break is transport fares. Keep fares low and watch a working city thrive.
Tamara is a shining light
The other evening I interviewed shoe entrepreneur Tamara Mellon for a fashion event at Harvey Nichols in aid of WellChild. I was struck by how she combined a tumultuous private life with a business sense of mongoose-like focus. She said the great professional lesson of her life was the necessity of confrontation.
Women’s belief that working hard and behaving nicely will get you rewarded is hogwash. The way Mellon has got a decent remuneration is to own the company and staff it almost exclusively with other women.
This echoes the logic of Caitlin Moran on the subject of women appearing on comedy panels. Tweaking the line-up is not enough, it is the structure which is at fault. Invent shows on which women can shine! Invent companies! Who wouldn’t want to work for Tamara Mellon?
Boris is not a man to take the bait easily
Every month or so, the name of Boris Johnson comes up at a political lunch and the hare is off. After the weekend round of stories about whether the Mayor will run for Parliament before or after the general election, I reminded him that Londoners had a particular interest in his decision. The mayoral election is in 2016 after all. His response was pithy and familiar: “It’s total balls."
Related stories
I have slightly known Boris, as a former colleague and through mutual friends, for 30 years. My observation over that period is that he does not like to be fenced in, especially by rivals. He probably has mixed feelings about his designated role of cheerleader-in-chief at the next election. He is waiting for something, or several things, to come up.
Ideally, and unconstrained by modesty, he would choose to be Prime Minister or Foreign Secretary, Mayor of London, possibly President of the United States. If he could combine these roles with a major historical TV series and several books on the go, that would be grand. Opportunity is destiny. That is what he is waiting for.
Figures that tell the story
Recently, the director of BBC Radio, Helen Boaden, asked me about my favourite programmes. I thought about the obvious ones — Today, Any Questions — but then said bashfully that I loved More or Less, the programme that debunks statistics.
Journalists can be quite shaky on numbers, yet they determine the story. When Steve McQueen dedicated his Oscars award to the “21 million people in the world who are still in slavery", I felt my eyes prickle. Then I thought: “Where does that figure come from? How is it calculated?" Over to you, More or Less.
More Oscars 2014 stories
Document NSONL00020140304ea34002mk
