{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"824"}
____
  
Features
Dramatic interludes
772 words
26 February 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
30
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
We've teamed up with a leading firm to bring you the best in filmed live theatre Official launch partner
THE "Live" part of London Live's name really matters. Not every event in London can be filmed live, of course, as it would play havoc with the schedules, but there is a growing trend for filming events "as live".
One area really booming in popularity is live theatre shown in cinemas or online. Everyone from the Royal Opera House to the Everyman Liverpool has tried it, many working with the Digital Theatre company. Digital Theatre has filmed 200 performances which have been seen in more than 1,000 cinemas around the world. This week, London Live has announced a partnership with Digital Theatre for a series of top-class and award-winning drama filmed in London venues.
Among the shows London Live will broadcast are: Lovesong This Frantic Assembly production was filmed at the Lyric in Hammersmith. Abi Morgan (who also wrote The Iron Lady, Shame, Birdsong and The Hour) has intertwined the story of a young couple in their twenties with their older selves a lifetime later. It's a love story about togetherness throughout a life shared, and stars Edward Bennett, Sam Cox, Sian Phillips and Leanne Rowe.
Beautiful Thing The 20th anniversary production of Jonathan Harvey's groundbreaking play was produced by QNQ at the Arts Theatre. Starring Suranne Jones, the play details a love story between two young men during a heatwave on a rundown Thamesmead council estate. It captures brilliantly what it is like to be 16 and in love.
Billy the Kid The Unicorn Theatre presented this charming play by Michael Morpurgo, author of War Horse, Little Foxes and Private Peaceful. All Billy ever wanted to do was play for Chelsea. His dream came true when the club signed him as a striker. The trouble is the year was 1939, and nothing would be the same again. Stars Dudley Sutton and Sam Donovan.
Over There Mark Ravenhill's moving, intense play from the Royal Court is the story of a man crossing the border between East and West Germany in search of the twin brother he lost when his mother escaped to the West. The brothers struggle to reconnect, just as the two Germanys did when the Berlin Wall came down. It stars real-life twins Harry and Luke Treadaway.
The Container Clare Bayley's highly acclaimed story about illegal immigration was famously performed inside a shipping container outside the Young Vic. The five protagonists only had one aim: to get to England and start a new life. Only a dozen people could see the play at one time in its original form. Each performance was filmed at least three times by Digital Theatre before the original director was invited to oversee the final cut for broadcast. The series will air on Saturdays and Sundays from April 5.
"This is an amazing opportunity to bring a different kind of content to London Live. Showing theatre in cinemas is really taking off, and to be able to bring the concept to television is thrilling," says Jonathan Boseley, London Live's head of programming.
Tom Shaw, co-founder of Digital Theatre, adds: "Digital Theatre has worked with theatres and producers across the country to present some of the best of British drama to a worldwide audience online and we're delighted for the first time to be able to broadcast a selection to Londoners with London Live."
Stefano.hatfield@londonlive.co.uk; Twitter: @stefanohat ¦ITV launched on September 22, 1955. The BBC was so worried that it killed off Grace Archer, star of its eponymous soap The Archers that same night. The first commercial was for Gibbs SR toothpaste, featuring a block of ice, a toothpaste tube and a voiceover extolling its "tingling fresh" qualities. Ads are much more sophisticated these days, but the first advertiser on any new channel is big news. London Live this week announced L'Oréal as its launch sponsor, which means it takes the prize of first commercial on air, for the relaunch of Studio Line. It will almost certainly be tingling fresh too.
Want to be part of London Live? We are looking for "London Eyes", local "vloggers" (video bloggers) who will create, share and upload films that matter to you in your local area or borough. These will be hosted on the London Live website when we launch. See londonlive.co.uk London Live launches on March 31 on Freeview 8, Sky 117, Virgin 159, mobile, web and outdoor media. Twitter: @LondonLive Facebook: LONDONLIVEESTV
Document NS00000020140226ea2q0007m
