{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"2316"}
____
  
Features
Those Victorian horrors get a touch of the Bond treatment
308 words
20 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
51
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
Pick of the day
Penny Dreadful Tonight Sky Atlantic, 9pm "Come on, Tim-othy Dalton," is what this page found itself cheering while the former Bond hunted for his daughter in Victorian London, reinvented as a charnel house where Dr Frankenstein, Dorian Gray, and a Transylvanian immigrant gorge on the British Empire's heart.
Skyfall's writer John Logan and its director Sam Mendes (who executive produces here), both tip more gore onto London's filthy cobbles by populating the streets with characters from Gothic novels — whose vices outstrip those of Saucy Jack's. This concept has been explored before in the graphic novel The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, the film adaptation of which remains a case study of cinematic imbecility, but Penny Dreadful is its own bloodthirsty creature.
A fin-de-siècle weirdness inhabits the streets where the supernatural and science brush top hats in dim alleys, which we enter alongside American trick gunslinger Ethan Chandler ( Josh Hartnett) after he's enlisted by Vanessa Ives (Eva "Casino Royale" Green) to aid Sir Malcolm Murray (Timothy Dalton) in the search for his daughter, Mina. Miss Murray, married off by Bram Stoker to Jonathan Harker, may well be instead living the life of a singleton vampire in big whalebone pants.
A more enticing mystery than that - yes, even more than whalebone pants — is who or what spiritualist Vanessa Ives might be. The colour of a consumptive's blush, Green appears to be using telekinesis on the cameras to dominate the screen, a single glance of hers hinting at soul-carving terror. At the start of this fantastical drama Timothy Dalton says, "Do not be amazed at anything you see." Well, sorry, Mr Dalton, but we are.
Watch our interviews with the cast on London Go at 6.30pm.
Document NS00000020140520ea5k0006w
