{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard Online","id:"3143"}
____
  
PA News Feeds
Clegg launches Lib Dems' campaign
438 words
24 April 2014
08:20
London Evening Standard Online
NSONL
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited.   
David Cameron and Ed Miliband are "missing in action" in the fight against "populists and xenophobes", Nick Clegg will claim today as he launches the Liberal Democrats' European election campaign.
The Deputy Prime Minister will return to his claim the Liberal Democrats are the "party of in" during European debates, warning that the "fight is on".
Speaking at a campaign rally in Colchester, Mr Clegg is expected to say: "Ukip and others have been allowed to peddle their myths unchallenged for decades, claiming that all of our problems would magically disappear if the UK just left the EU.
"But it's a dangerous fantasy. It's the surest way to jeopardise jobs, risk our fragile economic recovery, and it will leave Britain alone and diminished in the world."
The Liberal Democrat leader will claim every gain made by his opponents on May 22 will represent another step closer to the European Union exit door.
After the Tory and Labour leaders skipped recent TV debates with Ukip leader Nigel Farage, Mr Clegg will say only his party can stand up for Britain.
He will say: "If not us, who? The Labour Party? The Conservatives? Where are they? What are they doing to stop the populists and the xenophobes? Nothing.
"Ed Miliband and David Cameron are now officially Missing in Action - saying the bare minimum in this debate because they are too scared of losing votes to Nigel Farage, because they're so desperate to cover up the deep divisions in their own camps."
Jobs, crime prevention, climate change and foreign policy are all key reasons for Britain to stay part of Europe, Mr Clegg will claim.
Mr Clegg's rally with activists and supporters will be followed by a town hall-style public question and answer session.
At his own campaign launch on Tuesday, Mr Farage denied claims a major Ukip poster campaign ahead of the elections was racist by focusing on immigration.
He said: "I don't see how anybody can look at these posters and call them racist in any way at all.
"I know one Labour MP has come out and said it but that's classic of the type of Labour MP who's wanted to suppress debate on this question, brush it under the carpet and try and decry anybody who wants to discuss this as being racist.
"This, emphatically, is not a racist party."
Elections for the British members of the European Parliament are taking place on Thursday May 22, with results from across the European Union due to be announced on Sunday May 25.
Document NSONL00020140424ea4o00009
