{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"1454"}
____
  
News
Out of this world, London's tech spectacular to rival Fashion Week
Pippa Crerar   
1,345 words
13 March 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
6,7
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
Boris launches plans for 25 events bringing together 1,000 experts
BORIS JOHNSON today unveiled plans for the first ever London Technology Week, which he hopes will eventually rival London Fashion Week in its global reach.
The annual spectacle would include more than 25 events, including a major conference hosted by Bloomberg, and bring together more than 1,000 influential technology experts this June. New immigration rules that will give Tech City firms the right to bring in migrants on "exceptional talent" visas also went before Parliament today.
The system already exists for groups such as the Arts Council and the Royal Academy of Engineering and will allow a total of 500 migrants with high technological skills to obtain visas from April, with 500 more from October.
The Mayor, setting out his vision for the future of London's Tech City, also revealed plans for technological ambas-sadors to champion the capital. Tech City's chief executive Gerard Grech and entrepreneur Sherry Coutu are among nine industry leaders who will help to attract more firms and talent to London and advise City Hall on how to promote Europe's biggest digital cluster.
Mr Johnson also announced the arrival of three new tech firms that will open offices here, with dozens of jobs initially and more coming over time.
He said on a visit to the TechHub space on Old Street: "There is nowhere to rival London for tech firms to thrive and grow. We have the talent, the investors and the entrepreneurial spirit. "Our tech offer now spans the capital in its entirety, from Tottenham to Croydon and from Wembley to Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park.
"I want London's world-class tech sector to be as well known around the globe as our tourism, arts and financial services. It certainly deserves to be.
"London is where it all comes together.
We need to build on this growth and champion the city as the global leader for ambitious tech companies."
The Mayor was joined by some of the world's leading tech industry figures, including Mind Candy boss Michael Acton Smith, Nicola Mendelsohn of Facebook and Sir William Sargent, the chief of Framestore which won a visual effects Oscar for the film Gravity.
Sir William told the Standard: "When you grow a business you're on a rollercoaster so if you feel you have a supportive environment, starting with local planners and the Mayor's office, it can help you get over the little humps you experience in the first few years.
"The Mayor and the Government need to facilitate the virtual circle of success stories in London's tech sector. All they can do is enable and champion, they can't actually create the jobs or the businesses. It's not about the money they spend, it's about the personal enthusiasm they show for it." Kit Malthouse, deputy mayor for business and chair of London & Partners, said: "Our job is to help maintain the ecosystem. We're the groundsmen who will help look after the pitch and provide the football so it's ready when the players want to go out and play."
City Hall has lobbied for the UK visa system to be simplified to let in more highly skilled digital technology workers. It is understood that today's visas announcement was already planned but the timing was co-ordinated with the Mayor's announcement.
Immigration minister James Brokenshire said: "These changes today will ensure that the UK remains competitive in attracting global talent to work for British businesses, so that we can succeed in the global race."
The Mayor and David Cameron launched Tech City in 2010 to support the growth of the technology cluster. The sector has grown by 28 per cent, with Editorial Comment Page 14 TEAM BORIS the big names in the industry lending their expertise DR JO TWIST CEO, Association for UK Interactive Entertainment She took over at UKIE, the gaming industry's only trade body, after stints with Channel 4 as commissioning editor for education, where she brought in digital Emmy-winning youth campaign project Battlefront II, and at BBC Entertainment as multiplatform commissioner.
KATHRYN PARSONS Co-founder, Decoded has become know for its "code in a day" courses. They try to demystify the digital sector for individuals and companies, including Google and Microsoft, and show teachers how they can use code in the classroom. She is one of the youngest women bosses on Silicon Roundabout. "Entrepreneurs are now able to turn up with an idea on a piece of paper and find an incubation space, get some advice and potentially some funding and build that idea into a business. When I started out there were so many hurdles."
CLAIRE COCKERTON CEO Pivotal Innovations A serial entrepreneur from Canada. She is chief executive of Pivotal Innovations and head of innovation programmes at Level 39, Europe's largest start-up accelerator for financial, retail and future cities technology businesses, based in the One Canada Square tower at Canary Wharf. Previously worked for Richard Branson and as a consultant to the Guardian.
"We should ease the process of start-up tech firms applying for public projects — and also help the Government procure them — as that would give future tech clients a huge amount of confidence in the firms."
RUSS SHAW Founder, Tech London Advocates Former Skype vice president and Telefonica global innovation director, he is now a tech funding "angel" and venture investor, a member of the Tech City Advisory Group and non-executive director of a number of high-growth businesses. He is a passionate promoter of tech city as a world-class hub.
"There's a general belief that London is becoming an excellent place to start a business. But the question remains can you take these promising young businesses and see them through to sales."
SHERRY COUTU Creator of Silicon Valley Comes to the UK.
Widely viewed as one the most influential people in the "wired world", she is now an angel — or early stage — investor who serves on the boards of numerous companies, charities and universities. As an entrepreneur she set up and sold two major financial services businesses.
DEREK WHITE Chief Design Officer, Barclays Responsible for the launch of mobile payment system PingIt. He heads attempts by Barclays's retail and business banking to translate customer views into action. His passion for innovating and growing businesses began in college and he has launched hundreds of partnerships since.
GAVIN POOLE CEO Here East A former senior Royal Air Force officer and government adviser who spent four years at Iain Duncan Smith's Centre for Social Justice. He heads Here East, previously iCity, in the former press and broadcast centres at the Olympic Park. The campus will eventually house startups, corporations, universities, venture capital investors, and a huge new data centre.
MIKE BUTCHER Editor of Tech-Crunch Writes about startups, trends, venture capital and emerging markets. A former grunge rock drummer, he is also co-founder of TechHub, a service company for startups in Europe, and founder of the Coalition for a Digital Economy, which lobbies for legislation to help the sector.
34,400 digital tech companies ¦¦¦Two companies have been sold for huge sums already in 2014 (DeepMind bought by Google, Natural Motion bought by Zynga).
Since 2010 the capital has experienced a 75 per cent increase in the number of tech companies investing from overseas.
Moshi Monsters founder Michael Acton Smith, right, moved from Battersea to be at the heart of the tech hub in Shoreditch.
London hosts leading visual effects companies such as Framestore, who won an Oscar for Gravity.
There are 34,400 digital technology businesses here, a 26 per cent increase over the past ten years, with 155,600 employees.
20 per cent of new jobs in London come from the tech sector.
'There is nowhere to rival London for tech firms to thrive and grow. We have the talent and the investors' Boris Johnson
Document NS00000020140313ea3d00039
