{"newspaper":"London Evening Standard","id:"220"}
____
  
News
William has taken on his mother's mission — I look forward to meeting him
Rosamund Urwin   
1,348 words
13 May 2014
London Evening Standard
NS
1; National
20,21
English
(c) 2014 Evening Standard Limited   
Tonight the Duke of Cambridge will host a party to celebrate the new Ralph Lauren Centre for Breast Cancer Research. The designer tells Rosamund Urwin why London is so special to him
TONIGHT, Windsor Castle is home to a transatlanctic tie-up — a joint venture between British royalty and American fashion royalty. The Duke of Cambridge is hosting a charity gala in aid of the Royal Marsden Hospital, where he is president, with the event sponsored by long-term donor Ralph Lauren. Names on the starriest of guest lists include Benedict Cumberbatch, Cara Delevingne, Kate Moss and Cate Blanchett. And as the Evening Standard can reveal, they will all be celebrating the opening of the Ralph Lauren Centre for Breast Cancer Research at the hospital.
Chasing a cancer cure has been Lauren's philanthropic mission for almost a quarter of a century. His crusade began after a fashion editor friend, Nina Hyde, was struck down by breast cancer in 1990.
"In the beginning, I just wanted to help her," Lauren tells me in his gravelly voice. "I had had a brain tumour [which turned out to be benign] and I had the sense that because I was okay, I had some kind of magic — I eventually found I didn't. It wasn't a matter of creating a legacy for her, it was a matter of wanting her to live."
Hyde asked him to encourage the fashion industry to raise the profile of breast cancer. "I was involved because of her," Lauren explains. "And [after she died], I thought: 'What else can I do?' I do this out of passion. I still don't feel like I'm doing as much as I can, though: I feel there's more to come."
The designer — who looks dapper in a grey pinstripe suit and matching thin tie — is talking to me in the Royal Marsden's boardroom. We've just been shown the hospital's newest technology: the CyberKnife. It's a radiotherapy machine that can target tumours with highly concentrated radiation beams using a robotic arm. Walking into the room — a lead-lined space with a steel ceiling and the heaviest of doors — does feel like stepping into a hospital from a sci-fi novel. Lauren has long been impressed by the Marsden, though: "It has a reputation as a major research hospital, but it's also involved in the emotional care of the patients. Research is research all over the world, but this is a very connected hospital."
Lauren has given to a number of cancer cure units in the US, and even set one up in Harlem 11 years ago. The Bronx-born son of Belarusian immigrants may be the richest man in fashion (Forbes estimates his net worth at $6.8billion) but he has personal experience of the inequality of the US health system — hence his choice of Harlem.
"A doctor told me that a lot of [cancer] deaths are because of the person's economic situation," he says. "People are afraid to go to the doctor if they don't have the money. My mother once found a lump in her breast and was terrified that she might have to have an operation. She might have died just from the scare." Fortunately, his mother went on to live a long life.
Lauren is a charmer — his eyes really do twinkle and a perpetual smile shows off his toothpaste ad teeth. He's 74 now, and his skin hints at a few too many summers in the Hamptons sun, but he's so sprightly he'd put most twentysomethings to shame. "I don't even know what my age is," he laughs. "But I think I'm 26."
But while he's old enough to admit he doesn't much enjoy partying any more, he's clearly thrilled about the royal connection with tonight's event. Lauren knew Princess Diana, who was once president of the hospital, thanks to both their efforts to fight cancer. Tonight will be the first time he meets William, though: "I'm looking forward to it. He's taken up his mother's movement. Tonight's not a fashion moment as far as I'm concerned; it's a moment of connection."
ALTHOUGH the Duchess of Cambridge won't be attending, she has worn his clothes (there's a blazer she seems particularly enamoured of ) and inspires a Lauren panegyric: "Everyone loves her in the US. She's got a charming way about her and she's very beautiful. I think she's doing her job — as the Prince's wife and mother of the future King — perfectly. And the Prince comes across as a good guy — they seem like a couple you'd want to talk to — real people. Although you'll have to ask me again later..."
This is a rare visit to the UK, but Lauren loves London. "In the early part of my career, the men's clothes were very inspired by England so I've always had a special passion for it. It's a very masculine town. I always think Paris is for girls, London is for boys. It's changed a lot since I was last here, though — I see an energy now that's really terrific." He's such an Anglophile, he raves about Downton Abbey and Mr Selfridge: "It's the era and charm — I love them."
The Marsden opening isn't his only upcoming celebration: he'll soon also be marking 50 years of marriage to his wife, Ricky. She accompanies him to the Marsden, and they really seem like a dream team, with a sweet, jokey atmosphere between the two. When I ask how their relationship remains so strong, Lauren can't resist a quip: "My wife's very smart and beautiful. If she weren't so beautiful, I don't think I would have hung around that long."
The pair have three children: Dylan, a woman Willy Wonka with a chain of sweetshops; Andrew, a film-maker; and David, who followed his father into the family business: "Time passes very quickly. You're married, then all of a sudden you have three kids, and then suddenly one of the kids is walking around telling you what to do."
It strikes me that Lauren Senior doesn't need much bossing around. This is a man who's made it from the Bronx to the Billionaires' list via Bloomingdales. He planned to be a teacher and never went to fashion school, yet had the confidence to quit selling ties at 26 to design them. "[When selling] I'd make suggestions and they'd say 'the world's not ready for Ralph Lauren'. What did they know?' I quit because I felt I had something to say. It was right after the Mod movement — I started just as it died out, and my ties were elegant and unusual."
Shirts soon followed and later women's clothes and children's clothes. Although Lauren admits there were times he feared he'd go under, his empire now has a market capitalisation of more than $13 billion. And he remains heavily involved: "I work very hard to design the products. I have a team of people but it's not like I'm floating around — I'm working, I'm part of it. And it's fun."
I ask if it is difficult to remain relevant as a septuagenarian in an industry fixated on youth. He points to a shrinking gap between the generations: "It's easier to stay connected today. I think I'm at the best spot I've ever been. I'm not trailing and I'm not just there — I'm current." Besides, he adds, his clothes are about "timelessness, not the trend of the moment".
So would he ever put down his fabric scissors and retire? "I don't think so. Why would I? This is the best job in the world."
Document NS00000020140513ea5d0004n
