{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"57"}
____
Business
Manchester is hotspot for migrant entrepreneurs
By Shelina Begum   
424 words
25 March 2014
15:53
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Entrepreneurial activity amongst the migrant community was found to be nearly double that of UK-born individuals, with 17.2 per cent having launched their own businesses, compared to 10.4 per cent of those born here.
Manchester is the sixth most popular destination for migrants to start businesses in the UK, with 7,956 companies in the city founded or co-founded by migrant entrepreneurs.
This is one of many findings from new research by the Centre for Entrepreneurs and DueDil.
The survey found that migrant entrepreneurs are behind one in seven of all UK companies.
Nearly half a million people from 155 countries have settled in the UK and launched businesses. Among the vital SME segment, migrant-founded companies are responsible for creating 14 per cent cent of all jobs.
Entrepreneurial activity amongst the migrant community was found to be nearly double that of UK-born individuals, with 17.2 per cent having launched their own businesses, compared to 10.4 per cent of those born here. They are also, on average, eight years younger than indigenous entrepreneurs at 44.3 years-old compared to 52.1.
This is despite the extra challenges they face including access to finance and cultural and language barriers.
Entitled ‘Migrant entrepreneurs: Building our businesses, creating our jobs’, the Centre for Entrepreneurs think tank and financial technology company, DueDil, have sought to explore a neglected aspect of the immigration debate: the contribution of migrant entrepreneurs to the UK economy.
DueDil founder and CEO Damian Kimmelman, himself an American serial ‘migrant entrepreneur’, said: “Immigration is one of Britain’s most emotive topics for debate. Sadly, opinions are rarely informed by evidence. 
"This game-changing research proves that migrant entrepreneurs are hyper-productive, net contributors to the UK economy. History tells us that the most productive states always encourage intellectual and technological ferment; that’s what we’re seeing in Britain right now, and we must celebrate it“.
Centre for Entrepreneurs chairman and serial entrepreneur Luke Johnson said: “The majority of the public appreciate the value of migrant entrepreneurs, yet our politicians and media send out negative signals that risk alienating this vital group of job creators.
"Given the huge contribution of migrant entrepreneurs, we are calling upon the media and politicians to join us in celebrating those who come to our country and launch businesses.”
The UK’s migrant entrepreneurs are from virtually every country, although there are significant representations from Ireland, India, the US, Germany and China.
Document MNONL00020140325ea3p001mg
