{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"1583"}
____
  
News
Real-life Sherlock 'was a detective in the city centre'
Dean Kirby   
346 words
27 March 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
30
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
New book lifts lid on Victorian sleuth who was a master of disguise and deduction expert
THE story of Manchester's real-life Sherlock Holmes is set to be revealed in a gripping new book being launched to commemorate the centenary of his death.
Jerome Caminada was the son of an Italian immigrant who became Victorian Manchester's most famous detective and expert thief-taker.
He was a master of disguise and an expert at deduction who used his intimate knowledge of the city's slums to fight a one man war against murderers, thieves, conmen and pickpockets.
Now a new book by Manchester-born historian Angela Buckley titled 'The Real Sherlock Holmes: The Hidden Story of Jerome Caminada' dusts off the detective's case files and brings them to life.
Angela said: "Jerome Caminada was born in the slums of 19th century Manchester and overcame incredible odds to become one of the city's finest detectives.
"He was a true Victorian supersleuth and a real-life Sherlock Holmes."
Caminada's arch enemy was Bob Horridge, who was regarded as public enemy No.1 in 1880s Manchester. Horridge was an expert safe breaker who evaded capture by running over rooftops and jumping into the sewage-filled River Irwell.
But Caminada eventually arrested his nemesis at gunpoint after tracking him to Liverpool and he was jailed for life.
Caminada died in 1914 at his home in Moss Side and is buried at Southern Cemetery.
Angela is unveiling the book during a talk at the Manchester Histories Festival at 3pm this Saturday.
A tour of Caminada's Manchester is also taking place at 1.30pm.
Angela, 47, said: "My investigations began with my Italian ancestors, who were part of the same immigrant community in Ancoats.
"The more I read about his adventures fighting crime, the more fascinated I became and I knew I had to write about him.
"It has been a wonderful opportunity to bring him back to life from a century of obscurity."
Document MN00000020140327ea3r0003l
