{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"1725"}
____
One-in-ten miss first choice in primary school places 'crisis'
By Dan Thompson   
635 words
17 April 2014
13:10
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Thousands of mums and dads have been left disappointed after they were unable to secure their number one preference for their four-year-old
One in ten young children in Greater Manchester have missed out on their parents’ first choice of primary school in the first National Offer Day.
Thousands of mums and dads have been left disappointed after they were unable to secure their number one preference for their four-year-old come September.
According to figures provided by eight of Greater Manchester’s town halls, more than 3,000 children, out of almost 29,000 applications, missed out on their parents’ first choice – an average of 11pc.
National Offer Day primary school places in numbers
Mum considering appeal with son facing 40-minute walk to school 
Salford had the highest percentage of mums and dads who failed to get their preferred school – with 14pc – although, unlike other town halls, their figures contained late applications.
Coun John Merry, assistant mayor for children’s services for Salford, said: “We are proud to have allocated a school place to every application that was received up to yesterday, including late applicants.
“This is not the situation in every local authority. We have allocated a total of 3,166 school places to Salford residents, 92 per cent of families have been offered their first or second choices.”
Tameside had the biggest year-on-year increase in the number of children who were not offered the first choice – 13pc missing out this year compared to 10pc in 2013.
A Tameside council spokesman said: “Tameside’s figures were affected by a seven per cent increase in applications – more than in any other Greater Manchester borough. Even so, we believe we have done very well. More parents got their first-choice school this year as opposed to 2013: 2,568 to 2,460.
“To accommodate the increased demand for places we have successfully acquired government funding to build two new primary schools – in Ashton and Hyde – and we are expanding other sites.”
Tameside also saw the greatest increase in demand for places – up 7pc from 2,745 applications last year to 2,950 in 2014.
Applications across Greater Manchester, excluding Stockport and Trafford, who did not provide us with figures, were up two per cent on average compared to last year – from 27,995 to 28,629.
Across the region, between 94pc and 97pc of families were offered preferences one to three – leaving hundreds of families with a fourth of fifth choice.
In Manchester alone, more than 300 children were offered a school that their parents had not listed in their preferences.
As part of National Offer Day, parents across the country found out about their choices at the same time instead of individual local authorities giving decisions in their own time.
Some 600,000 families across the country found out about their places today (note WED) and early indications suggest that one in seven children - or 13pc - were unable to get their first choice place. Schools have been facing an increasing squeeze on places in recent years, caused partly by a rising birth rate and the impact of immigration.
Dr Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers (ATL), accused Education Secretary Michael Gove of failing to provide school places for the nation’s children.She said: “We know that there is a growing crisis in primary school places and we know that the Government, for all the money they say they are throwing at the problem, haven’t got the ability to plan school provision where it’s needed.”
The Department for Education (DfE) said it has given councils more than £5bn to establish new school places, with 260,000 created already.
Document MNONL00020140417ea4h00105
