{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"1592"}
____
News
Suspected fake brides and grooms held in 'sham marriage' dawn swoop
By Paul Britton   
405 words
27 March 2014
18:29
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
11 arrests of people accused of helping to arrange sham marriages or taking part in them were made by immigration officials early this morning
Suspected bogus brides and grooms were arrested in dawn raids across Greater Manchester.
Immigration Service officers swooped to make 11 arrests. All those held are suspected of helping to arrange sham marriages or taking part in bogus ceremonies.
The Home Office Immigration Service said the raids followed an investigation into a suspected ‘sham marriage ring’ believed to be based in Manchester. Two further arrests were made in Liverpool.
The raids are linked to a number of weddings which took place at Darwen Register Office, near Blackburn, between January and June last year.
The ceremonies all involved Pakistani men and Portuguese women.
All 11 were arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to breach the UK’s immigration laws and are being questioned.
Four Pakistani men aged between 21 and 33, a 29-year-old Pakistani woman and a 22-year-old Portuguese woman were arrested at a house on Hornbeam Road, Levenshulme.
A 25-year-old Pakistani man was held at a house on Stainer Street and a 54-year-old Pakistani man at a house on Northmoor Road, both Longsight.
At Rawcliffe Street, Moss Side, a 56-year-old British woman and a 25-year-old Pakistani man were arrested.
A 44-year-old Pakistani man was also held at a house on Hurford Avenue.
Nick Wood, from the Home Office’s North West Criminal and Financial Investigations Team, said: “Today’s arrests are part of an ongoing investigation into a suspected sham marriage ring operating in Manchester.
“Where there are suspicions that a relationship may not be genuine we will investigate and, if necessary, intervene to stop it happening. We are determined to stop migrants abusing the marriage system to cheat immigration rules.”
The operation was led by the Home Office’s Criminal and Financial Investigations Team with support from the National Crime Agency and Greater Manchester Police.
More news from the Manchester Evening News
Find out what's happening where you live with our In Your Area section
Read the Manchester Evening News on your phone - download the Apple MEN App here, the Android MEN App here and the Kindle app here - and get the paper as an e-edition every morning  by subscribing here
Document MNONL00020140327ea3r002jq
