{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"3407"}
____
News
Morning news headlines for Friday - Ann Maguire funeral, Kenya warning and Jay Z statement
By Neil Macdonald   
914 words
16 May 2014
10:51
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
The latest news from around the globe
The funeral of teacher Ann Maguire, who was stabbed to death in her classroom, will take place today.
Mrs Maguire, 61, was teaching a Spanish class at Corpus Christi Catholic College, in Leeds, when she was attacked on April 28. She died in hospital later that day from multiple stab wounds.
She had taught at the school for more than 40 years and was due to retire in September. TOURISTS LEAVE KENYA AFTER WARNING
Hundreds of British tourists are being evacuated from Kenya after the Foreign Office warned against all but essential travel to parts of the country.
Thomson and First Choice have cancelled all flights up to the end of October and are flying back holiday makers as a precautionary measure.
On its website, Thomson Airways said: ”The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) is now advising against all but essential travel to Mombasa island, Kenya. EUROPE RESOURCES ’RUNNING DOWN’
The UK’s own stores of oil, coal and gas will run out in little more than five years, a new report examining energy resources has claimed.
The study claims that a number of countries in the European Union, including France, Italy and the UK, are facing critical shortages of natural resources.
Produced by the Global Sustainability Institute at Anglia Ruskin University, the natural resource maps indicate that some countries have less than a year of energy resources remaining and are almost entirely dependent on imports from the likes of Russia, Norway and Qatar. PM MAKES ’POSITIVE’ CASE FOR UK
Prime Minister David Cameron will continue his visit to Scotland today to make ”the positive arguments in favour of Scotland remaining part of the UK”.
The Prime Minister is expected to speak to young people in the south of Scotland to discuss the referendum on the final day of his two-day trip.
Mr Cameron said only a No vote in the independence referendum would ensure the future of devolution. REBATE PLEA FOR POLICE BODY MEMBERS
Tens of thousands of rank-and-file police officers should have part of their membership fee for the embattled Police Federation refunded, a powerful group of MPs has said.
At national and local level, the Federation is sitting on around £70 million of its members’ money, far in excess of its operating costs, the Home Affairs Select Committee said in its damning report on reform of the staff association.
Ahead of the Federation’s annual conference next Monday, the MPs have called for cash held by the organisation’s national rank committees, which totals around £29.5 million, to be returned to members as a subscription rebate with membership fees frozen for next year and further reductions in future years. JUMP IN CHILD CALLS OVER PARENTS
The number of children calling ChildLine to confide in a counsellor about their parents’ drinking and drug abuse has doubled in the past year, the charity has revealed.
The 24-hour helpline received 5,323 calls - more than 100 a week - from children scared by their parents’ behaviour, a staggering rise on the 2,509 calls it fielded the year before.
Most of the children turning to the NSPCC-run service were between the ages of 12 and 15, but a substantial minority - one in 10 - were aged 11 or under and still at primary school. COUNTING STARTS IN INDIA ELECTIONS
India’s main Hindu nationalist party was making early gains as officials began counting votes following the country’s massive national election.
The opposition is looking to end the ruling Congress party’s decade-long reign.
The Election Commission was expected to announce the results later today. BRAZIL POLICE CLASH WITH PROTESTERS
Protesters and police clashed in Sao Paulo, as demonstrations against the World Cup and rallies calling for improved public services erupted in several Brazilian cities.
Officers in Brazil’s largest city fired tear gas and rubber bullets at protesters who set piles of rubbish alight to barricade a central avenue.
Demonstrators blasted the billions spent to host next month’s football tournament and said they wanted to draw attention to what they called a lack of investment to improve poor public services. JAY Z AND SOLANGE ADMIT PROBLEMS
Jay Z, Beyonce and Solange say ”families have problems and we’re no different” after a video leaked of Beyonce’s sister attacking the rap mogul in a hotel elevator.
In an exclusive statement to The Associated Press today, the trio said they have worked through their differences and moved on since a video emerged this week showing Solange kicking Jay Z as Beyonce looked on.
”As a result of the public release of the elevator security footage from Monday, May 5th, there has been a great deal of speculation about what triggered the unfortunate incident. But the most important thing is that our family has worked through it,” the statement said. UKIP SPOKESMAN ACCUSED OF HYPOCRISY
Ukip’s small business spokesman faced claims of hypocrisy after it emerged seven people were arrested for immigration offences in a raid on his restaurant.
The authorities raided the Manchester restaurant, set up by Ukip European election candidate Amjad Bashir with his two sons Tayub and Mudassar, on June 1 last year, The Times reported.
The family have denied any wrongdoing and party leader Nigel Farage said they are appealing and he was not going to ”prejudge” the case.
Document MNONL00020140516ea5g000um
