{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"929"}
____
  
News
PROBE AS UKIP CANDIDATE POSTS 'EXTREMIST' TWEETS
Jennifer Williams   
320 words
3 May 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
11
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
M.E.N. uncovers vile tweets and Facebook posts from man hoping to become a Ukip councillor.
UKIP is investigating after the M.E.N. uncovered 'disgusting' anti-Islamic and homophobic messages posted online by one of its election candidates.
Harry Perry, who is standing for the party in Offerton, Stockport, has published a torrent of extremist views on his Twitter account in recent months.
He also sent a Facebook message to a Lib Dem candidate calling homosexuality 'evil'.
Mr Perry, who is retired and lives in Hazel Grove, last stood for the party in the same seat in 2012, when he got 349 votes.
On his Twitter account, @harryperry15, he calls for Pakistan to be 'nuked', dubs David Cameron a 'gay-loving nutcase', Muslims 'devil's kids' and homosexuality an 'abomination before god'.
Last June he also described multiculturalism as 'evil', earlier tweeting at the EDL leader Tommy Robinson to ask why he didn't have a political party he could join. He welcomed Godfrey Bloom's controversial remarks on 'bongo-bongo land', replying 'well said' - and tweeted that Asian areas of the north west were now 'third world countries' thanks to immigration.
The revelations will come as an embarrassment to his party.
It emerged he had messaged Hazel Grove Liberal Democrat parliamentary candidate Lisa Smart on Facebook to say: "You three parties intend to change our culture as fast as possible without permission from the white indigenous population... Don't you know Lisa that GOD HATES HOMOSEXUALITY."
Ms Smart, who said the remarks were 'completely unsolicited', said: "I'm disgusted by these messages. It's dangerous and divisive.
"People should know what they are voting for on May 22."
Mr Perry could not be contacted for comment but deputy leader Paul Nuttall said: "The matter has been passed to the party chairman and it will be investigated."
Document MN00000020140503ea530003p
