{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"2882"}
____
  
News
crackdown on gangs nets drugs and cash
Neal Keeling   
422 words
29 March 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
3
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Organised crime raids launched after investigation into feud that sparked Cregan murders
dRUGS worth almost £300,000 and £70,000 in cash have been seized in a five-day crackdown on organised crime in Greater Manchester.
Forty search warrants were executed in a bid to disrupt crime gangs as part of Operation Challenger originally launched as an investigation into a gangland feud which sparked Dale Cregan's killing spree.
Known criminals were targeted in addition to gangs involved in illegal immigration, drugs, and trafficking vulnerable people into the sex trade.
Potential victims of exploitation working in brothels were offered protection and support and in Bolton six people were arrested on suspicion of human trafficking and sexual exploitation.
Since Monday there have been 78 arrests - 45 immigration-related and 33 for other organised crimes.
Chief Supt Rebekah Sutcliffe, who heads Operation Challenger for Greater Manchester Police said: "Organised crime groups do not assume a certain appearance or status; they take many different forms and often masquerade behind what appears to be a legitimate business, where they launder their ill-gotten gains.
"They do not specialise in a particular type of crime either and will pursue anything that offers the least risk and highest reward, from selling counterfeit goods and loan sharking to human traf-ficking and drug dealing.
"Those orchestrating illegal immigration will be involved in other criminality - there is often an overlap so this is why our multi-agency partnership and our close collaboration with Immigration Enforcement was integral to a quick and effective week of action.
"These criminals operate by preying on the most vulnerable in society - this is why activity such as this is really important to us."
Car washes in Salford, Wigan and Oldham were visited during the week, where a number of illegal workers were discovered.
Offences including drugs, benefit fraud and a potential sham marriage have also been uncovered through those visits - an effective and successful example of Challenger in action.
In Wigan the GMP Child Sexual Exploitation Unit arrested one man for both CSE and drugs offences, and another man was arrested for grooming offences. Challenger was stepped up after Cregan murdered father and son David and Mark Short and PCs Fiona Bone and Nicola Hughes.
Earlier this year the operation saw the jailing of 26 drug dealers.
Anyone with information should contact police on 101 or the independent charity Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.
'These criminals operate by preying on the most vulnerable in society'
Document MN00000020140329ea3t00027
