{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"3033"}
____
  
News
BEST OF THE WEB COMMENTS ON MANCHESTEREVENINGNEWS.CO.UK
338 words
8 May 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
10
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
A town hall chief has hit out at 'bone-idle Mancunians' after new benches in Piccadilly Gardens were vandalised and left covered in litter THe. . majority of people who loiter in the Gardens are not Mancunians. Jack Dalton ??WHETHER. . the people who use Piccadilly Gardens are Mancunians, non Mancunians or immigrants, where is the pride of keeping the city you live/ work in looking the best it can? I moved here three years ago from York and I wouldn't dream of dropping litter or doing anything to make public areas look awful.
Jennifer Dunbar ??I WORK. . in Piccadilly and the bone idle people that I see are always English, most often than not drinking during the day. The other day, a man was urinating in front of everyone in broad daylight! The police really need to get round there and start getting rid of the dead wood knocking about because it's scary having to walk past all these drunks on my way to the train station.
Rachel Monks I SAT. . on one of those benches while waiting for a friend one evening at around 7pm. It was quite frightening if I'm honest. There were gangs and gangs of youths threatening to set dogs on each other and then the males starting being rude to me. I didn't see any police or pcso to turn to.
Rachel O'Pray THRILLER! Michael Jackson statue unveiled by Mohamed Al Fayed at National Football Museum SAW. . this monstrosity at Craven Cottage about seven years ago and it's even more unpleasant on the eye than in a picture. Michael Legge NoT. . only is this a bad idea, but the statue doesn't even look like MJ. It looks like a fairly good MJ impersonator. Matthew Hartley TWEET OF THE DAY A home grown talent given his chance by a manager that understands what it takes to play so young. Well done James Wilson. #ManUtd Danny Webber @ DanielWebber81
Document MN00000020140508ea580003c
