{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"2467"}
____
  
Features
Dive into Sharm
840 words
4 March 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
16
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
MODERN? DAY Sharm el Sheikh has become one of the top tourist destinations from the UK thanks to year-round sunshine, clear blue seas and family-friendly beaches.
it's developed rapidly from a quiet  shing village, into a naval port, to now become a bustling holiday resort.
‚e area is known for a raft of  ve-star hotels, but travellers can also snap up plenty of bargains too at the hotels nestled along the series of bays that lie on the southernmost tip of the Sinai Peninsula on the Red Sea Coast.
‚ere are extraordinary coral reefs along the coastline, which makes the area a hot-spot for diving, whether you want to go full-on wet suit, or merely pick up a cheap snorkel to have a paddle along the coastline and see the spectacular sea life.
It's also an ideal base for exploring further a eld in Egypt too - you can book day trips to the historic areas of Luxor or overnight trips to Cairo and the Pyramids.
MUST SEES FOR FREE Coral reef ‚e Ras ‚e Ras Mohammed National Park has fantastic stretches of coral and vibrant marine life to explore.
If you are on a tight budget you can do this just by heading into the waters and viewing with your beady eyes.
Many hotels also lend snorkels and  nns to get that bit closer to the action.
Or there are plenty of glass bottom boat companies and scuba diving  rms who will help you to delve that bit deeper into the Red Sea treats here.
Old Market, Sharm Prepare to haggle - and more likely than not be hassled by sellers down at the Old Market where there are a variety of local treats to look at as well as more touristy trinkets to barter over.
Pick up everything from spices to toy camels, leatherwork and even hookah pipes.
MUST SEES FOR A FEE Camel Ride/Bedouin experience ‚ere is almost zero light pollution in this part of the world, and so trips into the desert for a night-time stargazing experience are truly magical.
You can join group Y tours, or take a camel ride into the desert to experience traditional Bedouin food around a camp re, while an astrologer points out constellations.
St Catherine's Monastery and Mount Sinai It's a two-hour trip by car or bus excursion up to St Catherine's Monastery at the foot of Mount Sinai, and is best booked with a guide.
Driving up through amazing desert and mountain scenery, the area is steeped in religious history, with its connections to Moses and the Burning Bush.
Hotels LUXURY Savoy Sharm El Sheikh, South Sinai: The five-star Savoy offers the kind of luxury you would expect from this brand, and also has an ideal location on White Knight Beach with the option of garden, pool or sea views.
Fine dining and a splendid spa are among the on-site facilities.
Rooms are available from £78 per night in low season, up to £180 in October and November.
BUDGET Kahramana Hotel, Naama Bay: Located in the heart of Naama Bay, it enjoys a great spot in the centre of the most popular tourist spot.
Hotel facilities including swimming pools for adults and children, restaurants and bars, a mini-club and diving centre. And it's next to a private beach.
Bed and breakfast from £35.
QUIRKY Sunwing Waterworld Makadi: This recentlyopened five star hotel is built around its own huge water park.
There area variety of exciting aquatic features including 515 metres of water slides, waterfalls, and a wave pool. Adults will also be pleased with the quirky Moorish styling of the villas and hotel rooms. holidays here are booked via packages with Red Sea Holidays.
Factfile LANGUAGE: Arabic TIME ZONE: GMT + 2 hours CURRENCY: Egyptian pound AIRLINES: EasyJet, Thomas Cook, First Choice, Thomson, Monarch all run regular flights from Manchester Airport to Sharm El Sheikh International Airport BEST MONTHS TO VISIT: The summer months (June to September) are considered off-peak, where sites are quieter and more peaceful, but be warned temperatures can exceed 30C.
VISAS, INJECTIONS, PRECAUTIONS: British nationals visiting mainland Egypt require a visa, if you are staying for 14 days or less you only need to obtain a free entry stamp at immigration control, but if you plan excursions you may need to obtain a visa on arrival.
Going out THE Na'aama Bay part of the city is the centre of nightlife and dining, where you can find plenty of clubs, cafes, restaurants and tourist shops.
El Fanar is an open-air club on the edge of a short cliff.
For the more exclusive side of Sharm's nightlife, try Buddha Bar, part of the Funky Buddha chain, it's hip and trendy - but drinks are expensive.
Top tip MANY a traveller succumbs to sickness bugs when visiting Egypt - individual hotels will advise you on the drinking water. But go prepared with hand sanitisers and wipes.
Document MN00000020140324ea34001nm
