{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"563"}
____
News
Peter Cranie: Ukip have just stolen the BNP's clothes
By men   
811 words
7 April 2014
16:26
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
The far right is on the rise across Europe - but what working people really want is decent representation, says the north west's lead Green MEP candidate
The general consensus is that UKIP came off best in last week's Nick vs Nigel television debate on the future of the EU.
Sadly the Greens didn't get a look in, despite asking to be included in the debate. Our response, this witty video, which sends up both party leaders and their views on Europe, spread quickly through the Twittersphere - light relief for those wanting an alternative take on the tedious in/out debate.
It's easy to parody Nigel Farrage, but the rise of UKIP is a worrying threat to many of the things the EU is there to protect - workers' rights, environmental protection, human rights.
And the appeal of these anti-immigration, pro-business parties is widening and increasing.
Recently Labour politicians were given more reasons to worry about the threat of UKIP. The first academic study into the party concluded that UKIP's support base is now “more working class than any of the main parties.”
In the recent Wythenshawe and Sale East by-election the Green Party was up against both UKIP and the BNP, alongside the mainstream parties.
The BNP was out on the streets assailing people with their repugnant views through a megaphone and handing out their hateful leaflets.
Meanwhile Nigel Farage's party was busy trying to keep up their charade of being all things to all people.
In the south of England Farage is the far-right Tory, appealing to little England with his talk of how much he detests the EU and his party's tough stance on immigration.
While in the north, he and Paul Nuttall, the North West’s MEP, want to appeal to working class Labour voters on the very same issues.
Farage's latest wheeze seems to be a desire to claim credit for the demise of the BNP.
Farage has said that voters will “know the difference between a patriotic party and a truly nasty party, which is what the BNP is”. This is simply not the case.
A recent Lancaster university study into political attitudes in Britain concluded that “…we find that UKIP has much in common, not only with the BNP, but also with what we know about extreme right parties across Western Europe.”
So the inconvenient truth for UKIP is that their success actually comes from stealing the BNP’s clothes. From being extreme enough to attract their supporters.
That is hardly what I would call a success in combating the BNP.
Rather than challenging attitudes based on prejudice and misinformation, UKIP feeds on both. And they continue to stoke fear, with their leaflets claiming that 29 million Bulgarians and Romanians can come to the UK - more than the combined population of both countries!
A more modern politics would take on prejudicial attitudes and challenge them.
Since the first Green Party councillor was elected in Liverpool, we’ve openly invited residents who we’ve met and who believe someone from a minority ethnicity is getting preferential treatment to bring us that evidence and we’ll pursue it.
In seven years, how many times has this happened? Not once.
In Chelmsley Wood ward, Solihull, held by the BNP until 2010, there are now two Green councillors. We haven’t got there by parroting BNP anti-immigration myths, but by hard work, engaging with the local community and dealing with problems that are relevant to local people.
Paul Nuttall, the North West's UKIP MEP, may attack Labour for their lack of working class credentials.
As it happens, I do know what the inside of a working men’s club looks like and I grew up in a council house.
But that’s not what matters. What working class people want is decent representation. People who turn up, make their views heard and effect change.
With UKIP’s poor attendance at the European Parliament, they’re not getting that from either Paul Nuttall or Nigel Farage. UKIP MEPs are happy to pocket nearly £80,000 each a year from Europe and not turn up to work.
Those voters that want a slightly diluted BNP message, a “BNP-lite”, will back UKIP in the European elections.
At the last European elections I was just 0.3% of the vote short of becoming the North West's first Green MEP. Instead we got Nick Griffin.
Those of us that truly want to destroy the BNP as a political force by challenging their hateful rhetoric and celebrating the diversity of Britain will not be celebrating with Nigel Farage this May.
Peter Cranie is the North West Green Party's lead candidate for the European elections in May.
Document MNONL00020140407ea470028m
