{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"1730"}
____
  
News
1.IN.10 MISS FIRST CHOICE IN SCHOOL PLACES 'CRISIS'
Dan Thompson   
919 words
17 April 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
3
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Thousands left disappointed as demand for primary education soars across Greater Manchester
ONE in ten young children in Greater Manchester have missed out on their parents' first choice of primary school in the first National Offer Day.
Thousands of mums and dads have been left disappointed after they were unable to secure their number one preference for their four-yearold come September. According to figures provided by eight of Greater Manchester's town halls, more than 3,000 children, out of almost 29,000 applications, missed out on their parents' first choice - an average of 11pc.
Salford had the highest percentage of mums and dads who failed to get their preferred school - with 14pc - although, unlike other town halls, their figures contained late applications.
Coun John Merry, assistant mayor for children's services for Salford, said: "We are proud to have allocated a school place to every application that was received up to yesterday, including late applicants.
"This is not the situation in every local authority. We have allocated a total of 3,166 school places to Salford residents, 92 per cent of families have been offered their first or second choices."
Tameside had the biggest year-on-year increase in the number of children who were not offered the first choice - 13pc missing out this year compared to 10pc in 2013.
A spokesman for Tameside said 'our people say they would be very surprised if we have the worst record' but failed to provide further comment. Tameside also saw the greatest increase in demand for places - up 7pc from 2,745 applications last year to 2,950 in 2014.
Applications across Greater Manchester, excluding Stockport and Trafford, who did not provide us with figures, were up two per cent on average compared to last year - from 27,995 to 28,629.
Across the region, between 94pc and 97pc of families were offered preferences one to three - leaving hundreds of families with a fourth of fifth choice.
In Manchester alone, more than 300 children were offered a school that their parents had not listed in their preferences.
As part of National Offer Day, parents across the country found out about their choices at the same time instead of individual local authorities giving decisions in their own time.
Some 600,000 families across the country found out about their places yesterday and early indications suggest that one in seven children - or 13pc - were unable to get their first choice place.
Schools have been facing an increasing squeeze on places in recent years, caused partly by a rising birth rate and the impact of immigration.
Dr Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, accused Education Secretary Michael Gove of failing to provide school places for the nation's children.
She said: "We know that there is a growing crisis in primary school places and we know that the Government, for all the money they say they are throwing at the problem, haven't got the ability to plan school provision where it's needed."
The Department for Education said it has given councils more than £5bn to establish new school places, with 260,000 created already.
'It's our fifth choice and it's 40 minutes away' A MUM working two jobs while studying at university has been left 'upset and disappointed' after her son got in her fifth choice school - which is a 40-minute walk away.
Kayleigh Norcross, who looks after four-year-old Harry on her own, had put a school around the corner from her home in Pendleton, Salford, as her first preference and one near Salford University as her second - to make it easier to drop her little boy off because she does not drive.
The 22-year-old said that she spent time researching her first choices on Ofsted too - and was happy they would provide the best start for her little boy.
Kayleigh, who works as a teaching assistant and a staff trainer at McDonald's, told the M.E.N. she put down her fifth choice, the Friars Primary School, off Blackfriars Road, to make up the numbers on her preference list.
So she was shocked to have been offered that school - not least because it is around a 1.5 mile walk away.
Kayleigh, who moved to Salford to study psychology two years ago, said: "I'm just really upset and disappointed that I couldn't provide Harry with the chance of the most beneficial education he could get.
"I've read the Friars Primary Ofsted today and its report is good, but not excellent. And it's a 40-minute walk away."
Kayleigh said her first choice was St Sebastian's RC Primary School, on Douglas Green, near her home on Cromwell Road.
She said: "I think parents should be given more information about which schools are likely to over-subscribed to avoid disappointment."
Kayleigh, who applied for the places on time, said she was considering appealing against the outcome.
Coun John Merry, at Salford council, said: "All parents are given information about how the admissions process works, clearly explaining that their home address is used as one of the criteria to help find a place at a school nearest to them. More popular schools are over-subscribed, which is why parents are invited to make up to six choices of schools."
'We know that there is a growing crisis in primary school places'
Document MN00000020140417ea4h0003j
