{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"3224"}
____
News
Another former Lib Dem councillor is standing for UKIP in Salford
By Neal Keeling   
462 words
9 April 2014
22:38
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
A prominent member of the Liberal Democrats, Joe O’Neill resigned in 2009 after reported disagreements with the then leader, Norman Owen
A second former Liberal Democrat councillor in Salford is to stand for UKIP at the local elections.
Joe O’Neill, was a prominent member of the Lib Dems before resigning in 2009 after reported disagreements with the then leader, Norman Owen.
He had represented Swinton South ward for four years and stood unsuccessfully as an independent in 2010, before joining The Green Party.
He stood for the Greens at a by-election in the same ward in January this year but lost to Labour.
Mr O’Neill, 58, will face former Tory leader, now Labour stalwart, Howard Balkind at the election in May.
Mr O’Neill said: “I tried as hard as I could with The Green Party in Salford, and they are good people. But at the end of the day I want to have a final crack at Labour in Salford and felt by joining UKIP I might be electable.
“I am not a racist but the issue of immigration is a major issue to many people in Salford - we should talk about it openly.”
As a member of the Green Party he was an active member of a group campaigning against possible fracking at Barton Moss in Salford.
Mr O’Neill said: “When I met with UKIP members in Salford I explained that if I stood for them I would continue to be opposed to any fracking in the city and they accepted that.”
As reported in the M.E.N., Mary Ferrer, another former leading Liberal Democrat councillor in Salford, who was once with The Green Party, is also standing for UKIP in Claremont ward - which she previously represented as a Liberal.
Councillor Balkind, who has been a Labour party member for 17 years after he and his Tory party were wiped out in the 1996 elections, said: “Mr O’Neill has been a member of four parties in his time. It’s a joke and smacks of desperation.”
But Mr O’Neill said: “I think we have a good chance of being elected. When the Labour mayor appoints an assistant mayor on £18,000 a year with responsibility for international relations you have to keep fighting nonsense like that and I will.”
More news from the Manchester Evening News
Find out what's happening where you live with our In Your Area section
Read the Manchester Evening News on your phone - download the Apple MEN App here, the Android MEN App here and the Kindle app here - and get the paper as an e-edition every morning  by subscribing here
Document MNONL00020140409ea49003bh
