{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"2446"}
____
What's On
Trip review: Touring the Caribbean in cruise control
By Eamonn ONeal   
1,369 words
13 April 2014
23:37
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Eamonn O’Neal visits five islands and enjoys star treatment on the aptly-named Celebrity Equinox cruise ship
Almost everything about a Caribbean cruise on Celebrity Equinox takes your breath away, from the sheer size of the ship to the vibrant, verdant destinations dotted like scattered stones across the sea.
As recent converts to cruising, having only done one previously, we were still fresh-faced enough to appreciate the splendour of this type of holiday whilst remaining fairly pragmatic. However, from the moment we checked in to the time we renegotiated immigration back on US soil, the service we received was never less than top class, setting the scene for an excellent 10-day trip.
We embarked in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, having flown across the Atlantic with American Airlines. As Manchester Airport is an important, busy hub for American Airlines, there are plenty of connecting flights to choose from and you reap the benefits on the return leg when you arrive back in the north west rather than having to travel up from London. We found return tickets for less than £500 per person. Terry, the airline’s representative at Manchester Airport, did everything possible to make sure all was in order and had arranged for us to be expedited through Chicago as the connection was going to be tight.
A 10-minute shuttle bus ride from Lauderdale airport to the Sheraton meant we were settled for an overnight stay within an hour of landing. As you board the ship before noon, you have to stay for at least one night near the port and the Sheraton Ft Lauderdale Airport Hotel suits that purpose perfectly, providing transport to and from both the airport and cruise terminal.
For the cruise itself, to celebrate our silver wedding anniversary, we had booked Celebrity’s Aqua Class which offers priority check-in, veranda staterooms, bathrobes, slippers, access to the spa area’s Persian Garden and Relaxation Room, as well as exclusive dining in the speciality Blu restaurant. All the accommodation and service is excellent everywhere on Celebrity’s Solstice Class ships but Aqua Class is worth considering for those important extras.
Nothing beats the welcome you get as you board Equinox and every crew member was cheerful and helpful. Before you could say anchors aweigh we were gliding majestically out of Fort Lauderdale, towering above the water-side condos and beach-front hotels. Two full days at sea lay ahead of us.
We spent the first afternoon exploring the whole ship, finding the bars, restaurants pools and shops to make sure we didn’t miss out on anything. All 15 decks are packed with places to spend quality time and there are some surprising attractions, including a full length grass lawn and glass-blowing demonstrations. Two days at sea are perfect for starting the sunbathing routine and despite there being around 2,500 passengers, finding a sunbed and space to stretch out was never a problem. The pool area was the favoured location for those wanting a drink and entertainment whilst the solarium and forward sundecks offered a quieter environment to relax. Relaxing is a favourite pastime on cruises.
Our stateroom was very well appointed with a huge bed, substantial shower room (with fog-free mirror), interactive television, safe and minibar. There was plenty of space on the balcony to enjoy spectacular sunsets.
The Equinox visits five Caribbean islands and the first stop is St Thomas. The ship arrives in the port of Charlotte Amalie and as with most of the destinations, it is only a short walk to the town where the action is.
St Thomas is renowned for its jewellery shops and great bargains can be found if you shed the British inhibitions and go for full-on bartering. Narrow alleys and passageways reveal galleries, and bars where you can choose sun or shade for your Caribbean cocktails.
Back on board most people gather on deck for the sail-away before gearing up for dinner and another night’s entertainment.
Aqua Class passengers have exclusive access to the impressive Blu restaurant which offers fine dining. The menu is extremely varied with an international flavour and everything except drinks is included in the price. There are three other speciality dining restaurants for which there is an extra charge and each is top class. Away from speciality dining, Equinox offers two sittings in the main restaurant, again all inclusive apart from drinks to purchase.
The performances in the ship’s impressive theatre are timed to coincide with the restaurant’s sittings so you’ll never miss a show. We went to a show every night and enjoyed a couple of superb music and comedy acts from Britain.
Another sunny morning, another Caribbean island. This time it was St Kitts and the lush mountains formed the perfect backdrop to brightly painted buildings.
Caribbean dancers welcoming passengers on the quayside at St Kitts Caribbean dancers welcoming passengers on the quayside at St KittsWe had booked a shore excursion and were met on the quayside to be taken on a tour of the island, followed by a visit to the 300-year-old Fairview Great House. In the cobbled courtyard we heard stories of the Irish settlers and tasted several flavours of rum.
At two-and-a-half hours, it was one of the shorter excursions and we were back on board for lunch. Mind you, you can eat fabulous food 24 hours a day on the Equinox so there’s never any need to rush.
Barbados was the next port of call and we had chosen another highly recommended excursion. We were going beneath the waves in a mini submarine. The Atlantis sub holds around 40 people sitting back to back with a porthole each. If you’re not a diver or a snorkler, this is the only way to see marine life in its natural habitat. We even sailed past a shipwreck, the Lord Willoughby, settled on the seabed since the 17th cenutry.
The following morning we docked at Dominica. This island boasts lush rain forests but passengers are greeted by hoards of taxi drivers, all hustling for business so unless you have booked an organised trip, you’ll be back on board before you know it.
Our favourite destination was the beautiful St Maarten. Half the island is Dutch and the other half is French. It is bright and beautiful; clean and vibrant.
The European influences mingle effortlessly with Caribbean culture and St Maarten is high on our agenda for a return visit.
The two days’ sail back up to Fort Lauderdale is punctuated with a formal night during which passengers are encouraged, but not obliged, to dress up and have their photographs taken with the captain.
On arrival back in Florida, the organisational skills get into top gear for disembarkation. It’s a well-oiled, logistical machine and within 45 minutes of walking down the gangway, we were at Fort Lauderdale airport for the first leg of our flights home.
The Celebrity Equinox is heading across the Atlantic for a summer season in Europe and then it’s back to USA for more Caribbean cruising. If you do choose the Caribbean option, like us, you will find the whole experience breathtaking.
Caribbean Cruise 
Factfile
You can join Celebrity Equinox on a 10-night Ultimate Caribbean fly/cruise from £1,689 per person (based on two people sharing an interior stateroom).
Price includes return flights from Manchester, transfers and a 10-night cruise departing from Fort Lauderdale (Florida) and calling at Charlotte Amalie (St. Thomas), Basseterre (St. Kitts), Bridgetown (Barbados), Roseau (Dominica) and Philipsburg (St. Maarten) before returning to Fort Lauderdale for the flight home; meals and entertainment onboard and all relevant cruise taxes/fees.
Price based on November 21, 2014, departure. For more information or to book call 0845 456 0523 or visit celebritycruises.co.uk
Eamonn stayed at the Sheraton Ft Lauderdale Airport Hotel where a double room was US$177 plus local taxes – starwood.com, Tel 00 1 954-920- 3500
Flights only: americanairlines.co.uk
Celebrity Equinox leaving St Kitts
Celebrity Equinox leaving St Kitts
Document MNONL00020140413ea4d001up
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:33
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
