{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"1189"}
____
  
News
HUSBA B ND GETS LIFE FOR KILLING 'WESTERN' WIFE, 30
343 words
21 March 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
7
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
AJEALOUS husband who murdered his 'Westernised' Muslim bride after she returned from a lovers' tryst with another man has been jailed for life.
Illegal immigrant Jahangir Nazar stabbed Farkhanda Younis, 30, to death at the home they shared at Bamford Street, Chadderton, Oldham.
Nazar, 35, married Ms Younis in an Islamic ceremony in 2012, and was desperate to have a civil ceremony to avoid deportation to Pakistan. But his possessive behaviour and her refusal to be a 'traditional' wife strained their relationship, Manchester Crown Court heard.
Ms Younis' body was found on April 19 after her six-year-old son from a previous relationship, who was sleeping next door when his mum was killed, rang 999 because he couldn't rouse her and her bedroom door was locked.
She had been stabbed repeatedly in the neck in a frenzied early hours attack. Earlier that night she had sex with a previous partner to celebrate his birthday.
Takeaway worker Nazar admitted killing Ms Younis, but denied murder, saying his responsibility for the killing was diminished by severe depression. The prosecution successfully argued that his behaviour after the killing - when he tried to cover his tracks and fled to Newcastle - showed 'mental agility', and he was found guilty.
The court heard the mum-of-two refused to wear the hijab, enjoyed drinking and nightclubbing, and had 'many boyfriends'.
Their relationship deteriorated soon after their Islamic wedding and Nazar began beating her -choking her until she passed out on one occasion.
The court heard that Ms Younis was one of seven siblings, and that her death has devastated her family.
Her father, Mohammed Younis, said in a statement: "I feel guilty that this has happened, that I have not been able to protect my youngest daughter. I feel I could have done more."
Jailing Nazar for a minimum of 22 years, Mrs Justice Simler told him: "This was a merciless attack on a young woman in her home with her six-yearold son lying asleep."
Document MN00000020140324ea3l000en
