{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"2317"}
____
News
UKIP row over 'foreign invasion' leaflet using graves of Britain's war dead
By Dan Kay   
366 words
20 May 2014
15:44
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
The anti-immigration poster has been called "offensive" and "shameful"
UKIP are facing more criticism over a party leaflet which uses the graves of Britain's war dead to attack immigration.
The poster features a picture of crosses on a field in France with the slogan: "They fought and died to keep Britain free from foreign invasion. Don't let their sacrifice die in vain. VoteUkip."
The leaflets are being spread around parts of Wales, according to the Sun.
The use of Britain's war dead, particularly on the anniversary of WWI, has sparked fury among many.
Journalist Adam Bienkov wrote on Twitter: "Dear Ukip, the 'invasion' of people like my Polish grandfather who fought in the RAF actually saved this country."
Another added: "Hey UKIP - what about all the colonial soldiers who also fought to keep the UK safe in both World Wars?"
Labour MP Dan Jarvis tweeted: "Shameful that British war graves being exploited to drum up votes. Offensive & irresponsible."
Labour councillor David Ellis added: "If the UKIP war graves leaflet is real maybe they should visit the graves in Newark of Poles who died fighting Nazism."
Conservative MP Ben Gummer also questioned whether the war graves were indeed British.
"Those crosses look like French war graves to me. The mistake tells you all you need to know..." he tweeted.
UKIP has been contacted for comment.
Over the weekend, a senior UKIP election hopeful was caught on camera swearing at a group of peaceful protesters.
Janice Atkinson, the party's most high-ranking female politician, also told activists in Kent to 'f*** off' and said she didn't care where they posted the image.
Last week she claimed that police raids in Kent were because of immigration and Eastern European crime gangs.
UKIP's leader, Nigel Farage, also said he r egrets making controversial remarks about Romanians suggesting he would be concerned if a group moved in next door.
The Ukip leader was forced to fend off a fresh barrage of accusations of racism after his comments were highlighted in an LBC radio interview on Friday.
 
Document MNONL00020140520ea5k001ry
