{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"3191"}
____
Manchester-Hong Kong flights - Top 10 things to do in both destinations
By Ollie Gillman   
1,225 words
10 April 2014
18:37
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
After Cathay Pacific announced its new Far East flight service, we have compiled the essential list of things to do in Hong Kong - and what Chinese tourists should do in Manchester
Following yesterday's announcement Manchester Airport has secured a direct flight service to Hong Kong with Cathay Pacific, here is a guide of 10 things to do in the 'Pearl of the Orient' for anyone looking to make the trip
1) Take in the view at Victoria Peak
The vantage point from Victoria takes in the entire city skyline and the majestic harbour. The view of the city, only accessible by a 120-year-old tramline, has a backdrop of mountains to the north. There are four restaurants at the top, giving visitors time to take in their incredible surroundings.
 
2) Temple Street Night Market
Temple Street market is highly regarded for its men’s fashion, but also sells an array of clothes, antiques and watches. Often featured as a background to gangster movies, there are worse ways to spend an evening than among this bustling hubbub of traders.
3) Avenue of Stars
Hong Kong hosts the ‘Hollywood of the East’, with celebrity hand prints, plaques and even a life-size statue of Bruce Lee in a kung fu action pose. Performers put on plays and musical shows more or less once a day at the Avenue, creating a lively atmosphere.
4) Feel like James Bond
Part of James Bond film The Man With the Golden Gun was set in Hong Kong and, while we are not suggesting you visit the Bottoms Up bar that 007 did in the movie, there are plenty of other places to get a vodka Martini in Hong Kong. The SEVVA rooftop bar is a great place to watch the non-stop city go by, especially at night when the buildings and streets light up below.
Video: MEN head of business Adam Jupp explains why the Hong Kong link is key 
5) Wong Tai Sin Temple
In 1921, a man called Leung Renyan claimed to receive a message from Chinese god Wong Tai Sin telling him to build a shrine. The temple, which opened 15 years later and is open to the public, is said to make every wish come true to any one who visits. No wonder it is so popular with travellers.
6) Infinity pool terraces
While this is is not a cheap option, there is no better way to take in the city’s skyline than doing it while sipping on a cocktail while lounging in the Intercontinental Hotel’s famous infinity pools. Unless you are staying there, which is not cheap either, this will set you back a couple of hundred dollars, but the breathtaking sight and pool waiter service are sublime.
 
7) Clock Tower
The tower, which was once part of the Kowloon-Canton train station, stands as a memorial to the Age of Steam. The whole station was knocked down over 40 years ago, but the 44-metre high clock tower remains, referred to by some as the Big Ben of the East.
8) Island hopping
Hong Kong is often thought of as just a busy, financial district with a towering skyline, but is actually a collection of more than 260 islands. Lamma, just a short hop away by boat, makes a great day trip away from the city. Exploring the fishing village and trying your hand at traditional angling methods is highly recommended.
9) The Big Buddha
A massive 34-metre high buddha sits atop a mountain on Lantau Island and is definitely worth the 268-step climb. The Tian Tan Buddha statue sits next to the Po Lin Monastery, where you can mingle with monks and visit a popular vegetarian restaurant.
 
10) Dragon’s Back trail
This five-mile trek is no mean feat, with humidity reaching 100 per cent at times. The views and nature are well worth the sweat however, with the trail snaking along the South China Sea coastline, along rolling hills and through thick Chinese foliage. Our tip: Take lots of water!
The Hong Kong service is tipped to lead to an influx of visitors jetting to Manchester from the Far East for the first time. Here is a list of the top 10 things to do in Manchester:
1) Manchester United
Thousands upon thousands of United shirts sell in China every year, so the Old Trafford stadium tours are likely to prove popular with incoming visitors from the Far East. The Manchester United Museum is also worth a visit after a look around the Theatre of Dreams.
2) Manchester City
But with Manchester City visiting China for their pre-season tour two years running, perhaps most visitors from the country will be touring the Etihad. With City looking like the best team in Manchester for the foreseeable future, shirt sales and popularity in China could soon swing their way.
3) Chinatown
Though foodies say British Chinese restaurants do not replicate the actual cuisine in the country, this is the closest to home tourists to Manchester, and arguably the UK, can get. Many of Chinatown’s original residents were immigrants from Hong Kong who moved to the UK when the government allowed easier access to our shores to people from the island.
4) Manchester Cathedral
Manchester Cathedral is the perfect escape from the busy city centre. Dating back to 1215, the impressive building still hosts services today and is a great example of British architecture.
5) Coronation Street tours
Such is the worldwide popularity of Corrie, Beijing started its very own version of the soap, called Joy Luck Street, in 2000. Visitors to Manchester can walk down the famous cobbles at the studio in its new home at MediaCity, which is holds group tours for the next few months.
6) National Football Museum
The National Football Museum is a must-see for any fans of the sport while visiting England, the home of football. With fascinating tours about the history of the game, FIFA’s own collection of football memorabilia, as well as your chance to get your hands on the FA Cup, the museum is not one to be missed.
7) Victoria baths
The Victoria Baths are over 100-years old, and can be specially arranged any time during the summer. The baths were the first place to install a public jacuzzi in 1952, and were a popular place to relax. Nowadays the venue is used for filming and exhibitions.
8) Gay Village
The Gay Village hosts some of the best bars and nightclubs in the city centre. Gay and lesbian tourists from the around the world visit Canal Street, though everyone is of course welcome. The annual Manchester Pride parade takes place in August, where a carnival atmosphere will take hold of Manchester.
9) The Lowry
Named after Manchester’s most famed artist LS Lowry, the venue shows an array of dance, drama, musical and comedy performances in its two theatres. The gallery at the Lowry is also free to enter.
10) Curry Mile
With over 70 Indian, Pakistani, Sir Lankan and Bangladeshi takeaways, who would not want to pop in to Curry Mile for an award-winning dinner. Visit during Eid, when festival celebrations go on through the night.
 
Document MNONL00020140410ea4a002pa
