{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"1878"}
____
  
News
GUARDIANS TO BE GIVEN TO CHILD VICTIMS
Jennifer Williams   
366 words
6 March 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
19
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Carers to be appointed to look after youngsters smuggled into country by traffickers .
CHILD tracking victims are to get their own 'guardians' in a ground-breaking new scheme being rolled out across Greater Manchester.
Ministers have asked the region to provide such youngsters - - most commonly smuggled into the country from Vietnam or Nigeria - - with independent carers to ensure they are protected from abuse.
Manchester has already begun trialling the project, according to a report going before councillors this week.
It follows recommendations from a string of non government organisations that child tracking and slavery victims be made much more of a priority.
According to the NSPCC, more than 370 suspected victims - usually tracked for sexual exploitation - - were reported nationally in 2012, but the real gure is far from clear.
Now the Home Oce has agreed with Greater Manchester's combined authority that its town halls will work together to provide the guardians - - who will be independent from councils and will help them deal with the immigration system and cut the risk of them going missing.
Meanwhile Manchester council is also looking at the way it deals with female genital mutiation after an MEN investigation revealed the shocking extent of the practice in the region.
We reported experts' fears that girls as young as six are being taken abroad for the operation, one common in some African and Middle Eastern countries.
Teachers and midwifes across the city are now being told to look out for signs of FGM.
A major review will report back in two months' time to council chiefs on how well it is progressing.
Councillor Sheila Newman, executive member children's services at Manchester council, said: "Children and young people who have been traf-ple traf cked are amongst the most vulnerable in our society and are clearly in need of all the help and support we can give them.
"-is is why we're keen in the region to support new and innovative ways to improve arrangements to combat sexual exploitation, prosecute o-enders and protect children and young people.
Facebook.com/Manchester EveningNews
'We want to prosecute offenders and protect young people'
Document MN00000020140324ea36001gh
