{"newspaper":"Manchester Evening News","id:"2880"}
____
  
News
POLICE ARREST MAN IN SHAM MARRIAGE RAID
297 words
29 March 2014
Manchester Evening News
MN
1; National
7
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
HIS is the moment a suspected sham marriage 'fixer' was arrested in a second day of dawn raids.
The 36-year-old Czech man, described by the Immigration and Borders Service as a main target, was held by officers at a semi-detached bungalow on Surrey Road, Blackley, just after 6am.
The M.E.N. can reveal that the probe centres around sham marriages involving bogus grooms and brides at Manchester and Bury register offices.
A total of 12 wedding ceremonies are under investigation, with some of them also held at register offices in Halifax and Shrewsbury.
It is understood the man, who hasn't been named, will be questioned over allegations that he was a witness at ceremonies. The probe is also investigating women being brought into the UK.
Supported by GMP officers and the National Crime Agency, immigration service investigators swooped on three addresses in Greater Manchester and made a total of four arrests.
All those held were arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to assist unlawful immigration. A 23-year-old Pakistani man and a Czech woman aged 28 were arrested at a house on Moss Road, Stretford, and a 25-yearold Pakistani man was arrested at Ashtree Road in Crumpsall.
The Immigration and Borders Service said the operation was launched to investigate sham marriages between Pakistani 'grooms' and Czech 'brides.' .' The ceremonies involved took place between February and August last year. Yesterday's operation follows raids which resulted in 11 arrests on Thursday in Levenshulme, Longsight and Moss Side.
Dave Magrath, assistant director of criminal investigation enforcement, said sham marriages were not 'victimless crimes.' .' He said: "There is an impact on the UK economy as people abuse health, education and welfare services alongside the job market."
Document MN00000020140329ea3t00003
