{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"1641"}
____
What's On
New book reveals story of Manchester's real-life Sherlock Holmes
By Dean Kirby   
411 words
28 March 2014
19:07
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Jerome Caminada was Victorian Manchester's most famous detective and expert-thief taker.
The story of Manchester’s real-life Sherlock Holmes is set to be revealed in a gripping new book being launched to commemorate the centenary of his death.
Jerome Caminada was the son of an Italian immigrant who became Victorian Manchester’s most famous detective and expert thief-taker.
He was a master of disguise and an expert at deduction who used his intimate knowledge of the city’s slums to fight a one man war against murderers, thieves, conmen and pickpockets.
Now a new book by Manchester-born historian Angela Buckley titled ‘The Real Sherlock Holmes: The Hidden Story of Jerome Caminada’ dusts off the detective’s case files and brings them to life.
Angela said: “Jerome Caminada was born in the slums of 19th century Manchester and overcame incredible odds to become one of the city’s finest detectives.
 
“He was a true Victorian supersleuth and a real-life Sherlock Holmes.”
Caminada’s arch enemy was Bob Horridge, who was regarded as public enemy No.1 in 1880s Manchester. Horridge was an expert safe breaker who evaded capture by running over rooftops and jumping into the sewage-filled River Irwell.
But Caminada eventually arrested his nemesis at gunpoint after tracking him to Liverpool and he was jailed for life.
Caminada died in 1914 at his home in Moss Side and is buried at Southern Cemetery.
Angela is unveiling the book during a talk at the Manchester Histories Festival at 3pm this Saturday. A tour of Caminada’s Manchester is also taking place at 1.30pm.
Angela, 47, said: “My investigations began with my Italian ancestors, who were part of the same immigrant community in Ancoats.
“The more I read about his adventures fighting crime, the more fascinated I became and I knew I had to write about him.
“It has been a wonderful opportunity to bring him back to life from a century of obscurity.”
Manchester's real life Sherlock Holmes
More news from the Manchester Evening News
Find out what's happening where you live with our In Your Area section
Read the Manchester Evening News on your phone - download the Apple MEN App here, the Android MEN App here and the Kindle app here - and get the paper as an e-edition every morning  by subscribing here
Document MNONL00020140328ea3s002jq
