{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"1630"}
____
News
Suspected sham marriage 'fixer' and three others arrested in dawn raids
By Paul Britton   
477 words
28 March 2014
10:17
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
The Immigration and Borders Service say the arrests are linked to bogus weddings held at Manchester and Bury register offices last year
This is the moment a suspected sham marriage ‘fixer’ was arrested in a second day of dawn raids.
The 36-year-old Czech man, described by the Immigration and Borders Service as a main target, was held by officers at a semi-detached bungalow on Surrey Road, Blackley, just after 6am.
The M.E.N. can reveal that the investigation centres around sham marriages involving bogus grooms and brides held at Manchester and Bury register offices.
A total of 12 wedding ceremonies are under investigation, with some of them also held at register offices in Halifax and Shrewsbury.
It is understood the man, who hasn’t been named, will be questioned over allegations that he was a witness at ceremonies.
The probe is also investigating women being brought into the UK.
Supported by GMP officers and the National Crime Agency, immigration service investigators swooped on three addresses in Greater Manchester and made a total of four arrests.
All those held were arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to assist unlawful immigration and were being questioned today.
House searches were expected to continue throughout the day and the immigration statuses of suspects will be checked.
A 23-year-old Pakistani man and a Czech woman aged 28 were arrested at a house on Moss Road, Stretford, and a 25-year-old Pakistani man was arrested at Ashtree Road in Crumpsall.
Three other arrests - two men and a woman - were made in Halifax and Wolverhampton. Investigating officers were searching for paperwork and other documentation in connection with a series of other targets.
The Immigration and Borders Service said the operation was launched to investigate sham marriages between Pakistani ‘grooms’ and Czech ‘brides’.
The ceremonies involved took place between February and August last year.
Today’s operation follows raids which resulted in 11 arrests yesterday in Levenshulme, Longsight and Moss Side.
Sham marriages are used as a means of attempting to gain long-term residency and the right to work and claim benefits in the UK.
Dave Magrath, assistant director of criminal investigation enforcement, said sham marriages were not ‘victimless crimes’.
He said: “There is an impact on the UK economy as people abuse health, education and welfare services alongside the job market. This has been a lengthy operation looking at a sophisticated abuse of marriage.”
More news from the Manchester Evening News
Find out what's happening where you live with our In Your Area section
Read the Manchester Evening News on your phone - download the Apple MEN App here, the Android MEN App here and the Kindle app here - and get the paper as an e-edition every morning  by subscribing here
Document MNONL00020140328ea3s000rw
