{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"721"}
____
News
Stockport council leader plays down calls to cut ties with twin town over far-right mayor
By Todd Fitzgerald   
398 words
4 April 2014
18:00
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Stockport has been twinned with Beziers since 1972. Robert Menard, who represents the Front National, was elected as mayor on Sunday
Stockport’s council leader has played down calls to cut ties with its French twin town after a far-right mayor was voted in.
Stockport has been twinned with Beziers since 1972. Robert Menard, who represents the Front National, was elected as mayor on Sunday.
The party is anti-immigration and anti-Europe, and has been accused of being racist, anti-Muslim and anti-semitic.
Stockport’s Labour group called on the council to suspend and terminate the twinning agreement earlier this week, with leader Coun Andy Verdeille claiming the people of Stockport have a ‘right’ to dissociate themselves with the views of the party.
But Coun Derbyshire told Thursday’s full council meeting: “As a liberal, I regret that the backlash against the socialist government in France has led to such a rise in the right-wing.
“However, as a democrat, I have to accept the result of the electoral process.
“If we say democracy is good, as long as we agree with the result, but if we don’t, then they can get lost, we will push those in a pluralist society who have minority views to believe they have no place in the democratic process.
“We’ve seen in this country and across the world what happens when people feel marginalised.”
Coun Derbyshire said there hasn’t been a civic exchange with Beziers since 2005 and that schools haven’t had much involvement with the town recently.
She added: “Twinning is a post-war way of making connections internationally, but in this day and age, it’s not really necessary. It was always about culture, schools and young people.
“While I would not extend or accept an invitation to or from Beziers at the moment, I don’t see any need to say to them ‘we disapprove of you, therefore we’re not going to have anything to do with you’.
“We wouldn’t like it if they did it to us and I don’t think we have the right to do it to them.”
Conservative leader Coun Syd Lloyd said the twinning agreement is about ‘schools, residents and young people – not politics’.
Document MNONL00020140404ea440030e
