{"newspaper":"manchestereveningnews.co.uk","id:"1808"}
____
News
Travellers face long delays at Manchester Airport after bottleneck at immigration desk
By Pete Bainbridge   
335 words
23 April 2014
14:16
manchestereveningnews.co.uk
MNONL
English
© 2014 Trinity Mirror   
Travellers faced long delays at Manchester Airport this morning after a bottleneck at the immigration desk
Passengers flying into Manchester Airport faced huge queues and delays as they tried to pass through immigration.
More than 1,000 passengers waited almost an hour at terminal three from 7.30am on Wednesday morning.
The Border Force (BF) said that the immigration desks were all manned but a combination of early and late arrivals caused a ‘bottleneck’.
Two flights were delayed by around 15 minutes, while another arrival was 20 minutes early, causing one thousand passengers to arrive in a much shorter period than expected.
A Chicago flight came in at 8.06am rather than 7.50am, a Paris shuttle arrived at 8.16am rather than 7.50am and the Gerona plane arrived at 8.54am rather than 9.15am. The queues were dealt with by around 9.30am.
A BF spokesman said: “There were queues for a short period at Manchester Airport this morning caused by the late arrival of busy flights coinciding with the early arrival of another. Border Force deployed staff to deal with the queues and reduce disruption for passengers, while ensuring the necessary checks took place.
“We are working with Manchester Airport to try and resolve issues around flight timings to ensure we provide an excellent service to legitimate travellers, as well as securing the border.”
However, M.E.N Twitter followers responded to the delays saying it was a regular occurrence.
Tommy posted 'happens all the time especially terminal 3', while Books By Bike said 'Plus ça change'.
More news from the Manchester Evening News
Find out what's happening where you live with our In Your Area section
Read the Manchester Evening News on your phone - download the Apple MEN App     here    , the Android MEN App     here     and the Kindle app     here     - and get the paper as an e-edition every morning      by subscribing here
Document MNONL00020140423ea4n001mh
