{"newspaper":"Metro","id:"1009"}
____
  
News
Europe: It's the final countdown
ETAN SMALLMAN   
1,023 words
19 May 2014
Metro
METRO
1; National
12,13
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved.   
Europe - a contentious issue. Do you despair of meddling 'Eurocrats' or do you think the EU is a vital trading bloc? ETAN SMALLMAN looks into the issues that matter ahead of this week's elections...
THIS Thursday, citizens from across the EU will turn out to elect hundreds of representatives to the European parliament.
Well, some of us will. At the 2009 election, only 43 per cent of eligible voters cast their ballots. In Britain, turnout was just 34.5 per cent.
With a hefty dose of controversy thanks to a surge by Ukip, the event has dominated the headlines in recent weeks. But asked whether the results will have any impact on our lives - and whether we would notice the difference if Labour or Ukip got the most votes - MEP Godfrey Bloom told Metro: 'British MEPs have seven to eight per cent of the vote in what is an amending chamber. So, in answer to your question: It doesn't make the slightest bit of bloody difference at all.
'I think an awful lot of people don't turn out to vote - they don't understand it and they can't be bothered.' Mr Bloom has served as an MEP for Yorkshire and the Humber since 2004. He was elected on a Ukip ticket but had the whip withdrawn in September last year after he hit a journalist over the head with a party brochure and referred to his female audience at a party event as 'sluts'.
On the one hand, he says, we should care because 'over 70 per cent of our law now comes from the EU', adding: 'There are 2,000-odd rules and regulations that come in every year.'
On the other hand, the European parliament is not a law-making body but an amending chamber. 'That tends to suggest it isn't as important as it should be when it comes to the amount of legislation passing through,' he admitted. 'Do people not take much notice of the European elections because they don't really understand them?
'I have dinner with men of my own age who read law at Oxford who still have absolutely no idea how they're governed.
'In fact, you probably won't be able to name more than three or four MEPs off the top of your head. I've never met anybody who can.' Stephen Booth, research director at the Open Europe think-tank, believes it is a question of scale.
'The distance between your vote and what comes out of the EU machine is huge,' he said.
'That's something that puts a lot of people off and makes it quite difficult to explain what the European parliament does, even though it has huge amounts of power.
'It does make a difference, in that it does have quite a lot of legislative power - on issues such as free trade.
'But these are quite specific and technocratic - not the kind of things that are likely to capture a voter's imagination.'
OPEN Europe is predicting a wave of gains for populist, anti-EU, antiausterity, anti-immigrant and anti-establishment parties, estimating that protest groups could win as much as 31 per cent of the vote - up from 25 per cent in 2009.
Many activists hope to use the vote to get their campaigns on the national agenda - one of them being Noel Gallagher's ex-wife, Meg Mathews.
The designer is standing in London for the Animal Welfare Party, which is joining forces with six other political organisations across the continent to get the first dedicated representative for animals elected. For her party, EU success 'would really signal to the rest of the world that the way we treat animals has to and is changing for the better', she says.
Another candidate, comedian Rufus Hound, describes himself as 'just some Johnny clown-shoes celebrity' with 'no desire to take power'.
Yet he is standing for the National Health Action party, which was formed by medical professionals to oppose what they describe as the Coalition's 'clear agenda to increasingly privatise and commercialise the NHS'.
He told Metro: 'If the NHA can get one candidate elected, that is going to send quite the message in the lead-up to the general election that people are waking up to the fact that the NHS is deeply under threat.
'Hopefully, then it gets pushed to the top of the agenda.
'Frankly, if anybody's apathetic about voting, just to turn up, to spend ten minutes voting for the NHA, means suddenly politicians are going to feel very shaky about what they thought their approach to the general election was going to be.'
But Prof Maurice Fraser, from the London School of Economics, said it was important to keep the significance of these elections in perspective.
'They will tell us next to nothing about the outcome of the general election set for spring 2015,' he added.
7 % of Britons know how many MEPs are elected by our voters (73)
55% don't know the decade Britain joined what is now the EU (1970s)
93 % cannot name any of the MEPs for their own region
only 16% can correctly name the date of the elections (May 22)
Only 26% of Europeans think the EU is 'going in the right direction'
Only 39% say they trust the EU parliament
50% of Britons think Britain 'could better face the future outside the EU'
The EU has 24 official languages
Elections to the European Parliament only began in 1979
It is the EU's only directly-elected institution
It has the largest democratic electorate in the world apart from India
When asked to name things that the EU stands for (multiple answers were possible)
43% of Europeans said 'the freedom to travel, study and work'
32% said the 'euro'
27% said 'waste of money'
25% said 'peace'
24% said 'bureaucracy'
Since 2009, the parliament has passed 871 legislative acts and voted 23,551 times on 19,213 amendments to 2,790 legal texts in debates that lasted 2,160 hours
Document METRO00020140519ea5j0002r
