{"newspaper":"Metro","id:"821"}
____
  
Features
Home truths on austerity
Anthony Cummins   
629 words
26 February 2014
Metro
METRO
1; National
34
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved.   
Danny Dorling offers a radical solution to the housing crisis in Britain. By Anthony Cummins
ALL THAT IS SOLID: THE GREAT HOUSING DISASTER
by Danny Dorling
Allen Lane
****
WE all need a roof over our heads. But fewer and fewer of us can afford one - not when first-time buyers in London, for example, need to fork out an average of £60,000 for a deposit.
And yet the ball and chain of a mortgage can look seductive if you're a tenant shunted around every time your landlord hikes up the rent under the sway of an estate agent out to line their own pocket.
A foot on the ladder might seem the only sensible step - though not if prices fall, as they have done outside the bubble of the south-east, and you end up in hock for more than the property is worth.
Talk of a housing ladder is exactly what social affairs expert Danny Dorling wants to get away from. For him, it encourages us to incur titanic debt in the hope of profiting from buyers even more desperate than us further down the line.
His new book argues homes should not be seen as assets but as shelter - a basic right, like education or healthcare. Dorling paints a grim picture of how the free market in housing works, particularly in the capital. While the mega-rich dig up the earth to furnish their west London town houses with subterranean swimming pools, hard-up families on the other side of the city cram themselves into garden sheds leased illegally by homeowners trying to scrape extra cash to service their own mammoth mortgage.
For Dorling, the solution isn't more construction, which pollutes the environment and only benefits developers, landlords and banks anyway. He says Britain has plenty of housing - we just need to use it more efficiently.
And by this, he doesn't mean charging social security claimants for every unoccupied room in their home, as does the coalition's 'bedroom tax'. He wants to tax the rich, not the poor.
Step one, he says, is to remove the limit on council tax so the wealthiest pay in line with the value of their multiple properties. Sting them for a land tax, too, says Dorling; and while we're at it, tax high wages in general so it becomes pointless to strive for top-end pay rises.
If this sounds crazy, ask yourself why politicians are so keen to portray immigration and welfare as the cause of the country's housing ills. For Dorling, the stunningly obvious reason MPs don't turn on those who buy more homes than they need is that they (or their backers) often own multiple investment properties themselves.
Dorling brings up an interview in which David Cameron appeared to forget how many homes he owned.
We're also reminded that the family of a Tory minister who oversaw Thatcher's right-to-buy scheme in 1980 now happen to own a sizeable chunk of ex-council housing stock.
Dorling's left-wing sympathies are clear and he hardly expects freemarket advocates to heed a book that lifts its title from Karl Marx. But you don't need a copy of The Communist Manifesto by your bedside to read this and think there's something a bit whiffy about the slogan 'we're all in this together'.
He cuts to the heart of things: if you think the bedroom tax sounds sensible, did you know it penalises parents of children who die? And did you know that in 2012 one in every four new jobs in Britain went to a new estate agent? So someone's been doing all right. No austerity there, then.
Document METRO00020140226ea2q00022
