{"newspaper":"Metro","id:"1729"}
____
  
News
Parents 'facing an uphill battle to get children into best school'
NICOLE LE MARIE   
323 words
17 April 2014
Metro
METRO
1; National
42
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved.   
PARENTS are facing 'a growing crisis' in primary school places for their children as figures suggest thousands missed out on their first choice this year.
Pupils in England began learning which school they would attend yesterday with early figures indicating more than a third in some areas missed out on their preferred place.
Councils and schools have faced a squeeze on places, particularly for primary-age children in recent years, caused partly by a rising birth rate and higher immigration.
Dr Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, said government reforms also made it difficult to open institutions that were not free schools or academies.
She added that education secretary Michael Gove 'has divested himself of his first key responsibility, which is to provide school places for children.
'He's divested himself of his second key responsibility which is to put quali-fied teachers in front of those children. Whatever you think of the rest of his policies, those, to me, seem to be two quite big catastrophes for our nation's children and young people.' Studies suggest many councils have received more applications for primary school places compared with last year.
In Rutland, Doncaster and north-east Lincolnshire almost all parents got their first choice of primary school.
But two fifths missed out in Kensington and Chelsea.
The Department for Education said it had given councils more than £5billion to establish new school places, with more than 260,000 created already.
Meanwhile, almost half of parents admit sending their child to a specific nursery in the hope of winning a primary school place.
'Competition for what parents perceive to be the best schools is now so tough they will do almost anything to gain their child a place,' said Siobhan Freegard, founder of Netmums, which carried out a poll of 1,000 parents.
Document METRO00020140417ea4h00027
