{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"1755"}
____
  
News
Cooper: Scotland would need million immigrants
TORCUIL CRICHTON   
547 words
24 April 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
1; National
8,9
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
AN INDEPENDENT Scotland would need to let in one million migrant workers to fund pensions, Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper warned yesterday.
The Labour MP claimed taxes won't be enough to support the growing elderly population.
That would give Scotland a choice of cutting services or letting in more workers, she said.
Cooper pushed immigration to the front of the referendum debate ahead of a speech in Inverness, where she was born. She will highlight official figures showing that the Scottish population would need to grow by one million over 30 years to make pensions affordable.
House of Commons library research shows Scotland's working age population needs more than 24,000 migrants a year to keep pace with the rest of the UK.
This means a net migration of nearly one million new Scottish workers by 2051.
Cooper called on Alex Salmond to "come clean" on what Scotland's immigration policy would be. The SNP's White Paper on independence acknowledges Scotland needs more migrants and that visa requirements for overseas students would be relaxed.
Cooper said: "All the evidence shows that there has to be a significant pensions gap in Scotland and that it has to be funded.
"If that isn't done as part of the UK, where the risks are shared, then it would have to be done by raising taxes, cutting pensions or raising immigration to meet the bill.
"The SNP has said it would mean higher immigration for Scotland but haven't said just what that means. It wouldn't be possible to meet the needs of pensions in the future with just more university students from abroad.
"We all think more students would contribute to our economy but Scotland would need looser immigration controls and more low-skilled immigrants.
"That has consequences in terms of the pressure on public services and schools and the pressure on them.
"Immigration needs to be controlled and managed. I think highly skilled immigrants can be beneficial but there should be restrictions and stronger controls around low-skilled jobs."
Cooper, who is married to Labour Shadow Chancellor Ed Balls, would not comment on whether a different immigration policy in Scotland would lead to border gates with England.
She said: "Immigration policy has consequences for border controls of course but we simply don't know what the SNP immigration policy would be. What we do know is that the scale of additional migration needed can't simply be made up by university graduates."
The Labour frontbencher said the issue of immigration has to be tackled head-on and that her comments and official figures could not be dismissed a scare story.
"Whether it's a debate with the SNP, the Tories or UKIP, we need to be honest about the consequences of immigration.
"We've said we need stronger immigration controls, we've said we made mistakes in government and we've called for stronger action to stop the exploitation of migrant workers undercutting local jobs and wages."
Cooper will spend the day in Inverness today meeting women voters before a Shadow Cabinet meeting in Glasgow on Friday.
More low-skilled immigrants would have consequences YVETTE COOPER in terms of pressure on public services and schools
Document DRECRD0020140424ea4o0003t
