{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"460"}
____
  
News; Front Page
HELD TO RANSOM
MARIA CROCE   
1,247 words
12 March 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
1; National
1,4,5
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
Pregnant Scots mum slams cruel visa rules that leave her trapped in USA until she gets job paying £27,200 KIRSTY'S PLEA AGONY OF COUPLE FACING MONTHS OF SEPARATION LET ME COME HOME Scots mum of 2 is trapped outside her own country as immigration law means she needs to earn £27k before she can return to Scotland with her family
A PREGNANT mum last night condemned "cruel" rules that prevent her coming home to Scotland with her family.
Kirsty Miller, 30, wants to return from the US to raise her twins and her soon-tobe-born third child here. But Kirsty was horrified to learn new immigration rules mean she doesn't earn enough to bring husband Daniel to Scotland.
She branded the rules "sexist" for failing to take brewer Daniel's potential TURN TO PAGE FOUR FROM PAGE ONE earnings into account in deciding the family's fate.
And she said she felt abandoned by her own country.
Strathclyde University graduate Kirsty now faces the prospect of travelling to Scotland alone to have her baby.
Her wage as a university support assistant is only £17,050. But she needs to be earning at least £18,600 and have an offer of a similar job here to sponsor her husband.
Because her one-year-old twins Alexander and Matthew do not have British passports, the figure rises to £24,800 to bring them too.
And if the new baby, due in September, is born in the US, she would have to earn £27,200 to bring her husband and all three children to Scotland.
Kirsty, whose parents live in Baillieston, wept last night as she said: "I feel trapped, trapped out of my own country.
"It almost feels like my country has turned its back on me, simply because I don't make enough money.
"The rules are unfair - please just let me come home to Scotland with my husband and babies.
"I had the best childhood here and I want that for my children. My family are simply the best and I miss them so much, it hurts. Now I need their support to help me cope with a new baby."
Kirsty is hoping the twins will be granted British citizenship which means the extra salary level for them will not be needed.
But she's still short of the £18,600 salary required for Daniel's visa and now she's pregnant it will be harder to get a job lined up in the UK before the baby arrives.
"If I can get the twins their British passports in time I will be taking them with me - otherwise they'll have to stay behind with their dad," she explained. "The thought of being away from my husband and possibly my twins too for several months is tearing me apart."
Kirsty has 15 years' experience in hospitality including work as a hotel manager in the UK.
But her qualifications and experience didn't transfer when she moved to the US and so she initially worked as a waitress and hotel receptionist before landing her current job.
Daniel, 39, earns £31,180 working in the beer brewing trade and is hopeful he could get work here.
But the immigration rules mean his potential earnings cannot be taken into account.
Kirsty said: "I think it is sexism that they don't take into account on visa applications whether the person having to meet the financial requirement is a mother.
"Daniel is the main breadwinner. That won't change when we move to the UK - but they won't take his salary into account.
"He will be and always has been a hard worker. We both have worked non-stop since we were 15.
"I don't think that the financial requirement should be dropped or even loosened.
"I think that all incomes in the family should be taken into account. My husband is the chief breadwinner so they should look at his salary.
"I think that there should be perhaps a more personal approach to immigration where people like us can be interviewed so we can explain our circumstances and individual situations can be taken into account. Not everyone is trying to evade the system.
"He's furious that he's expected to miss the birth of his child and our family is to be torn apart for at least six months. It's just inhumane."
Kirsty added: "The only option now is to return to Scotland without my family, have the baby, without its daddy or siblings present, wait eight weeks until I'm able to return to work then work for six months to earn the financial requirement.
"Then and only then can my husband apply for his spousal visa. This is ridiculous. Families are being torn apart by these rules."
The couple first met at a country club on Fishers Island, New York, when Daniel was a chef and Kirsty was the beach bartender in 2007.
They married in 2008 at Fishers Island and then had a second wedding back in Scotland.
Daniel was granted a visa to live and work in the UK, as a head chef of a hotel and then a brewer.
But in 2010, the couple decided to move back to America for a while - never thinking they would have problems returning to the UK.
They bought a home in upstate New York and were delighted when they discovered Kirsty was expecting twins. But soon they were struggling with the extra financial burden when Kirsty had to leave work early on medical grounds.
She said: "When we found out I was pregnant again we decided we would have to return to the UK.
"If I have the baby here, I will have several thousand dollars in hospital bills again as doctors are insisting I have another C-section. I'm still trying to pay the last lot.
"People in the UK don't realise how valuable the NHS is until they don't have the ability to use it any more - I certainly didn't.
"But it's not just financial. I really want to come home to have the baby because I need the support.
"I cry all the time and think I will end up with post-natal depression if I don't get home. When Daniel's at work, there's no one to talk to or get a hug from.
"With two babies at home already, bringing home another after a C-section is going to be impossible. And I'm worried what the stress could be doing to my baby.
"The new immigration rules are unfair. I'm a mum who knows the Scottish lifestyle I grew up in and cherished is not being made accessible to my children, without leaving their dad behind.
"That is just not right and surely has to be changed. Please let us come home."
A back door from Europe SOME Britons are reported to be bypassing immigration rules by going to work in another EU country.
If a British citizen exercises their treaty rights and works in another part of the European Economic Area (EEA) they can then apply to enter the UK with a non-EEA spouse under EU rather than British law.
It then appears that the minimum earnings requirement doesn't apply.
I think that all incomes should be considered. Daniel is our chief breadwinner KIRSTY MILLER
Document DRECRD0020140312ea3c0003w
