{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"2279"}
____
  
Features
4million people in Scotland are entitled to vote It's up to you to keep this man out..
3,009 words
21 May 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
1; National
1,2,3
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
The threat from Farage and UKIP is real.. let's show them we reject politics of fear
THE PARTIES HEADING IN A tale of tw N HERE wo nationalisms
RECORD VIEW LET'S face facts. The election Scotland really cares about this year happens in September, not tomorrow.
But if you're one of the many who think the European Parliament vote doesn't matter - that it has nothing to do with you or your life - take a look at the man on the left, and then think again.
If, after the results are all in, you want to listen to Nigel Farage crowing about UKIP gaining their first ever foothold in Scottish politics, just stay at home like you were planning to.
If you share the Daily Record's belief that his fearmongering, Thatcherite, anti-immigrant politics have no place in an inclusive, tolerant country like Scotland, get out and vote and help to stop him.
Most Scots see UKIP as an irrelevance, a ragtag, chaotic bunch of eccentric Little Englanders obsessed with the old prejudices of their angry brigade of voters down south.
Their policies - like a flat rate of income tax to help the rich and imposing more privatisation on the NHS - are alien to the vast majority of Scots. Their obsession, withdrawal from the European Union, fails to resonate here like it does with some in England.
And when Farage claimed at the weekend that many Britons wouldn't want to live next door to Romanians, many Scots detected an ugly whiff of racism.
UKIP have never won a single seat in any election north of the border.
But make no mistake: this time, the threat is real. And as a result, it's easy to argue that no European election has TURN TO PAGE TWO FROM PAGE ONE ever been as impor tant for Scotland.
Four million of us can vote tomorrow. At the last European elections in 2009, the turnout was a paltry 28.6 per cent.
We need to do better. The more of us who vote, the less likely it is that UKIP will win a seat.
Scotland is one constituency in tomorrow's vote, but it returns six MEPs. And Farage's party have a chance of grabbing one of those seats because of the complex system of proportional representation used to send MEPs to the parliament in Strasbourg.
Last time, the SNP were the largest party and got two MEPs. Labour also got two and the Tories and Lib Dems one each.
But a Record poll this week suggested the Lib Dem vote has collapsed - down from 11.5 per cent in the 2009 Euro poll to six per cent - as voters punish them for imposing a Tory-led Westminster Government on Scotland. And that could leave the door r UKIP and Farage. Their ate, David Coburn, is g he will cause a "political uake" in Scotland. poll showed UKIP had ent support here - a small y, but a significant one. Tories' 13 per cent vote n our poll is likely to be to keep their one MEP, e SNP and Labour holding heir two each.
open for candida claiming earthqu Our p 10 per ce minority The T share in enough with the on to th And if support couple o f Farage can increase his t in Scotland by another of points, that could give UKIP the sixth Scottish seat.
Pundits see the battle for the seat as a tale of two nationalisms - a straight fight between UKIP and the SNP.
And with Farage riding high in the polls in England and getting blanket media coverage, UKIP's profile has never been higher.
The SNP are determined to keep Farage out - and not just so they can increase their own tally of MEPs. Alex Salmond, as always, has his eye on September 18.
If UKIP win overall in England but achieve nothing in Scotland, the SNP will seize on the result as proof of the two countries' wildly different political views.
And there's some evidence Scots are ready to listen. One recent poll said almost a fifth of people in Scotland would be more likely to vote Yes if UKIP topped the European poll.
So a UKIP defeat in Scotland would suit the SNP, but we would argue that unionist voters have just as strong an interest in keeping Farage out. We believe UKIP's siren call to disaffected voters - that all our problems have their roots in immigration - is a dangerous falsehood.
UKIP claim migrants take jobs from Britons. Studies have repeatedly shown no link between EU migration and unemployment.
UKIP claim migrants jump housing queues. In reality, very few get council homes, and a lack of affordable housing is the real problem.
UKIP claim migrants undercut Britons' wages, but official statistics show migration has no impact on wage levels. Public sector pay freezes and zero hours contracts are the real drivers of poverty among workers.
UKIP claim "health tourists" and immigrants put strain on the NHS - a line the Tories repeat.
But in reality, up to 20,000 people come to Britain to use the NHS while 63,000 Britons travel abroad for treatment. And overseas staff play a huge part in keeping the NHS going.
Let's also remember that Scotland has a low birth rate and an ageing population. Many, including the Scottish Government, believe we need more immigration, not less.
Nick Lowles of pressure group Hope Not Hate, said: "We solve nothing by whipping up fears about immigration.
"This only creates fear and division and the real issues get ignored.
"UKIP are a distraction from the real issues we face. Please reject the politics of fear."
SUPPORT? YOUR AFTER WHO'S SCOTLAND has six MEPs and six major parties are standing for election. We can expect to see the SNP top the ballot again but with Labour next, reviving compared with 2009 and likely to win two seats.
The Conservatives can expect to retain their one MEP, despite their low support, but there will be a real fight for the sixth seat.
The Lib Dems are facing meltdown and the Greens, at about six per cent, do not appear to have enough support either.
That means UKIP could come close to winning the sixth seat. It looks like a straight fight between them and the SNP.
Scottish Conservatives Topping the Tories' list of candidates in the proportional representation poll is Dr Ian Duncan, who aims to replace the Tories' outgoing MEP Struan Stephenson.
Duncan is a former chief executive of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. He has also been head of the Scottish Parliament's office in Brussels and a clerk to the Parliament's European committee.
Stephenson's former assistant, Belinda Don, is second on the Tories' list but has little chance of being elected.
Scottish Green The Greens' number one candidate is Maggie Chapman, a university lecturer in geography and an Edinburgh city councillor. She is also co-convener of the Scottish Greens.
Scottish Labour Labour's top candidate for Scotland is David Martin, who has been an MEP since 1984.
He was formerly Labour's leader in the European Parliament, and served as a vice-president of the parliament between 1984 and 2009.
Catherine Stihler MEP is second on Labour's Scotland list. She has been an MEP since 1999 and was previously president of the National Union of Students. She is currently Labour's European spokeswoman on consumer rights and serves on the economic and monetary affairs committee.
In third place for Labour is Derek Munn, a one-time adviser to former first minister Jack McConnell.
Scottish Liberal Democrats Top candidate is MEP George Lyon, who won his seat in 2009. He was previously a member of the Scottish Parliament, rising to be deputy finance minister and chief whip before losing his seat to the SNP in 2007.
Lyon has been a vice-chairman of the European Parliament's budget committee, but the Lib Dems are in freefall in the polls and his seat is in jeopardy again.
Scottish National Party Veteran MEP Ian Hudghton, first elected at a by-election in 2004, heads the SNP list of candidates. Three of them have a realistic chance of making it to Strasbourg.
Hudghton is vice-president of the European Free Alliance, a group of smaller pro-independence parties from different parts of Europe who band together in the parliament and are allies of the Greens.
Second place on the SNP list goes to Alyn Smith, also an MEP since 2004. He is a member of the agriculture and rural development committee.
The third placed candidate is Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh, a lawyer who has received an OBE for services to business. She was previously a member of both the Tory and Labour parties.
United Kingdom Independence Party UKIP's top candidate is David Coburn, the London regional chairman of the party and a former Territorial Army soldier. He is a newcomer to Scottish politics and Scotland has never been good ground for UKIP, but his party's rising profile and the Lib Dems' collapse combine to give him a real chance.
Scots ready to play part WE found a fair amount of voter apathy when we took to the streets to ask Scots about their plans for tomorrow's poll.
But those who couldn't see the point of casting their votes were balanced out by men and women from all walks of life who always make a point of taking part in our democratic process. Let's hope there are plenty more like them.
Philip Simon TRAINEE solicitor Philip says he has been following the coverage leading up to the European elections.
And the 26-year-old, from Clydebank, near Glasgow, believes it's important to get out and vote.
Philip said: "I think I will probably vote Labour, although I'm not enthusiastic about it.
"I think I also voted in the last ones but I can't remember when they were.
"I do think it's important to have a say and to vote in the European elections.
"A lot of decisions are made by politicians in Europe and they affect a lot of people's lives in Scotland."
Kerry Magil ll s she didn't pay much attention verage until her voting card t. al from Springburn ll be at her local polling station KERRY, 24, admits to the election cov arrived in the post But the paraleg in Glasgow will stil tomorrow.
ill vote because so many ns are being made at Kerry said: "I wi important decisio European level.
say they won't vote, but then the round and complain about things happening.
"Some people s same people turn that are or will be "You have the r chance to try and right to vote so you can take the change things."
Gordon Don GLASGOW council worker Gordon says he had enough years ago of the "broken promises" of politicians - and didn't even know there was an election this week.
The 40-year-old said: "I gave up on politics a long time ago.
"You hear all these different sides talking about how they are going to do this or going to do that.
"But as soon as they get in, they do the exact opposite. It doesn't matter how we vote.
"I hear bits and bobs about what goes on in Europe and about how some laws affect us, such as taking things higher up to the European courts. But you can't really get the full picture.
"I will not be voting. Thursday will be my day off. I'll be enjoying myself instead. That's it."
Douglas Ewing DAD-OF-ONE Douglas, a motorcycle salesman, believes the results of the European elections could end up being meaningless if Scotland votes for independence in September.
The 35-year-old, from Howwood, Renfrewshire, still intends to use his vote tomorrow. But he said: "It makes no difference what happens when we have the referendum on the horizon.
"We have bigger fish to fry. "It all could mean nothing later in the year if there's a Yes vote and a veto from the EU on our membership."
Douglas added: "There have been a lot of negatives to come out of Europe, such as the Common Fisheries Policy.
"Scotland used to have the largest white fish fleet in Europe. But it has all been reduced in order to help landlocked countries."
Peter M McIntyre ws many Scots will ignore s vote - because of what's on n in September.
year-old outdoor activities said: "To be honest, I don't think o many people with the m coming up.
PETER kno tomorrow's the horizon The 35-y instructor s it matters t referendum "It will be But Pete in the Europ some last-m He said: "more focus September.
e overlooked by the majority." r, of Bathgate, will cast his vote pean elections - after doing minute research.
I know all about it but I'm a lot ed on what's going to happen in .fully researched the European o I'm not sure how I will vote. ably have a last-minute squint net and ask a few of my more developed friends."
"I've not elections so "I'll proba at the inter politically d Mary McTegue CASHIER Mary, 54, from Craigend in Glasgow, always votes in every election.
She said: "I am politically aware. "People died to get us the right to vote and I believe you either use it or lose it.
"But I do think there isn't a lot of information for people about what happens at the European Parliament, so a lot of people can't be bothered.
"I haven't decided who I'm going to vote for yet. I'm more of a floating voter.
"I used to be a staunch Labour supporter. Now I lean towards the SNP."
Michelle McFarlane THE 31-year-old fraud investigator said she definitely intends to use her vote on Thursday morning.
Michelle, of Glasgow's Auchinairn area, said: "I do believe in having a say in how things are run.
"I just believe that I should vote. We are all a part of Europe, aren't we? "There are certain laws passed at the European Parliament that affect a lot of people here.
"I feel as if I sort of HAVE to Alan Kerr SALESMAN and dad-of-two Alan knows more about European politics than most after working in Vienna running bars and clubs for 15 years.
He's now living in Ayr, and will "absolutely" vote tomorrow.
Alan, 52, said: "I always use my vote. A lot of people went through a lot of stuff to get us the vote."
But he added: "There is a disconnect between people and the European Parliament - mainly because of the press, who give it a bad run.
"People in Austria also have a problem with the EU. Britain thinks it is the odd one out, but that's not the case.
"Personally, I waver on the issue but I'm more for it than against it."
Jack Miller GREAT-GRANDAD Jack, 80, is a staunch SNP supporter and votes in every general election and Holyrood poll.
But the retired gravedigger from Glasgow's Gorbals says he is not interested in what happens tomorrow.
used He joked: "I think that's the day I get paid."
Jack added: "I know the election is on but I'm not caring at all.
at "What is it anyway? You're just spitting against the wind and all you get back from them is patter.
Inever "I send my postal vote away for the general election and Scottish election. But I'm just not interested in this.
is so "It is definitely distant from us.
"On Thursday, I'll be lying in my bed listening to the radio. But I won't be paying Robert Hamilton DANCE teacher Robert, of Glasgow's west end, has never used his vote and doesn't plan to start.
He doesn't feel his opinion counts for much, and only knew there was an election this week because his polling card arrived at his home.
Robert said: "It's something I don't take part in and never have.
"I'm 38 now so I guess I'll never take part in it now. I really don't see what difference my opinion is going to make.
"Also, I don't know much about politics or anything in that field, so why would I bother? "I will just be working on Thursday."
Sheila Charters BEARSDEN granny Sheila believes voting is a duty. And she's already done it - by post.
The retired office worker said: "I pay a little attention to politics.
"I've missed out on voting before because I was away so I decided it wouldn't happen again.
"Like a lot of people, I don't know that much about the European Parliament. No one really knows any of the names of the MEPs. But I still vote. It's important - we are all part of Europe."
Karen Cusick KAREN, an unemployed gran from Glasgow's Milton area, told the Record she always votes.
But she admitted she rarely pays attention to politics and didn't know about the European elections until this week.
The 44-year-old said: "I don't really bother about any of it, only when I get the card through the door do I know when to go to the school to vote.
"The card has come through the door so I'll go down on Thursday.
"I always vote Labour but I think I might start changing my mind.
"My mother and father always voted for them, so I just carried on voting that way."
Document DRECRD0020140521ea5l00012
