{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"2626"}
____
  
News
Curry is the spice of life
Jack Mathieson   
434 words
19 March 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
1; National
14
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
FOOD Celebrating original Indian
LOVERS of Indian food are being invited to travel back in time to sample Scotland's original curry.
Khushi's - renowned as the first Indian restaurant in Scotland - is to serve a collection of the original dishes it first cooked up when it launched in 1947.
From chicken shammi kebabs and mince lamb samosas to lamb kofta with chapatti, the range of dishes - based around raditional, simple methods of cooking - will feature the same ingredients used to give customers their first taste of curry more than six decades ago.
It is part of a 'Back to 1947' event to mark the 80th birthday of co-founder Hamida Khushi.
Jaimon George, general manager of the restaurant, now based in Antigua Street, said: "It's unbelievable how far Khushi's has come since creating the first curries for Scotland back in 1947.
"Although our cooking methods have changed, we still use the freshest ingredients originally used so it will be great to let people get a proper taste of how it all began.
"Ingredients tended to be a bit more basic back then as sourcing exotic spices was quite tricky.
But this will be the perfect opportunity for all lovers of curry in Scotland to sample how the Indian restaurant scene all began.
"This event is also a fantastic way to help us celebrate Mrs Khushi's milestone birthday and embrace Khushi's nostalgic past with both new and returning customers."
For £19.47, diners can select a starter, main course, side and dessert of their choice from the specially designed "Back to 1947" menu which will run until Sunday March 30, excluding Fridays and Saturdays. The event will run in both Khushi's Antigua Street and Khushi's Dunfermline at the same time.
The first Khushi's restaurant was opened in Edinburgh's Potterrow by Khushi Mohammed, a penniless Indian immigrant who arrived in Britain in the mid 1930s after being lured by the Commonwealth promise of work and a better life.
The restaurant became popular with the city's growing Asian community, and attracted food lovers.
The now-demolished Potterrow restaurant gave way to various locations until, in 1974, it opened in Drummond Street with Khushi's wife Hamida replacing him in the kitchen, before son Islam Mohammed oversaw the move to Victoria Street.
A fire in 2008 destroyed the Victoria Street venue but the business bounced back with the flagship restaurant in Antigua Street and Leith fine-dining restaurant Mithas.
People will get a taste of how it all began
Document DRECRD0020140319ea3j00003
