{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"2280"}
____
  
News
Shun siren call of UKIP in Euro poll
401 words
21 May 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
1; National
8
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
RECORD VIEW
THE European Union has few friends among the 400million voters across the continent.
Fewer than half, perhaps only a third will participate in the European Parliament elections tomorrow.
Many people see Europe as a distant project of the political elite that has little to do with their lives. It is mostly portrayed as a failure that produced a currency system which wreaked havoc across the continent when it fell apart.
It is an unaccountable, faceless bureaucracy that imposes needless rules and opened the door to migrants from the poorest parts of the east to compete for jobs in the wealthier west.
The European Union is guilty, in part, of many of these things. It needs reform, but not destruction, because overall it has been a force for good in our lives, too.
The working hours directive that stops companies exploiting workers comes from EU regulation. Stopping roaming charges for mobile phones and long overdue reforms to fishing and agricultural policy help to show the EU is inching towards relevance.
The European Union and MEPs influence and affect much of our lives. The choice we make tomorrow is not a futile one. It sets the political weather in Scotland now but sets the direction of Europe for the next five years.
Across Europe there is a hostile, right-wing coalition intent on destroying the EU. In Britain that is headed by the xenophobic UKIP who use anti-immigrant rhetoric as barely disguised racism.
The EU was founded as an economic body to make sure the carnage of war would never again tear apart the continent.
Right now, on the edge of Europe, the fabric of democracy is being dismantled by an expansionist, nationalistic Russia.
We need a stable EU, defending workers' rights, ensuring trade and commerce prosper across open borders to counter the forces that would tear the continent apart again.
Scotland needs political representatives who reflect its outward looking traditions.
To ensure that we must go out and vote - but not for a party who have extremist views, who would rather turn their back on the world and on Europe and would set us against our neighbours.
Do not be tempted by the siren call of Nigel Farage or UKIP. A vote for them is a vote for intolerance and we do not see Scotland as that kind of country.
Document DRECRD0020140521ea5l0000p
