{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"84"}
____
  
News
TRIADS' DEADLY TRADE IN FAKE ECSTASY PILLS
CHRIS CLEMENTS   
1,252 words
26 March 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
1; National
4,5
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
EXCLUSIVE DRUG LAB CHEMISTS INVENT ONE NEW KILLER EVERY WEEK
Police warn kids: Every time you take these tablets, you're rolling the dice with death
SCOTS clubbers are facing a new drug danger every week, and ruthless Triad gangsters are to blame.
The Chinese crooks run secret labs in their homeland where their chemists create constant stream of new, untested, mind-altering compounds could kill.
The Triads then play a role in supplying the drugs dealers in Europe, who them in the fake ecstasy made on the Continent our clubs.
Kids who buy them think getting ecstasy, with its ingredient of MDMA.
But in fact, they are swallowing lethal mixtures of drugs they never heard of.
Tablets from the same brand will d of to of often contain wildly different - and totally unpredictable - combinations these so-called legal highs.
The Chinese and other crooks churn out new compounds at the rate of one per week.
And with youngsters continuing die from fake ecstasy, police are desperate to convince kids at risk that they are "rolling the dice" every time they take a pill.
In an exclusive interview with the Daily Record, Police Scotland drugs expert Detective Sergeant Michael Miller said: "Any of these pills can contain anything. Any one of them could kill you.
"Drug dealing is about making money.
"People will sell the cheapest product they can to make the maximum profit.
"If dealers can take out some of the more expensive MDMA, and add in something cheap instead, they will do it.
"We are seeing the new substances they are bunging into pills and selling on the street.
"A lot of them are made in China. Dealers can easily go and buy them - and mix them.
"There are so many of these drugs now. It's estimated they could be producing as many as one a week.
"Nobody knows the effects and the dealers don't care. It's about maximising profits."
Families across Scotland will spend the rest of their lives paying the price of the dealers' greed.
Schoolgirl Regane MacColl, 17, from Clydebank near Glasgow, died last month after apparently taking a red Mortal Kombat tablet at the city's Arches nightclub.
And last summer, 18-year-old Demi Campbell, of Alexandria near Dumbarton, became the seventh victim in Scotland of a form of fake ecstasy known as Green Rolex.
Demi's uncle said her death had "destroyed the family". The pills also killed 13 youngsters in other parts of the UK.
DS Miller said kids pay attention to press warnings about lethal drug batches. When names such as Mortal Kombat and Green Rolex appear in headlines, the clubbers stop buying them.
But they move on to other pills, believing they are safe, when in reality they can have no hope of knowing what they're taking.
DS Miller said: "Last year, we were asked to find pills called Yellow Rockstars. We found six different types at the one time - same logo, same colour, totally different chemical make-up.
"Brand names are just marketing ploys. Just because it has the same symbol doesn't mean it's the same pill.
"Someone could take one pill one week and be fine, then take it again the next week and it's a completely different pill, off a completely different press, with completely different drugs.
"It's like mixing your drinks. People know not to do that.
"But if you buy an ecstasy tablet, there's a high possibility the manufacturers are mixing their drugs.
"When you mix two drugs that aren't supposed to go together, your risk is increasing. You're gambling, rolling the dice.
"And I've encountered a tablet that had four different drugs in it."
DS Miller works for the specialist Police Scotland unit who keep track of the array of substances hidden in "ecstasy" pills.
They do whatever it takes - even sweeping nightclub floors.
DS Miller explained: "A lot of pills are dumped on the floors of clubs. We collect these and we analyse them.
"And if one of them, even if it hasn't caused a problem, contains something we know is dangerous, we will get the message out there. Our priority is keeping people safe.
"We're constantly evolving and we're pro-active.
"We're working far better with health and addiction services and drug charities and the formation of Police Scotland has made communication and informationgathering easier.
"Intelligence that perhaps wouldn't have reached me in the past will reach me now.
"It's like a jigsaw. We're seeing more of the bigger picture."
DS Miller's Statement of Opinion (STOP) unit also give evidence at drug trials and issue press warnings about danger drug batches.
He said: "If there is an immediate risk, we have to get the message out there about the dangers of a particular pill.
"But the bigger picture is that we can't focus in on one pill. They are all potentially dangerous."
DS Miller said most pills sold in Scotland are made on the border between Holland and Belgium.
It's rare for Scots dealers to make their own tablets, and DS Miller has never heard of MDMA being manufactured in this country.
The Green Rolex deaths last year were linked to a substance called PMA, which is cheaper than MDMA, more toxic, and can kill at lower doses. It also takes longer to work, meaning users endanger their lives by taking more pills in a bid to get high.
DS Miller said police were also seeing wide use of benzocaine - a dental anaesthetic usually made in China - to bulk out ecstasy pills.
MPs heard in February that Chinese crooks were trawling the internet for old pharmaceutical research papers to help them produce legal highs.
Any of pills could contain anything.
Drugs minister Norman Baker said he would ask the Beijing government to help curb the labs' activities.
CALLOUS CRIME EMPIRES
TRIAD gangs in Scotland make millions from a long list of crimes - from growing cannabis to selling bootleg tobacco and DVDs.
Gangs linked to south-east Asia grow huge quantities of cannabis in empty homes and warehouses.
They produce super-strong "skunk", linked to mental health problems including schizophrenia in the young.
The triads also sell more than £10million a year of illegal rolling you tobacco, smuggled in from China in tens of thousands of small parcels and sold at street markets.
The tobacco often contains high levels of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide, and its sale cheats the public purse out of millions of pounds in tax.
When the Daily Record exposed the trade in 2012, a senior Customs officer told us: "We're awash with it.
We're seizing about half of what's being brought in.
"They post small quantities, but they post them often.
"If you buy this stuff, God knows what's in it.
"Sometimes they just sweep up all the extra bits that fall on the floor, along with dust and everything else."
The Triads also traffic women for the sex trade and extort protection money from restaurants.
They have been linked in the past to massive global credit card fraud, as well as drug trafficking, kidnapping, trafficking of illegal immigrants, video piracy, counterfeiting, loan sharking and illegal gambling.
The most infamous gangs include the Wo Shing Wo and the 14K.
Any of these pills could contain anything. Any one could kill you DS MILLER
Document DRECRD0020140326ea3q0002f
