{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"2030"}
____
  
News
SNARED CROOKS COUGH UP £8m
JOHN FERGUSON   
960 words
29 April 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
1; National
12,13
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
CAUGHT CHEATS AND DEALERS HAND OVER THOUSANDS Drop in cash grabbed by prosecutors but more criminals' fortunes disappear
PROSECUTORS grabbed £8million in illegal earnings off the likes of drug dealers, fraudsters and even a puppy farmer in the past year.
And though that was £4million down on the previous year's total, they hit more people with crminal confiscation orders.
There was also a big jump in the number of people forced to prove they were earning their cash legally in 2013-14.
Solicitor General Lesley Thomson QC said yesterday: "Those who attempt to build up criminal business are finding that we can wreck their ventures by ending their funding streams and their hopes of living off the profits of their crimes."
There were 166 people hit with criminal confiscation orders, compared with 149 the previous year.
The number of disclosure notices issued - which force suspects to prove their wealth wasn't made through Scotland's £2billion crime industry - shot up from 195 to 288.
Businesswoman Kwai Fun Li, 46, of Bishopbriggs, near Glasgow, was ordered to surrender more than £700,000 in cash and assets.
She was initially fined £6000 for employing illegal immigrants at her Chinese restaurants between December 2009 and May 2010.
But in confiscation proceedings, she was forced to hand over the six-figure sum after failing to account for how she was funding her lavish lifestyle.
Last year's cash haul included £65,313 from two drug-dealing brothers.
Alan Burns, 26, and Michael Burns, 29, are serving two years and nine months after they pleaded guilty to supplying cannabis, diazepam and methacathanone.
They sold drugs in Paisley and internationally via the interent between 2010 and 2012.
Drug dealer Mohammed Riaz was ordered to hand over £203,724 at the High Court in Livingston.
The 42-year-old had amassed a fortune selling heroin in Edinburgh, Glasgow and Bathgate, West Lothian.
In January, notorious gangster Russell Stirton forfeited almost £59,000 which had been seized from him by police in 2007 as he sat outside a golf driving range.
The cash was confiscated after he was spotted collecting a package from a criminal courier in a car park at World of Golf in Drumchapel, Glasgow.
But it wasn't until January this year that his legal bid to get it back finally failed.
A man caught with £61,000 of drugs and an arsenal of weapons and live ammunition had £14,650 seized under proceeds of crime laws.
Paul Donnell, 43, was jailed for nine years and four months after cocaine, heroin, five handguns, a rifle and bullets were discovered at his home in Erskine, Renfrewshire, in September.
A man jailed for mistreating puppies was hit with the first confiscation order in animal cruelty.
Charles Swan, 68, from Stirling, was sentenced to eight months in March last year after pleading guilty to breaches of the Pet Animals Act and the Animal Health and Welfare Act.
It was calculated he made £12,340 from his crimes but a confiscation order for £1 was made against him after he was found to have no assets available to pay the full figure.
And a Borders company became the first in Scotland to be given a confiscation order for an environmental offence.
Scrap metal business David Cochrane (Duns) were fined £53,000 in June last year for illegally keeping and treating waste for 14 years and for failing to remove a quantity of mixed waste metals, liquid waste, tyres and batteries after being required to do so by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency.
A confiscation order for £41,000 was then made against the company.
The Solicitor General yesterday defended her team's record, claiming the Proceeds of Crime Act has resulted in "serious disruption" to criminals in Scotland.
Thomson said assets worth £3.6million were recovered through the courts from criminals' illegal profits, while £4.4million was seized using civil recovery measures.
She added: "The combination of an increase in both disruption and confiscation orders is a double whammy for criminals operating in Scotland.
"Hundreds of them have felt the full force of POCA over the last year and it has destroyed their lifestyles and their activities."
Justice Secretary Kenny MacAskill said that since 2003, more than £80million has been recovered from criminals in Scotland.
He added: "These figures demonstrate that the Proceeds of Crime Act continues to be an extremely powerful and effective tool in the fight against organised crime in Scotland."
The Crown Office have assembled a formidable allwoman team to seize dirty money from Scotland's crooks.
Thomson has appointed Deborah Demick as the new head of the proceeds of crime unit and Linda Hamilton as head of civil recovery.
The fourth member of the team is Lindsey Miller, procurator fiscal for organised crime and counter terrorism.
Demick said: "In recent years we have expanded the use of the POCA legislation.
"We have identified further opportunities to ensure that organised criminals are not able to accumulate wealth or assets."
Hamilton said: "In the last year, the civil recovery unit has dramatically increased its investigative capabilities.
"The team of lawyers, forensic accountants and financial investigators in the unit work collaboratively with Police Scotland, HMRC, DWP and other agencies to take every opportunity to dismantle serious organised crime in Scotland."
Miller added: "Before the POCA legislation was introduced, the criminal fine would have been the end of the matter.
"Now the conviction is only the start of a process by which criminals must account for how they are funding their extravagant lifestyle or see it come to an end."
£204,000 MOHAMMED RIAZ
£59,000 RUSSELL STIRTON
£14,650 PAUL DONNELL
£65,313 ALAN BURNS
£700k KWAI FUN LI
Document DRECRD0020140429ea4t0002r
