{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"2600"}
____
  
News
Red tape wife and cruelty has locked my son out of the country
CHRIS CLEMENTS   
1,072 words
18 March 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
1; National
4,5
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
TORN APART IMMIGRATION LAWS SEPARATE LOVED ONES Dad banned from bringing family home to Scotland because rules state he doesn't earn enough
en es om and A SCOT is heartbroken after immigration rules barred his family from coming to his homeland to live with him.
een ing and ua to esn't PHILLIP MALLOY has been told he cannot bring Japanese wife Kyoko their young son Joshua the UK because he doesn't earn enough.
e has 600 a ill be isa. 14,500 sistant, by my Border rules state he to be bringing in £18,600 year before Kyoko will granted a permanent visa. Phillip, who earns £as an administration assistant, said: "I feel let down country.
ed my ly life." inning, "I'm being denied human rights to a family " Phillip, from Kilwinning,herapist o while n English Ayrshire, met massage therapist Kyoko five years ago working in Japan as an teacher.
d in 2011 ssed as an in 2012.
The couple married and Joshua, who is classed British citizen, was born They moved to Scotland last April but Kyoko, 32, was only granted a six-month family visitor's visa to enter the UK.
When her visa expired last October, she had to return to Japan and she took two-year-old Joshua with her.
Phillip has been trying to get them back into the UK ever since.
But he feels helpless because of the salary rule.
Phillip, who planned to complete a teaching degree in Scotland, blasted the rules and called on more to be done to keep families together.
He said: "I feel discriminated against as people from the European Union can enter the country with no similar requirements asked of them.
"But because I have married someone outside the EU, I'm penalised as a British citizen.
"I believe that a spouse visa should be looked at as an individual case.
"My parents provide accommodation and support, so we don't have many outgoings or claim as many benefits as others."
He added: "I've been trying to get a job earning the amount required by the rules but I'm finding it really difficult in this climate."
Phillip, who works for a medical firm, said Kyoko plans to get a job if she is allowed to settle in Scotland.
But the immigration rules do not take her potential earnings into account.
As the wrangle goes on, Phillip, 32, feels the daily agony of being separated from his wife and son.
He said: "I keep in contact with them every night on FaceTime. It's really hard for us."
Phillip said he and Kyoko's experience with immigration officials has not been positive so far.
He claimed they were detained for seven hours by officials from the UK Border Agency when they landed in Scotland last year.
He added: "I came back with my wife and my son as we wanted to start a life here. I wanted to pursue a career and settle in Scotland.
"When we first came back, it was a terrible situation. We were detained for seven hours after a 12-hour flight.
"I wouldn't say we were treated well, especially with me coming back to my own country. We had already visited the UK Border Agency in Japan to check if we needed a visitor visa. They said it wasn't necessary but that it would help. We decided against it, due to the cost.
"But when we got home, they started questioning this and they detained us and our infant son while they carried out checks on us.
"One guy started asking me questions, like what finances I've got, what I was entering the country for.
"I told him I was returning to the UK to find employment and Kyoko was coming with me because we were a family. She just wanted to be with her husband."
Phillip said the salary rule may mean he has to rethink his career plans.
He added: "I was going to try to apply for a teacher-training course. But I feel that if I go ahead and do that, I will be penalised.
"This income threshold is above the average working salary and very hard to achieve.
"A lot of jobs would require me to return to study, which can take time."
A Home Office spokesman said: "Each application is considered on its individual merits and in line with the immigration rules.
"Our family rules have been designed to make sure that those coming to the UK to join their spouse or partner will not become a burden on the taxpayer and will be well enough supported to integrate effectively.
"We welcome those who wish to make a life in the UK with their family, work hard and make a contribution."
The Malloys' case echoes the immigration nightmare of Kirsty Miller.
The Record reported last week how the pregnant 30-year-old, who is living in New York, has been told she needs to find a job earning £24,800 to sponsor visas for her American husband and twin sons.
And that figure will rise to £27,200 if her third child is born in the US.
Kirsty only earns £17,050 a year as a university support assistant.
The mum, whose parents live in Baillieston, Glasgow said: "It almost feels like my country has turned its back on me, simply because I don't make enough money.
"The rules are unfair - please let me come home to Scotland with my husband and babies."
The Record also reported last week how a cross-party group of MPs called for an urgent review into immigration rules that came into force in July 2012.
A two-year inquiry heard evidence from hundreds of families torn apart by the rules Lib Dem MP Sarah Teather said: "What was clear from the evidence is that the system is tilted against family life, unless someone can demonstrate that their spouse who is coming into the UK is desirable in some way and meets some extra criteria.
"Our inquiry showed the rules are inhumane, lacking in common sense and will do great damage to the country."
SO CLOSE Joshua'second birthday
I feel let down by my country. I'm being denied my human rights to family life PHILLIP MALLOY
Document DRECRD0020140318ea3i00033
