{"newspaper":"Scottish Daily Record","id:"2956"}
____
  
News
WE'LL GIVE UKIP FARAGE A BOOT IN THE BALLOTS
DAVID CLEGG   
638 words
10 May 2014
Scottish Daily Record
DRECRD
2; National
8
English
(c) 2014 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd   
EURO DECISION DAY LOOMS Salmond in rallying call to Scots voters as protesters target Nigel
SALMOND ALEX Salmond yesterday insisted Nigel Farage should be defeated at the ballot box - and not through ugly demonstrations.
The UKIP leader returned to Scotland a year after he had to be rescued by police from a group of rowdy protesters in Edinburgh.
And he was again met by about 300 protesters.
They gathered to taunt Farage's supporters at a rally in the capital's Corn Exchange, some waving banners reading: "Ghandi would have smacked you in the head."
But there was no repeat of the chaotic scenes last year that saw him driven to safety by the police after he clashed with the protesters in the Canons' Gait pub.
Radical Independence and other left-wing groups had run coaches to take people from Glasgow to the rally in Edinburgh.
Unite Against Facism had called for all those "sickened" by UKIP's adverts to gather in protest.
But Farage insisted he would not be intimidated - and predicted his party could win up to two Scottish seats in the Euro elections later this month.
Backing UKIP's Scottish candidate David Coburn, he said: "We're on course to win one seat in the European Parliament in Scotland and, if things go really well, possibly even two.
"We will have a legitimate voice in Scottish politics in two weeks.
"Mr Salmond is pretty scared of us. He's not not scared of the size of us at the moment but he is very scared of the argument.
"He is offering the Scottish people in September a referendum on independence.
"They think they've got a referendum on independence but they haven't. Mr Salmond is a Euro-federalist fanatic.
"He wanted to sign Scotland up to the euro, he wants Scotland to be part of the European Union and you can't be an independent, selfgoverning, democratic nation and be a member of a club whose laws are supreme over yours."
Prior to Farage's visit, Salmond had warned the protesters not to give Farage a boost by making him look like a victim.
The First Minister said: "Nigel Farage and his party will not be defeated by demonstrations which only give him the chance to play the victim, but by being humiliated at the ballot box as they have been many times before in Scotland.
"This election is as clear a contrast and choice as Scotland has ever faced at the polls.
"I am confident people will make the right choice, keeping Scotland free of the politics of UKIP."
Although UKIP have surged in popularity in England, they have yet to make a breakthrough in Scotland. They won a tiny 0.91 per cent of the list MSP vote in the 2011 Holyrood election.
But polls from last month suggest support of about 10 per cent for the European election, giving the party a chance of a seat.
During a Holyrood by-election campaign last May, staff were forced to clear the Canons' Gait pub on the Royal Mile as protesters gatecrashed a press conference.
Farage tried to escape by taxi but protesters blocked its path, forcing him back. Police barricaded him in the pub until a riot van arrived.
Radical Independence said yesterday's demo was against UKIP's "homophobic, misogynist and anti-immigrant" policies.
But Farage said: "Things they are accusing us of are so wide of the mark. It appears they want to close down debate on what are really important subjects.
"If you are dealing with calm, rational people you can have a sensible debate. I tried that twice in Scotland but it's impossible."
People will make the right choice - keeping Scotland free of UKIP
Document DRECRD0020140510ea5a0005c
