{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"2079"}
____
Features; Opinion Column
GODZILLA's back and he isn't half scary!
Henry Fitzherbert   
1,247 words
18 May 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; Scotland
50,51
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
GODZILLA ..... (12A, 123mins) Director: Gareth Edwards Stars: Bryan Cranston, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Mary Elizabeth Olsen, Juliette Binoche THE TWO FACES OF JANUARY ..... (97mins, 12A) Director: Hossein Amino Stars: Viggo Mortensen, Oscar Isaac, Kirsten Dunst IN SECRET ..... (15, 102mins) Director: Stars: Oscar Isaac, Mary Elizabeth Olsen, Jessica Lange, Tom Felton GADZOOKS! Gareth Edwards, a thirtysomething Brit, has graduated from the micro budget Monsters (special effects courtesy of his home computer) to Godzilla (special effects courtesy of a £95million budget) in one monster-sized step. It is an enormous leap of faith in the Nuneaton-raised director, not least since it falls to him to erase memories of the little-loved Godzilla directed by Roland Emmerich (Independence Day) in 1998.
Can Edwards show Emmerich how it should be done? The answer is, yes... up to a point, the point being approximately half way into the film when, after a gripping start, the picture becomes, well, just another monster movie.
Human interest is crushed under (giant) foot and the picture evolves into a series of lavish set pieces; albeit impressive but lacking the tension that comes from caring what happens. It is disappointing after a cracking initial 50 minutes that prove Edwards to be a maestro of suspense, cranking up the anticipation and intrigue with Spielbergian panache.
We get a family in jeopardy, an imminent threat only one man foresees and earthshaking intimations of disaster while the monster remains teasingly unseen. Think Jurassic Park crossed with War Of The Worlds, a doom-laden scenario in which the creatures unleashed (Godzilla has company) will rampage on a global scale.
True to Godzilla's Japanese roots the action starts in Japan where a nervy Joe Brody (Bryan Cranston from TV's Breaking Bad), an American scientist who works at a nuclear power plant, is getting jittery about strong tremors. In a stomach-churningly tense sequence his fears that no mere earthquake is to blame prove devastatingly correct: the plant is destroyed with dreadful personal consequences.
That was in 1999 and we cut to the present to find Joe a shambling obsessive. Still in Japan, he is convinced the truth is being covered up while his now grown-up son Ford (Aaron Taylor-Johnson), a bomb disposal expert with the US army, tries to talk sense into him.
The family dynamics give the picture a fierce human focus and Cranston is terrific as a lonely Cassandra; his surname Brody presumably a nod to Roy Scheider's Brody in Jaws. Unfortunately the characters are muscled off screen to make way for the monsters and the picture becomes a showcase for epic destruction, fun in parts but lacking the excitement that comes from emotional engagement.
Godzilla, a mighty beast with a barrel chest and bear-like visage, is actually on our side. The real villains are two "mutant spawn" of Godzilla who can fly (they resemble colossal alien-like mosquitos) and wreak all the havoc. Very much in their shadow, bland Ford makes for a dull hero while the plotting is contrived and sometimes confused: an attempt to join the dots between set pieces.
There are some rather brazen attempts to engage our sympathies during the mayhem, acknowledgement perhaps of the picture's narrative flaws. For example, a young boy we have never met is temporarily united with Ford to give us someone to fret over when the monorail they are riding in Honolulu comes under attack. Never seen again, he is just there to inject a bit of jeopardy.
That we have someone to root for in these sequences is vital since the rest of the planet is going up in smoke and the battle already seems to be lost: thousands dead, whole cities trashed (Las Vegas becomes a smouldering ruin in the blink of an eye). Meanwhile, top tier cast members like Sally Hawkins, who plays a scientist, and Elizabeth Olsen, who plays Ford's wife, barely register.
Nevertheless, Edwards conjures up an extraordinary spectacle and creates an eerie, oppressive atmosphere that, in the picture's quieter moments, is very effective.
Fans should be more than happy: the picture is reverent to Godzilla folklore while bringing some inventive new twists to the legend. It may not deliver on its promise but no doubt Edwards will.
AMERICANS abroad in cream linen suits. Sex and murder under the hot sun. South-east Europe redolent with history and intrigue. Set in 1962 and based on the Patricia Highsmith novel, The Two Faces Of January is a pleasurable throwback to the character-driven thrillers of Alfred Hitchcock, rich in atmosphere and immaculately tailored.
Like many of Highsmith's works, including Strangers On A Train and The Talented Mr Ripley, it finds two men from opposing backgrounds forging a potentially catastrophic alliance. They are suave, worldly businessman Chester (Viggo Mortensen) who is holidaying in Greece with his young wife Colette (Kirsten Dunst) and a handsome tour guide, Rydal (Oscar Isaac), with an eye for the main chance.
Like Chester, Rydal is American but he is younger, considerably poorer and very much alone having lost contact with his family; he did not even attend his father's recent funeral. He latches on to the sophisticated American couple (we assume to fleece them, as he does the trusting tourists in his charge) but finds the tables turned when Chester's own suspect dealings come back to haunt him.
Writer-director Hossein Amini cleverly toys with our assumptions as he strips away Chester's integrity and composure while suggesting that Rydal may be more sincere than appearances suggest, in particular in the attention he pays to Colette.
More character drama than thriller, the story explores the shifting dynamics among the trio as events force them to hide out in Crete while waiting for false passports which will allow Chester and Colette to make their escape.
The sun-baked locations are beautiful and the ancient sites (the picture opens at the Parthenon) are nicely redolent of the decaying relationships unfolding before us.
Best of all, the acting is terrific especially from the magnetic Isaac who is as irresistibly watchable here as he was in Inside Llewyn Davis. He also plays the most intriguing character, a man you are constantly trying to second guess.
However, none of the three commands much sympathy (Rydal is too compromised to count as an innocent victim) and the suspense never really cranks up.
There is one tense sequence when Rydal and Chester have to bluff their way through immigration but otherwise little to make us sweat.
Meanwhile, the relationships do not quite draw you in emotionally, especially that between Rydal and Colette on which the whole drama really hangs. It should be intense but feels perfunctory.
Yet there is much to savour in the fabulous location work, intelligent writing and Marcel Zyskind's exquisite cinematography. Amini directs with elegance and subtlety.
In Secret is the rather bland title for a racy adaptation of Zola's Therese Raquin that boasts strong performances from a first-class cast but never quite justifies its existence.
Elizabeth Olsen plays the frustrated Therese, trapped in a sexless marriage to sickly cousin Camille (a very good Tom Felton), who is swept up in a torrid affair with dashing family friend Laurent (Oscar Isaac) in 19th-century Paris.
It rattles along compellingly enough if you do not know the story but feels rather dated and is too melodramatic to move.
Document THEXSU0020140518ea5i000bc
