{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"1545"}
____
News
Debt debate 'snub'
David Stephenson   
327 words
16 March 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; Northeast
11
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
EXCLUSIVE
PAYDAY loan bosses have refused to take part in a Channel 5 debate on Britain's personal debt crisis.
"They all declined," said a spokeswoman on the eve of the show, as it emerged British families now owe more than at any time in history.
The nation's spiralling personal debt mountain is £1.4trillion, an average of £54,000 for every household in Britain. More than 2.5 million households spend more on bills each month than they earn. Even taking out mortgages, the average family owes more than £8,000.
Politicians and representatives from credit card companies will join tomorrow night's The Big "Can't Pay" Debt Debate: Live. The show is hosted by Sunday Express columnist Nick Ferrari and will also feature contributions from Katie Hopkins and former Celebrity Big Brother contestant and writer Liz Jones, who has spoken about her debts.
Payday loan companies have been accused of preying on the poor and adding to the debt crisis. Their high interest rates have drawn widespread condemnation. Some shortterm loans are levied at 5,000 per cent a year.
Former Dragon's Den investor and multi-millionaire businessman Theo Paphitis last week called for the Government to take action against the companies. He told a BBC documentary: "If I were David Cameron, I would ban them."
The Channel 5 show follows two earlier live debates, one on Britain's benefits culture and another on immigration. Both made for compelling and volatile viewing.
A Channel 5 spokeswoman said: "We will look at whose fault it is. Is it the credit card companies and banks who encourage us to spend? The payday loan firms who have cashed in on the recession? Or is it down to the people who get into debt?" ? The Big "Can't Pay" Debt Debate: Live is on Channel 5 tomorrow at 10pm.
? What a sorry state we are in - Nick Ferrari: Page 33
Document THEXSU0020140316ea3g0000z
