{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"2078"}
____
News
CONFIDENTIAL AGENT
553 words
18 May 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; Scotland
77
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
LOTTE VON TRIPPE defends letting fees and reveals why using an agent can be prudent
ADEAR old friend has just popped into the office with a tale of woe as long as her legs. The former model has been investing in property for a number of years.
The luxury London apartment in Chelsea that she bought pre-Olympics has paid off handsomely, but not all of her portfolio is as glamorous.
Like many buy-to-let investors, her bread and butter comes from modest apartments which she manages entirely herself.
Among her interests are a couple of High Street shops with flats above in a small Surrey town. She lets them directly to save paying fees to a letting agent.
"You know that flat of mine above the Oxfam shop?" she starts. "It seems to be full of illegal immigrants."
"Oh. How so?" I ask. "Well. I was letting it to a man who worked for IBM but it seems he has been posted abroad."
"I've Been Moved." "I beg your pardon?" "I've Been Moved; it's the acronym for IBM...never mind," I say.
So she went on with the story about how the man had said he knew an Indian lady with a baby who needed somewhere to rent and she had moved in.
Then a few weeks later one of the shop assistants mentioned that she had not seen the Indian woman for a while but there were a lot of Chinese people coming and going.
"You should have used a letting agent," I said, adding: "You know they are trying to pass laws forcing landlords to check that anyone they rent to is a legal resident? Not to mention that you are now a landlord of a House in Multiple Occupation and of health and are probably breaking all sorts of health and safety laws. Not to mention losing a baby."
"Thanks," said my friend. "According to the ladies in the shop, there are at least seven of these Chinese people living upstairs.
"They also say that they have seen an Indian man in a white van coming to the flat every Monday night. We assume he must be collecting the rent."
"The new enhanced rent, you mean," I say. "You will have to get a private eye to stake out the shop and follow him home," I suggest. "That will be expensive."
AT THIS point Tim, who had been listening quietly, turned to my friend and said rather aggressively: "So what's your problem?" "Well," she said. "I don't know who they are. They could be anyone. And as Lotte says, I am probably breaking the law even though it is not my fault. And now I am going to have to pay for a private eye or something."
She began to look weepy, which always works wonder with Tim.
"Why don't you just knock on the door and ask them to pay you the rent in future. Either they'll scarper or you can collect from them and cut out the Indian gentleman.
"I'll come if you're frightened. You should have a man with you."
Tim, sometimes, is brilliant.
'They are trying to pass laws forcing landlords to check that anyone they rent to is a legal resident'
Document THEXSU0020140518ea5i000cd
