{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"278"}
____
News
Ukip turns its sights on Labour
Marco Giannangeli   
352 words
11 May 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; National
21
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
UKIP will target Labour seats as its European election campaign changes tack, it emerged last night.
The move, agreed at a high-level strategy meeting last week, will see the party launch a head-on assault on Ed Miliband's "cost of living" message.
Insiders revealed the change of tactic was inspired by an interview between the Labour leader and BBC presenter Andrew Marr.
A source said: "It occurred to party leader Nigel Farage that Mr Miliband did not understand the links between the crisis in living standards and our membership of the EU."
The campaign will see two posters unveiled tomorrow in London and Doncaster, a key target area for Ukip, highlighting the extra cost that EU membership brings to energy and food bills.
Mr Farage said last night: "These two new posters bring home the point graphically in a way I believe will resonate within working-class communities.
"Food prices and energy prices are key components of the squeeze on living standards and in both cases the EU is right at the heart of the squeeze." Insiders confirmed Ukip's sights would be particularly trained on urban areas in the North-east, including South Shields and Sunderland, South Yorkshire and the South-west.
Deputy leader Paul Nuttall said: "Labour has lost five million traditional supporters since Tony Blair's New Labour experiment, which has seen the party hijacked by a Liberal Metropolitan middle-class agenda and they have been left disowned. Many actually have Conservative social values. These are the people affected most by mass immigration because these are the people whose communities have been turned upside down.
Our policies resonate with them. They are the most likely to be affected by crime and this is where our zerotolerance approach, and our objection to the Human Rights Act, go down so well. At the moment we have education by wealth and not ability, because all social mobility has stagnated.
"The Common Agricultural Policy means every working-class family is paying £400 a year extra for food."
'EU increases cost of living'
Document THEXSU0020140511ea5b0003h
