{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"3529"}
____
Features
HAPPY 450th, SHAKESPEARE
Simon Callow   
1,604 words
20 April 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; National
41,42,43
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
This week marks the 450th birthday of Britain's most beloved playwright. Simon Callow celebrates his work and explains why its emotional impact makes it still relevant today'Shakespeare was not of an age, but for all time'
'Shakespeare was not of an age, but for all time'
ONE EVENING in the early Eighties, I nabbed a cab on Waterloo Bridge, just by the National Theatre. "You been acting?" said the driver. I had; I was playing Orlando in As You Like It.
"That's Shakespeare, innit?" "Yes."
He carried on: "And what's on at the Royal Court Theatre?" "Hamlet," I said. "They're doing Hamlet at Stratford East an' all, aren't they?" They were.
"And what they doing at the Aldwych?" "Shakespeare," I said.
"And down in Stratford-upon-Avon, that's all Shakespeare too?" It was.
"Tell me," he said, "what would you actors all have done if it wasn't for Shakespeare?"
"Well," I said, and launched into an erudite monologue about how, because of the time in which he was born, the state of the English language and the development of the theatre, someone else would probably have come along and done something very similar.
The cabbie listened politely and then he said: "I reckon Bacon wrote 'em." Fortunately we had arrived by now so he was spared another, more heated monologue about that absurd idea.
But he was right: where would we actors be without Shakespeare? A more important question, though, is where would audiences be without him? He has never been more popular. Partly because thrusting and successful young actors with glittering movie careers want to prove themselves in the great roles, there has been a triumphant procession of Shakespearean smash hits.
Last year alone, the three hottest tickets in London were for Richard II, Henry V and Coriolanus respectively starring Messrs Tennant, Law and Hiddleston. Tickets for the latter, at the Donmar Warehouse, were to be had on eBay at £2,000 each. Happy Birthday, William!
Next Saturday, we will be celebrating the 450th anniversary of his baptism. How glad, and how surprised, he would have been at this astonishing artistic longevity. In his lifetime, he was a victim of theatrical fashion. By the time he stopped writing, only a few years before his death at 52, nobody was doing his plays. Were it not for the determination of two acting colleagues from the company for whom he wrote almost all of his great plays, we might not have known of him at all.
John Heminges and Henry Condell patiently assembled the Collected Works in the First Folio, which finally came seven years after his death, with an affectionate Foreword by his great rival Ben Jonson. In doing so they changed the face, not only of the British theatre and of English literature, but of the world.
This took time; even in Britain many of the plays waited for decades, even centuries, before they were rediscovered. In Europe, and then the wider world, the discovery started in the 18th century, but by the following century Shakespeare was everywhere.
What astonished these foreigners was the freshness and the freedom of what they read and saw because every actor across the wide world wanted to play these great roles the moment they discovered them.
Above all what struck them was the quality, the truth, of the plays; the sense in them, minute-by-minute, of lived life. At all the great moments of life Shakespeare is there, getting it right, unerringly.
Ever been jealous? Ever wanted to destroy a friend? Have you lost a father, a child, a fortune? Ever fallen in love or gone mad? It's all here. Here in the plays is a man or woman or child who lived 400 years ago and guess what? They feel exactly what you feel. And you know exactly what they felt.
For actors, this is sometimes quite hard to handle: the emotion is so powerful, so direct, so accurate, that it threatens to engulf you. "Pray do not mock me," says King Lear, as he begins his final decline: I am a very foolish fond old man, Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less, And, to deal plainly, I fear I am not in my perfect mind. Methinks I should know you, and know this man, Yet I am doubtful for I am mainly ignorant What place this is, and all the skill I have Remembers not these garments, nor I know not Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me.
"Nor I know not/Where I did lodge last night." Anyone who has been anywhere near Alzheimer's has heard these terrible thoughts, though not in quite those words.
And that's the nub. The astounding privilege that we Anglophones have is that he is speaking our language. It has changed in some ways, the vocabulary particularly, but in essence, Shakespeare speaks our language.
Or do we speak his? He invented so much of it. He supremely embodies the Elizabethan love of, discovery of and indeed downright invention of language; its playfulness, its passion. His pages are filled with flights of fancy, with electrifying imagery, with epigrammatic truths.
It all comes of character; it all perfectly expresses the thoughts of the players as they take to the stage of life.
In the theatre we sometimes try too hard to create energy, sound, fury, overlaying the plays with the phoney noise and bustle of our stage, defying Hamlet's instruction to the actors who are about to perform his play: "In the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness… o'erstep not the modesty of nature."
The audience needs and wants above all to get what is being said, because once you hear these words, really hear them, you will melt into the fully human creature that life sometimes stops you from being.
above all to get what is being said, because once you hear these words, really hear them, you will melt into the fully human creature that life sometimes stops you from being.
No one in the whole history of literature has given a better account of what it is, for better or for worse, to be human.
No one in the whole history of literature has given a better account of what it is, for better or for worse, to be human.
In one of the last contributions he made to the stage, working as part of a team, he wrote a speech for the controversial Play Of Thomas More. It is the only piece of writing of his which we have in his own hand and such is its startling directness, it feels as if the ink is barely dry on the page.
In one of the last contributions he made to the stage, working as part of a team, he wrote a speech for the controversial Play Of Thomas More. It is the only piece of writing of his which we have in his own hand and such is its startling directness, it feels as if the ink is barely dry on the page.
As he wrote, across London the mob was furiously chanting anti-immigrant slogans, demanding that the jobstealing foreigners be sent back where they came from. Thomas More defends the immigrants: As he wrote, across London the mob was furiously chanting anti-immigrant slogans, demanding that the jobstealing foreigners be sent back where they came from. Thomas More defends the immigrants: Grant them removed, and grant that this your noise Hath chid down all the majesty of England.
Grant them removed, and grant that this your noise Hath chid down all the majesty of England.
Imagine that you see the wretched strangers, Their babies at their backs with their poor luggage Plodding to the ports and coasts for transportation, And that you sit as kings in your desires, Authority quite silenced by your brawl, And you in ruff of your opinions clothed.
Imagine that you see the wretched strangers, Their babies at their backs with their poor luggage Plodding to the ports and coasts for transportation, And that you sit as kings in your desires, Authority quite silenced by your brawl, And you in ruff of your opinions clothed.
What had you got? I'll tell you: you had taught How insolence and strong hand should prevail, How order should be quelled, and by this pattern Not one of you should live an agèd man, For other ruffians, as their fancies wrought With selfsame hand, self reasons and self right, Would shark on you, and men like ravenous fishes Would feed on one another.
THE SPEECH was never spoken, the play never heard: the censor banned it. The theatre, as it always does, was moving on. Shakespeare retired and moved back to Stratford, where he died, rich and comfortable, the theatre perhaps far from his mind.
But what he wrote is inextinguishable; actors will never cease to want to perform his plays, audiences will never tire of his truth. He is, as his chief rival Ben Jonson said of him, not of an age but for all time. Happy Birthday, indeed.
Simon Callow's one-man show Being Shakespeare is available on the Illuminations TV label. The Royal Shakespeare Company celebrates the playwright's work; more details at rsc.org.uk
'Actors will never cease to want to perform his plays, audiences will never tire of his truth' SIMON CALLOW
Document THEXSU0020140420ea4k0005v
