{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"2548"}
____
News
Super sleuth Jerome
1,568 words
16 March 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; National
42,43
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
ON A COLD December evening in 1886, Arthur Foster left the Queen's Theatre in Manchester with a lady on his arm. Stepping carefully past the hawkers and street sellers, the handsome couple hailed a cab.
As they settled inside the carriage, a shadowy figure slipped in behind them and the yellow light of a gas lamp revealed the stranger's identity. Arthur Foster, also known as the Birmingham Forger, was wanted by police for serious fraud amounting to £5,200 (nearly £500,000 in today's money) and the intruder in his cab was Detective Chief Inspector Jerome Caminada, who once again had caught his man.
By the time Sherlock Holmes made his début in 1887, in A Study In Scarlet, Detective Caminada was already at the top of his game. He had been policing the notorious underworld of Victorian Manchester for two decades and he knew everything there was to know about criminals and their nefarious ways.
A master of disguise and an expert in deduction, just like Sherlock, he could spot a thief by the way he walked and sniff out a swindle with unerring success. He would even pursue his own Professor Moriarty, the notorious career criminal Robert Horridge, for 20 years before finally capturing him in a deadly confrontation in Liverpool docks.
Horridge was one of the most desperate criminals Caminada encountered, an unscrupulous felon hardened by time behind bars. The rivals met for the first time in 1870 when PC Caminada traced a stolen watch to a watchmaker's where the thief had left it for repair.
When Horridge turned up to retrieve the watch, Caminada was waiting for him. Horridge received seven years' penal servitude due to previous convictions and, as he was sent down, he swore that he would kill the man who had put him in prison. After Horridge's release, the paths of the two men crossed many times as Horridge continued to terrorise the streets of Manchester.
An inveterate burglar, he raided shops and warehouses and, with the police on his tail, he often committed daring escapes to evade capture. These included breaking through the ceiling of a house to flee through the lofts of adjoining properties and diving into the River Irk after "knocking down" a policeman.
It was not long before he served another sentence, this time in Pentonville Prison, from which he tried to escape and was shot by warders in his attempt. After his second stretch, he was still more determined to get even with Detective Caminada.
On July 30 1887, Bob Horridge broke into a shoe shop and was disturbed by a passing constable. When the police officer entered the premises to investigate, Horridge shot him, uttering the bloodcurdling words: "I will not be taken alive." The bullet grazed the constable's neck but, when a colleague came to his assistance, he received a shot in the chest. Although he survived the incident, he never fully recovered. Now wanted for the attempted murder of two police officers, Horridge fled and the chief constable turned to the only man who could run him to ground.
Detective Caminada's sources told him Horridge had absconded to Liverpool so, disguised as a labourer, he began his search at the docks, where the detective recognised his enemy by his gait.
Caminada grabbed Horridge by his arms to stop him reaching his loaded gun. Drawing his revolver, Caminada jammed the muzzle in Horridge's mouth and said: "If there's any nonsense with you, you'll get the contents of this." After striking his prisoner on the head with the butt of his revolver, Caminada arrested him for the final time. Horridge was sentenced to life imprisonment.
the butt of his revolver, Caminada arrested him for the final time. Horridge was sentenced to life imprisonment.
Jerome Caminada was not from the landed gentry or university-educated, as Holmes was, but his ability to solve complicated cases and the methods he employed bore an uncanny similarity to those of the famous "sleuth-hound".
Jerome Caminada was not from the landed gentry or university-educated, as Holmes was, but his ability to solve complicated cases and the methods he employed bore an uncanny similarity to those of the famous "sleuth-hound".
Born in the slums of Manchester in 1844, Caminada was the son of immigrant parents. When Jerome was three his father died, forcing the family to move into one of the worst quarters of the city.
Born in the slums of Manchester in 1844, Caminada was the son of immigrant parents. When Jerome was three his father died, forcing the family to move into one of the worst quarters of the city.
In the closed courts and labyrinthine alleys of this crime-ridden rookery, Caminada gained an intimate knowledge of the thieves and crooks who lived there. This was to serve him well, becoming one of his most effective weapons when he joined the Manchester City Police Force in 1868, aged 23.
In the closed courts and labyrinthine alleys of this crime-ridden rookery, Caminada gained an intimate knowledge of the thieves and crooks who lived there. This was to serve him well, becoming one of his most effective weapons when he joined the Manchester City Police Force in 1868, aged 23.
Dubbed "a terror to evil doers" by the press, Detective Caminada tackled all manner of criminals, from thieves and pickpockets to con artists and killers, and exposed some of the most complex frauds the city had seen, including ruthless quack doctors and bogus heir hunters. Like Sherlock Holmes he regularly donned disguises and, on one occasion at the Grand National, his labourer disguise was so convincing that his own chief constable failed to recognise him and almost arrested him on suspicion of stealing a watch.
Another time, when he was undercover tracking Fenian suspects, he lifted the imprint of an address from a blotting pad that led him to Paris.
DETECTIVE Caminada had a network of informants whom he would meet in the back pew of the Hidden Gem, a church in the centre of Manchester, and one Friday evening he received warning of an event "of an immoral character".
The detective placed his officers around Hulme's Temperance Hall while he climbed to an adjoining roof to watch the proceedings from behind a chimney. Hansom cabs arrived, all carrying men although some were dressed as women.
Caminada realised that this was no ordinary ball and at 1am he knocked at the door of the hall and called out the password "Sister!" in a high-pitched feminine voice. A man dressed as a Sister of Mercy opened the door and the police rushed in. After a considerable struggle, the men and their "ladies" were arrested. In 1889 he solved the Manchester Cab Mystery, a baffling case which tested Detective Caminada to his limits. Indeed the case bore all the hallmarks of a tale written by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
It began with well-known businessman John Fletcher and a young man hailing a cab at Manchester Cathedral. A few hours later Fletcher was dead and his companion had vanished.
When the city analyst detected chloral hydrate in Fletcher's stomach, Caminada was convinced that he had been poisoned deliberately because he knew chloral hydrate was often used in illegal prizefights to drug one of the boxers. By linking the murder with the theft of chloral hydrate from a Liverpool pharmacy, his instincts led him to 18-year-old Charlie Parton, son of a pub landlord known for using the substance on his opponents in the boxing ring.
Within three weeks Caminada had proved the case against Parton by finding a key witness who had seen Parton pouring liquid from a vial into Fletcher's beer on the night he died. Charlie Parton was convicted of murder and Detective Caminada's success made national news.
The final decade of his dazzling career involved a beautiful, expert forger; a real Irene Adler (one of the most notable female characters in the Sherlock series) and an invitation to work undercover for the CID, tracking Irish nationalists through Europe and America. In Manchester he faced the notorious gangs of "scuttlers" (street fighters) and anarchists who battled the authorities.
After his retirement in 1899, the actual and fictional worlds of Detective Caminada and Sherlock Holmes finally merged totally when Caminada became a "private inquiry agent".
Caminada was constantly compared to Sherlock Holmes and could easily have inspired Conan Doyle's works.
His obituary in the Manchester Guardian made the final comparison: "In real life the successful detective is not a man endowed with extraordinary powers of impersonation and disguise, an expert knowledge of chemistry and a brain which has to be kept cool with wet towels when it is at work, but rather one who has acquired by slow degrees and after many years of obscure routine, a personal acquaintance, with habitual criminals."
Real Sherlock Holmes by Angela Buckley, published by Pen & Sword books £16.99 (RRP £19.99) with free P&P please call 0871 988 8451 or visit expressbooks.co.uk. You can also send a cheque or PO (payable to The Express) to: The Express Orders Dept, 1 Broadland Business Park, Norwich NR7 0WF
'A master of disguise, just like Holmes, Detective Caminada could spot a thief by the way he walked'
Document THEXSU0020140316ea3g0005h
