{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"592"}
____
Features
Licence to chill
Simon Button   
629 words
6 April 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; National
33
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
Born into showbiz royalty and a star turn in Mad Men, Jared Harris has nothing left to prove. But he's still determined to scare us, as Simon Button reports
He may have knocked back his last martini in Mad Men, but fans of Jared Harris - aka suicidal ad executive lane pryce - needn't worry. The london-born, US-educated, Irishdescended actor has two new movies in the bank.
Both productions are spine-tingling affairs, so what frightens this 52-yearold son of hell-raising screen legend richard Harris? "Unemployment!" he roars. "The fear that you'll never work again never goes away."
In The Quiet Ones, a retro sci-fi chiller, Harris plays a 70s academic who recruits his students into a paranormal investigation. The actor hopes that audiences will be "jolted, disturbed and scared" by it. Then fans can look forward to a film called Poltergeist - so do we spot a theme here? "I haven't encountered the supernatural myself," he says, "but I know people who have and I'm fascinated by their experiences. I don't think they prove the existence of an afterlife, but I was raised a Catholic so somewhere in the back of your mind there's always that little goblin."
The second of three sons born to richard and his Welsh socialite wife Elizabeth rees-Williams, Jared enjoyed a rough-and-tumble childhood. "We were quite a handful," he admits. "For some reason, my parents bought my elder brother three air rifles, so we'd have these gun battles round the house. Several times we narrowly missed shooting our dad. He'd get quite furious at us."
At that time Harris senior was at the height of his fame, both as a movie star and a boozer. "But we experienced him simply as Dad," says Jared. "He wasn't out painting the town red when he was with us. He was a father who was conscientious about the time he spent with his kids. That's not to say he made his reputation up, but I understand now that he was exaggerating a certain part of his personality for effect. Basically he was selling tickets."
Jared himself treads a quieter path. Divorced from actress Emilia Fox, he is now married to 38-year-old TV and radio presenter Allegra riggio. Their idea of a great day off is "simply spending quality time together".
"you're not going to find that emotional stability and support on a film set where all the relationships are fleeting," he says. "you're intensely bonded for a brief period of time, then everyone goes their separate ways."
At first unsure if he wanted to follow in his father's footsteps ("I know it sounds odd," he grins, "but I'm not someone who likes to be the centre of attention"), Jared found himself drawn to college productions and drama studies at university in the US.
returning to the UK after graduation, he cut his teeth with the royal Shakespeare Company and has since enjoyed a very varied career with more than 60 credits on the big screen alone. often excelling in supporting parts, he enjoys "the idea of people not recognising me from one role to the next".
That said, he has learned not to present himself at US customs with the full beard he wore as arch villain Moriarty in 2011's Sherlock Holmes: A Game of Shadows.
"I can see those immigration guys looking at me and thinking, 'There's something about you and it's not good.' But I tell them I'm just an actor then they go 'oh yeah' and they relax."
The Quiet ones opens in cinemas on Thursday. poltergeist is out next year.
Document THEXSU0020140406ea460008e
