{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"277"}
____
Clegg's blunt solution
NICK FERRARI   
791 words
11 May 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; National
25
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
IT IS very easy to have a go at Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg. Indeed, last week the Labour party, bizarrely, decided to devote its entire party political broadcast to belittling him, seeking to portray him as a bullied, putupon wimp who is routinely ignored by Coalition Cabinet colleagues.
Never mind that top of most sane people's worry list is the economy, jobs, immigration, national security or the state of the health service, Labour lavished a considerable sum to send up Nick Clegg in a film that was humourless, pointless and left most people feeling they could not care less.
As someone in the media who probably knows Mr Clegg as well as anyone (his "Call Clegg" segment has been on my radio show virtually every week for the past 18 months) I can assure you he is too robust and steadfast for this to have fazed him for even a heartbeat.
However, what desperately does require more scrutiny is his avowed intent to block Conservative plans for a crackdown on knife crime. This was promised in David Cameron's manifesto in 2010 but was another victim of the fact that the Tories managed to blast the ball over the bar in front of the empty goal of that general election and needed a coalition with the Lib Dems to get into power.
In truth, the authorities help Scotland start digging clues in McCann commentators and political chatterati have been deeply dismayed by how little the Coalition has fought and how well, in most areas, it has performed. Hence they seize on any bit of discord and treat it as if it were fisticuffs across the Cabinet table.
This bold stance by Clegg could be the one, however, that causes a good old-fashioned rumpus and possibly demonstrates that despite taking all the calls we have done together down the months, he might not always have been listening. Partly spurred on by the stabbing to death of a teacher in her classroom, the Conservatives want to introduce automatic jail terms for repeat knife offenders, a "two strikes and you're in" kind of policy but Clegg is adamantly against it.
He dismisses it as an attempt to introduce "headline-grabbing solutions" in the wake of the killing of Ann Maguire. He goes on to claim it could "turn the young offenders of today into the hardened criminals of tomorrow" and calls it "a backwards step that will undermine the Government's rehabilitation revolution".
This is high stakes stuff for Mr Clegg and if, as is being mooted, the Labour party opts to support the Conservatives, at a time when the Lib Dems' poll ratings are bouncing on the bottom and in one case they are being beaten even by the Green Party, Clegg's party risks being stranded on a political peninsula. Clegg is a shrewd strategist and is that rare politician who usually actually stands by his beliefs, however unpopular they might be. As the calls came in last week, he did not move an inch on his trenchant opposition, even if his rather convoluted argument "it could mean an electrician could be sent to prison for going to work with a penknife" seemed as big a stretch as you are ever likely to witness outside of a gymnast's workout. The likelihood of the Crown Prosecution Service seeking such a conviction could best be described as remote.
EXPERTS in the field support the move. Lord Chief Justice Lord Thomas said it was time for "a proper and objective look at youth sentencing... in controlling the use of knives." Metropolitan Police Commissioner Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe agreed and pointed out it has worked extremely well in controlling the use of guns as everyone knows they will get a minimum of five years inside.
Sir Bernard added that there is every reason it would work equally well in combating the problem of knives.
If Clegg's opposition is a principled stance it is to be admired but in no way whatsoever does that detract from the fact that he could very well be incorrect and surely in an area as potentially dangerous and sometimes lethal as knife crime, it is worth heeding the advice of the police and the judiciary.
IF YOUR failure to act soon enough could be seen in any way whatsoever to have contributed to the bungled investigation into the disappearance of a little girl on holiday, wouldn't you want to put things right at the first opportunity? So, can anyone explain the ludicrous intransigence of the Portuguese authorities and their failure to help Scotland Yard detectives start digging at once for clues in the Madeleine McCann case? was and
Document THEXSU0020140511ea5b0003i
