{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"593"}
____
News
We must stop this influx
NICK FERRARI   
731 words
6 April 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; National
37
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
IT IS DIFFICULT to imagine what more needs to be done. Every week four men die under the wheels of giant trucks in Calais as they try to clamber in, on or cling underneath them to get into this country. If that is not enough to wake up our politicians about the problems of unchecked immigration into Britain, what is? How about the report from the widely respected pressure group Migration Watch which highlighted that over the next four years, enough people from Eastern Europe will enter this country to fill a city larger than Manchester? Have you any idea where more than half a million people can fit? Nope, me neither, but those in charge either do not or will not care.
Unchecked immigration and its impact on virtually every corner of the land dominated the two Euro debates between the political leaders brave enough to stand in front of the public and battle it out. Ukip's Nigel Farage was always on a sure footing when he went on the attack over that and pro-European Nick Clegg had to look on as the audience cheered Farage on. Migration Watch chairman Sir Andrew Green spelt it out when he said: "It was crazy to have opened up our labour market and our benefit system to 100,000,000 people from countries with a standard of living less than a quarter of our own." The previous STANCE: Labour government must never be allowed to forget how it betrayed this nation over that and the many decent families who came and found the streets were not paved with gold.
Mealy-mouthed assurances that everything is under control are simply not good enough. Immigration Minister James Brokenshire responded to last week's Migration Watch findings by bragging how this government had managed to get non-EU migration down to its lowest level in years, totally missing the point that the biggest challenge comes from the hundreds of millions of Europeans across the Continent who could (and any sane person realises they are obviously not all going to) waltz towards Britain while we roll out the welcome mat. That insipid cobblers seems hard to comprehend until you remind yourself of David Cameron's promise that he would get figures for net migration down to the tens of thousands. That now must be relegated to the ranks of another pie-crust promise; easy to make, easy to break.
No rational person would argue that immigration has not been good for this country. It has. The percentage of immigrants who come here and are in work is nearly 10 per cent higher than British nationals in employment. They create jobs, they pay taxes, they contribute massively and it is totally fair to say the economic recovery has in part been borne on their backs. However, be in no doubt, Britain's barmy benefits system is a magnet for many. Instead of blitzing you with statistics about age groups, percentages and contribution to GDP, just focus on this figure: British taxpayers pay more than £20million each year to Polish parents living here but whose children are in Poland. That's right; through our taxes, you and I are paying enough money to recruit an army of nurses or a platoon of police to children from Gdansk while pleading poverty concerning the needs of those in Grimsby.
Nigel Farage That shows precisely why the idea of a five-year ban on benefits for migrants makes so much sense. Like any bank that might still be standing on a high street near you, once you pay in you can then take out. Try asking for cash from them when you have done nothing for them.
In fairness the Prime Minister does seem to have woken up to some of this but he is hobbled by Euro fanatic Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg. A day of reckoning of sorts could be about to dawn however.
The Euro elections take place next week and the polls currently have Ukip in an extremely strong position. A triumph for it would rewrite the political landscape in time for next year's General Election but sadly it would move the country away from the workable position of a radical renegotiation of our relationship with Europe, to the confrontational "we want out!" stance. Watch this space!
Document THEXSU0020140406ea460005a
