{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"2898"}
____
Features; Opinion, Column
Cameron and Miliband are debate losers
Nick Ferrari   
739 words
30 March 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; National
39
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
TWO POLITICIANS debated the issue of Britain's future relationship with Europe last week and it brought the house down. It was beamed across the globe, 150 journalists from all over the world were at the event, Sky News devoted three hours of live TV including filming the set being constructed, it dominated the news agenda and was trending worldwide all night.
The politicians were Lib Dem leader and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg and Ukip leader Nigel Farage and I am hugely proud I helped to engineer the showdown through my LBC radio show. That was where Clegg threw down the challenge for a live debate that I would host and Farage swiftly rose to it.
All credit to both of them and they and their teams can reflect on the crystal-clear wisdom of their brave decisions. Like 'em or loathe 'em, there was absolutely no getting away from Clegg or Farage last week and they undoubtedly got their messages across. With coverage across all the terrestrial stations and rolling news channels, the official estimate for the viewing figures is 15 million; roughly a quarter of the nation's population. So where, you might wonder, were the nation's Prime Minister and leader of Her Majesty's opposition? They both bang on ceaselessly about "listening to the people" and boldly claim they empathise with our struggles and know what is best for virtually every aspect of our lives, surely they were banging on the door begging to be allowed on the stage? Forget it. They were nowhere to be seen. So as the other two were slugging it out (and believe me, I was there, there is no love lost between those two) the others did not have the cojones, to use a word that can come in handy over in Europe, to stride up to the plate. What a pair of losers. Because you always back the one in the fight who runs away, don't you? When you remember that the whole question of Europe rarely features in the top five of people's concerns (think the economy, immigration, the NHS, education, jobs etc.) the success of the debate is stunning until you realise the sea change that has taken, and is still taking place, in how the nation reacts to events, issues, politics and politicians.
It is an undeniable fact that voter turn-out in elections is declining and much of that can be put down to our totally understandable disenchantment with politicians and their ability to break their promises almost as often as they change their socks. There is also the unfortunate truth that "they" are frightened of "us". How many times have you listened to a politician in an interview go out of his or her way to avoid saying something that might seem to show they actually have a view on anything? The notable exception is Boris Johnson and perhaps that is much of the key behind his success.
All of which makes Clegg and Farage's decision to duel even more laudable and makes David Cameron and Ed Miliband's reluctance even more laughable. With social media, 24-hour news and radio phone-ins the public are now in more control and more engaged than ever before. This idea of voter apathy is partly a myth and I should know. I can tell you now that when I discuss matters such as unemployment, the economy or Human Rights abuses, the calls, e-mails, texts and tweets pour in by the thousand. The public is engaged, the politicians' job is to work out how to be a part of it.
It won't be easy but in his Call Clegg phone-in with me over the past 15 months the calls have never stopped and come what may he keeps smiling and always bounces back. Nigel Farage regularly sells out theatres up and down the country when he goes on his "Audience With..." show, which is effectively an old-style public meeting with more schtick and laughs.
Commentators shake their heads and say there was nothing for Cameron or Miliband to gain from taking to the stage with me and the feuding leaders last week but that misses the point.
They no longer set the agenda, the people are starting to call the tune. And they are loving every note.
Document THEXSU0020140330ea3u0004f
