{"newspaper":"Sunday Express","id:"3604"}
____
Features
Hunting stag-horn sadist
David Stephenson   
951 words
23 February 2014
Sunday Express
THEXSU
1; National
56,57
English
(c) Copyright Express Newspapers 2014   
TELEVISION
TELEVISION is the new Hollywood. It has been for some time. HBO, the American "home box office" subscription channel, began the revolution with large scale TV dramas, mostly about grumpy men of a certain age.
It has now perfected it and rarely offers anything to the viewer which is not comparable with films in the cinema. True Detective (Sky Atlantic, last night) was another fine example of the genre.
It has borrowed two reputable and classy Hollywood character actors, Woody Harrelson (Russ) and Matthew McConaughey (Marty) for a bizarre buddy/cop story that is so far from the cliché that I fully expect them to be tearing each other apart in a fist fight by the end of episode two.
Russ is your typical family-man detective, while Marty is an introverted, silent type who has trouble sleeping. I imagine many viewers will share his insomnia, if not nightmares, after watching this drama. It deals with a strange killer in deepest Louisiana with a taste for satanic ritual (aren't they all?). The victim, a woman, was found wearing deer antlers and it was not the result of a fancy dress party.
Marty is known as "the taxman" for the large notebook he carries about with him recording odd notes and drawing sketches. In Louisiana that constitutes "weird". He is, however, worryingly OCD. He is also an atheist and something of an amateur philosopher. Russ tells him: "Don't talk about this in these parts."
What is the twist? Both are telling the story, separately, but in flashback to 1995. Marty looks to have escaped from rehab while Russ appears to still be employed, or at the very least putting on a good appearance.
The Deep South is no stranger to "weirdo", which is why this story has such a compelling feel.
Something appears to have gone wrong between the two of them but what? My suspicion is that one night Marty bored Russ to death with his arresting tales of existentialism, at the end of which he bashed him over the head with a life-size cardboard, cut-out of Jean-Paul Sartre.
That hoot of a drama Blandings (BBC1, Sunday) has returned for a new series with a spiffingly good performance from that old hand Harry Enfield. Old? If you remember what year he introduced us to Loadsamoney, you can win a free impersonation of dear Kevin the Teenager. Here he played Lord Dunstable, who was so round the twist he must have invented the phrase.
He was not best pleased about anything, especially some whistling he could hear. He shouted, with manic authority: "Stop that! You disgusting Scots peasant!" (More political bias from the BBC?).
Dunstable was targeting anyone in range: "You bunch of bloater eaters!" We haven't heard that for a while.
Blandings has a fabulous cast, including Timothy Spall, Jennifer Saunders and now Tim Vine, although I felt he was a little underdone in the role of the butler. Let's hope he has more to do in future episodes.
It was Dunstable, however, who eclipsed all before him with this idle threat: "I will drag your pancreas out through your hat!" Beat that, Holby City.
CHANNEL 5's new topical debate series continues to surprise and make Question Time look like a Women's Institute meeting. The latest incarnation was The Big British Immigration Row (Channel 5, Monday).
We will never see the like of it again so I do hope someone took a picture of the panel at one point, which included former prisoner Vicky Pryce, with reality TV show favourites, loudmouth Katie Hopkins and Celebrity Big Brother contestant, Luisa Zissman. Who spoke the most sense, or least nonsense? Zissman, surprisingly. With such extreme views held on both sides of the debate, it was inevitable that a shouting match would ensue but, at the very least, there is merit in these sensitive issues being put to discussion.
Two things did surprise me though. First, former Sun editor Kelvin McKenzie supported immigration, calling for us to "Hoover them up" across Europe. The second shock was that the NHS would barely exist if not for foreigners; 30 per cent of doctors have come from abroad, while the figure for nurses is even higher, at 40 per cent. If Britain cannot fill these positions, who will? If the BBC does not make another programme about the First World War, we will be more than satisfied with Jeremy Paxman's Britain's Great War (Monday, BBC1).
The series concluded rather too soon for me last week with a programme which pointed out the upsides of the war. Upsides? Paxman told us that the conflict produced a social revolution in Britain; the poor won better wages and conditions.
He also said that the "loss of a generation" was a "myth" as nine out of 10 troops returned. While this may be true, the 10 per cent who died represented some 995,939, with a further 1,600,000 wounded. I suspect we would not have chosen to have a war in order to bring about some form of social revolution.
The surprise of the week was Doll & Em (Sky Living HD, Tuesday). Famous daughters Emily Mortimer (father John) and Dolly Wells (father John) have fashioned an Episodes-style comedy which is subtle, funny and well observed.
The set-up is that "celebrity" Emily hires her friend Doll as her assistant and dogsbody. The comedy comes from the inevitable strains this puts on their relationship.
You won't laugh out loud particularly but you will snort a bit and think: "Remind me never to be employed by a celebrity dear."
Document THEXSU0020140223ea2n00070
