{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"1366"}
____
  
Features
YOU'RE WRONG, MR CABLE. RISING MIGRATION FROM EUROPE IS NOT 'GOOD NEWS'...AND WE MUST STOP IT
BY THERESA MAY    
1,210 words
2 March 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
27
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
The latest independent migration statistics, published last week, showed a clear but diverging picture. First of all - and most importantly - they showed that in the areas where we can exert control over the immigration system, our reforms are working. Net migration from outside the European Union is down by more than a third since the last Election. Our reforms have cut non-EU migration to its lowest level since 1998.
Immigration has undoubtedly brought many benefits to Britain. Controlled immigration can fill skills shortages and make our economy more competitive, while individual immigrants have made huge contributions to our national way of life.
But uncontrolled immigration - such as we saw under the last Labour Government - makes it difficult to maintain social cohesion, puts pressure on public services and can drive down wages for people on low incomes. That's why we are building a system to work in our national interest and cracking down on the abuses to which Labour turned a blind eye.
For example, the student visa regime we inherited was open to widespread abuse: bogus colleges and unskilled migrants posing as students thrived in it. We have cracked down by closing down these colleges, requiring students to prove that they have the financial means to fend for themselves, and giving border officers the power to turn away people claiming they are coming to the UK to study but who cannot speak English.
Since 2010, the number of student visas issued has decreased by almost a third, while visa applications from university students has risen steadily. So we continue to welcome the brightest and the best to Britain.
Our reforms are stamping out abuse in other areas too. We have introduced new powers and guidance to tackle sham marriages and raised the level of English required of family migrants. As a result, the number of family visas granted has fallen by 37 per cent since 2010.
We welcome those who wish to make a life in the UK with their family by working hard and contributing to society. But family life must not be established here at taxpayers' expense, and family migrants must be able to integrate and speak our language so they can play a full part in British life. As a result, there are now 82,000 fewer people arriving annually from outside the EU than there were under Labour.
This means that hard-working British people are getting a fairer crack of the whip. Under Labour in the years before the recession, more than 90 per cent of the increase in employment was accounted for by foreign nationals. But under this Government - thanks in part to our measures to control immigration and reform welfare - more than three-quarters of the increase in employment has been accounted for by Britons.
BUT the picture from last week's statistics regarding European migration was different. While immigration from outside the EU fell, net migration from Europe has doubled in just 12 months. These numbers are coming from right across EU. Indeed, the biggest rises came from older member states such as Italy (up by two-thirds), Portugal (up by almost 50 per cent), and Spain (up by a third).
As a result, last week's statistics showed an increase in net migration - although it remains significantly lower than when we took office, with 70,000 fewer migrants coming to the UK.
My Liberal Democrat Cabinet colleague Vince Cable said this rise was 'good news'. I do not agree. We still have work to do to restore control to our immigration system and fix problems left by Labour. That's why it remains our objective to bring the level of net migration down to the tens of thousands per year - but this rise in EU migration makes our task more difficult.
At the moment, we are bound by the treaties that successive governments have signed. These mean we cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants - but there are several things we can do, and are doing.
EU nationals who come to the UK must be working, studying, or self-sufficient, just like the British people who choose to leave the UK and settle in other EU countries.
We have introduced measures to limit new jobseekers' access to benefits and new powers to tackle fraud and abuse. We are also ensuring EU nationals removed for not exercising their Treaty rights cannot return to the UK without a valid reason.
Across government, we are working to ensure our controls on accessing benefits and services - including the NHS and social housing - are among the tightest in Europe to protect the UK from abuse. We have introduced a three-month delay before a European jobseeker can claim benefits, and a tougher six-month test to assess whether claimants have a genuine chance of finding work.
The Government has also issued new statutory guidance to make sure local authorities set a residency requirement before a person qualifies for social housing. We are working too with the police, local authorities and other agencies to identify and seek to remove Europeans who are sleeping rough and not exercising their Treaty right to be in this country.
But in all honesty, whatever the Government does to reduce the pull factors that draw people to Britain, as long as there is such an enormous disparity between EU member states in terms of income per head, there will be an overwhelming incentive for people to move from poorer nations to richer states.
That not only puts pressure on communities in countries such as Britain, it robs poorer EU member states of their most talented people. So in future we must put in place new arrangements to slow full access to each other's labour markets until we can be sure it will not lead to mass migration. This could, for example, be achieved by requiring new member states to reach a certain level of income or economic output per head before full free movement is allowed.
We must also seize the opportunity presented to us by the Prime Minister's plan to reform the EU and address the problems caused by free movement - problems other EU members are starting to recognise.
There are obvious hurdles which stand in our way - we are in a coalition, and do not have a majority in Parliament to do all this yet. But I am determined we should do everything we can in the meantime.
The Immigration Bill, currently before Parliament, will make it more difficult for people to live in the UK unlawfully, ensure immigrants make a fair contribution to our key public services, and make it easier to remove people who have no right to be in this country.
Then, when it comes to the General Election next May, the British people will have a choice - between Labour, who got us into this mess and have opposed all of our reforms; the Lib Dems, who think a rise in net migration is 'good news'; or the Conservatives, who have cut net migration and will continue to build a system that works in our national interest.
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140302ea320000t
