{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2455"}
____
  
FINANCE
Budget 2014: Ten policies George Osborne should announce; The Chancellor needs to show that he is on taxpayers’ side. Nobody should have to pay more than 50pc of their income in tax in any one year
By Allister Heath   
1,242 words
4 March 2014
16:38
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Let’s face it: George Osborne is unlikely to unveil the sort of dramatic tax cuts and public sector reforms that this country so desperately needs at his Budget in two weeks’ time.
The deficit remains high and the realities of coalition government would constrain his options even were he in the mood for radicalism. But much could still be achieved within the confines of the politically palatable. So here are 10, eminently realistic ideas for the Chancellor to mull over. Let us hope that he adopts at least a few.
First of all, Osborne needs to show that he is on taxpayers’ side by adopting a new fiscal red line of great symbolic and philosophical importance. Nobody should have to pay more than 50pc of their income in tax in any one year. This should be enshrined in a new pledge – the maximum tax promise – and should include income tax, all national insurance (NI), council tax and stamp duty; over time, it could be extended to more taxes.
Few people end up paying more than half of their income to the taxman, apart from when they shell out on stamp duty or in some other cases. But even that ought to be unacceptable. The pledge would create a neat dividing line between the Chancellor and the increasingly high-tax Labour party. The idea would need to be refined to make sure it isn’t abused, but it could be hugely powerful.
Next, the Chancellor needs to shut down the increasingly damaging rift between those who want to help 40p taxpayers and those keener to boost workers on low incomes. Many Tory MPs have become irritated at the Chancellor’s commitment to focus all of his tax cuts on increasing the personal allowance, a policy driven by the Liberal Democrats.
Some don’t like the idea because they believe that few voters actually notice; others are upset that the Chancellor isn’t prioritising the middle classes; some worry about the principle of taking people out of income tax altogether; all are angry at the Chancellor’s decision to reduce the rate at which the 40p tax rate starts to make sure the better off don’t benefit from the higher personal allowance.
Some of these arguments are valid; others are not. It is madness that the number of people paying the 40p tax rate has surged so much. Only 1.56m people were eligible in 1989-90 – 6pc of income taxpayers; this year, 4.71m (or 15.8pc) of taxpayers will be hit. Some believe 5.5m will be affected in three years’ time.
The fastest increase took place under George Osborne: there were 3.19m 40p taxpayers in 2009-10, Labour’s last year in power, 10.4pc of the total; astonishingly, an extra one-in-20 taxpayers has since been dragged into the top rate band. No wonder they are angry.
The higher rate threshold was cut to a ridiculously low £41,450 in 2013-14. This has been one of Osborne’s gravest errors, and it has sent a devastating signal to the aspirational middle classes. Politicians who help those who don’t vote for them and punish their supporters don’t stay in office very long. But it is also essential to help those on low incomes, many of whom don’t earn enough to live on: minimum wage workers shouldn’t have to pay a huge chunk of tax, merely to get the money back in benefits.
Their incentives need improving, too. Hiking the personal allowance has been advocated at least since the 1980s by free-marketeers as a quid pro quo for cutting the higher rate and eventually adopting a flat tax; and it was backed in a paper by Lord Saatchi and Peter Warburton, published by the Thatcherite Centre for Policy Studies in 2001. It is thus absurd to portray the idea as somehow left-wing; and the alternative to cutting tax for the lower paid is either even more benefits or a massive, job-destroying hike in the minimum wage.
We shouldn’t have to choose between a higher personal allowance and increasing the 40p tax threshold. The Chancellor should advocate both, starting this month; the proceeds of tax cuts need to be shared equally between the two policies from now on.
Next, housebuilding. The number of housing completions fell in England to just 109,370 last year, though new starts rose by 23pc to 122,590. This isn’t enough to house a growing population fuelled by a high birth rate, increasing life expectancy and rising net immigration.
The shortage of supply is pushing up house prices, when compared with incomes, and means that the young can no longer afford to buy.
Osborne must allocate far more land for building, kickstart new towns, further speed up and liberalise the planning process and release public sector property for housing projects.
Capital gains tax is another absurd levy in urgent need of reform. Osborne should index it for inflation – investors are currently paying tax on paper gains, rather than real ones, which means that existing wealth, and not just a share of the increase, is being confiscated by the taxman. This is a scandalous flaw.
Osborne should also extend the tax-free privileges now granted to entrepreneurs to all staff who are given shares or options in a business under existing long-termincentivisation schemes.
The next reform would be costless, but hugely significant: it’s time to merge NI and income tax. As a first step, NI should be renamed the earnings tax, as advocated by Ben Gummer, the Tory MP, and Osborne needs to give us a timetable detailing how the two taxes will become one. Any eligibility requirements for benefits would be passed on to the new levy.
The reforms need to start immediately: the present system is a stealth taxer’s dream and allows the Treasury to grab a massive share of workers’ wages almost unopposed.
Another important and equally cheap reform would be to extend the Treasury’s pioneering dynamic modelling to all fiscal policies and to allow members of the Select Committee to commission their own analyses. In the past, official models failed to account for behavioural responses – people work harder when tax rates are lower, for example, and companies invest more, which in turn can increase tax receipts. Ignoring this has biased fiscal policy in favour of tax hikes and against cuts; the Treasury needs to push its tentative reforms in this area to their logical conclusion.
My next ideas are straightforward. Air passenger duty and fuel duty should be cut; energy and green taxes and alcohol taxes should be frozen, as should business rates. Stamp duty on shares should be abolished, boosting returns to investors and cutting the cost of capital.
Last but not least, Osborne should bring forward by a year the cut to corporation tax to 20pc to April 2014. This would send business a great signal and make it trickier for Ed Miliband, who wants to go the other way and start hiking corporation tax again, to get away with it.
Chancellor, the ball is in your court.
Allister Heath is editor of City AM
Document TELUK00020140304ea340059c
