{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3593"}
____
  
News
It's easy to beat waster to a job if he's on couch
LOUISE MENSCH   
554 words
23 February 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
29
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
THERE was a strong reaction to my column on White Dee last week — after which the "depressed" star did two MORE TV interviews.
But Dee won't be too happy to find she's even more out of sync with the average British woman. We're grafting harder than ever, as new figures out this week show a massive surge in women's jobs.
In the year after Maggie Thatcher died, more British women are in work than at any time since records began in 1971 — the year I was born. There are 14million of us bringing home the bacon — and usually frying it up afterwards too.
If we don't want to raise a nation of White Dees, we must tackle youth unemployment. Too many kids are sitting at home on benefits when they could be and should be working.
If you start out with bad habits, you're unlikely to get out of that comfortable welfare trap. There are lots of options — figures show there's part-time work in micro or mini jobs.
Young people need to get that habit good and early — so they can wind up like their hardworking mums — and not Dee's friends on Benefits Street.
When I was a teenager I had to work a Saturday job if I wanted an allowance. I won't lie, I bloody hated it.
Standing in a clothes shop in Wadhurst, Sussex, folding "snazzy" sweatshirts and bored out of my mind. After that it was a bookshop, which I thought would be great, but I was bored there too (no reading on the job).
But it taught me you have to work if you want money. Today, young Brits on Twitter ask me why they should be compelled to work for their benefits if the job's not "fulfilling".
Don't blame the immigrants "Depressed" Dee herself said on TV last week she couldn't work as she'd have to call in sick if she was "feeling down". How many of us don't "feel down" on a Monday morning traipsing in to work? Labour MP Frank Field admitted there's a "servant class" of Romanians and Bulgarians "beating" young Britons to jobs.
But don't blame the immigrants — it's easy to beat a young waster to a job when he doesn't get off his couch. Ten per cent of all new jobs last year went to these hard workers. Too many young Brits just don't want to serve coffee or work for the minimum wage.
Field says we should SLASH benefits to young people after a much shorter time.
I agree with him. These youngsters are fit and able — but not willing. All too often the under-25s start out drinking and loafing on the dole, then become deeply depressed — and after that, unemployable.
It'll soon be spring, when hard-working mother birds kick grown-up chicks out of the nest to force them to fly. Maybe that's not such a bad idea for Britain either.
And as for those young Romanians snapping up lowpaying jobs — at least if they settle here and have children, those new Britons will see two parents with a work ethic.
Document THESUN0020140223ea2n00099
