{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1750"}
____
  
Features
All the fun of the unfair
Anna Picard   
385 words
24 April 2014
The Times
T
1; National
11
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Mussorgsky's political opera preaches with panache in modern dress, writes Anna Picard
Opera
Khovanskygate: A National Enquiry Cannon Hill Park, Birmingham ****
Left incomplete with the death of Mussorgsky in 1881, Khovanshchina is a sprawling, radiant mess of private and public arguments about power and powerlessness, society and statehood. In Graham Vick's moderndress production of Shostakovich's 1960 completion, it is renamed Khovanskygate: A National Enquiry and staged in a big-top tent in Cannon Hill Park. The nation named in Max Hoehn's demotic translation is still Russia, the suffering motherland whose downtrodden children bewail her maltreatment, hoping fervently for a kinder father, but we could be anywhere — even here, Vick suggests.
Outside the Freedom Tent protesters chant against inequality, watched by diffident policemen. ("We don't need opera! We need social housing!") Both groups are drawn from Birmingham Opera Company's 250-strong cast of actors, dancers and singers, a body whose collective impact in the great choral set pieces is as stunning as the slow burn of the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra's Dawn over the Moskva River, under conductor Stuart Stratford. Vick may be preaching to the converted — this is not a Bollinger and black-tie audience — but he is preaching with panache.
Inside the tent, TV cameras are trained on the Khovansky campaign. Rosettes and glossy leaflets are distributed, advertising the anti-European, anti-immigration policies of Andrei Khovansky (Joseph Guyton), the handsome, gun-toting, cokesnorting puppet of his father, Ivan (Eric Greene). As riot police quell the uprisings, the charismatic preacher Dosifei (Keel Watson) wages his own campaign — anti-abortion, antihomosexual — while his daughter Marfa (Claudia Huckle), clothed in an eerie halo of flutes and celesta by Shostakovich, writhes with hopeless love for the weak, venal Andrei.
The moderate voice of Golitsyn (Jeffrey Lloyd Roberts) has been drowned out in this debate and even the machinations of Shaklovity (Robert Winslade Anderson) are rendered useless by the mass suicide of Dosifei's congregation. Crude politics, vivid performances from those above and from Paul Nilon (Scribbler), Stephanie Corley (Emma) and Ben Thapa (Kuzka), magnificent orchestral playing and startling choreography of the rebirth of tortured and assassinated dissidents combine to exhausting, unsettling effect.
Box office: 0121-246 6632, to May 2
Document T000000020140424ea4o000es
