{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3257"}
____
  
News
CROWNED OFF!
JASON JOHNSON   
405 words
15 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Ulster
16
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
Belfast bar calls time on Ukip publicity stunt
PINT-SWILLING Ukip chief Nigel Farage was BARRED from holding a photocall at Belfast's most iconic pub yesterday.
The controversial party leader made his surprise visit to the Crown Bar during a flying trip to Northern Ireland.
It is understood he was hoping to sink a lunchtime Guinness with Ukip MLA David McNarry and local MEP candidate Henry Reilly as the cameras flashed.
But management at the National Trust-owned boozer saw the press pack coming and pulled a party official to one side.
The aide was told that NO photocalls of any flavour were allowed in the famous city centre pub. Moments later Farage, wearing his trademark country gent attire, decamped across the street to the Europa Hotel — where the Brussels critic sipped on a pint of Murphy's.
While Crown Bar management declined to comment on the episode, a Ukip spokesman insisted his boss had not been refused entry.
He explained: "There was problem with taking photographs in The Crown." The PR disaster continued when Farage's entourage left the hotel — and were confronted by a heckler who accused them of "spreading hatred about immigrants".
The man raged: "People don't want fear, they want to move on."
Farage later insisted Ukip was "taking the vote in Northern Ireland seriously" as he canvassed farmers at the Balmoral Show in Lisburn.
He said: "We have approached politics in Northern Ireland. as a nonsectarian party — we absolutely welcome Catholics as members and activists."
The MEP for South East England also vowed to stick to Ukip's hardline stance on immigrant workers just hours after a prominent British Asian quit the party. High profile member Sanya-Jeet Thandi, 21, said its direction was "terrifying".
And in a separate development Ukip firefighters tried to damp down a storm over one of its councillors here.
Cavalier Orangeman David Jones made headlines in 1998, when a Catholic policeman, Constable Frankie O'Reilly, 30, died five weeks after a loyalist blast bomb exploded in Portadown, Co Armagh.
Jones had said: "Unfortunately, when you are standing up for liberties the cost can be very high."
Yesterday Labour's Shadow NI Secretary Ivan Lewis said Jones had been "cavalier and insensitive."
Defending Jones, a Ukip spokesman responded: "We are satisfied that he did not condone the killing of a police officer."
jason.johnson@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUN0020140515ea5f000i8
