{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1004"}
____
  
News
Nigel Farage's taste of things to come
By Benedict Brogan   
561 words
19 May 2014
09:59
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
 From my Morning Briefing: subscribe here 
Ukip is taking a pounding, but will it make a difference? The polls give the party first place on Thursday in the Euros, but anyone reading across the papers would wonder how that can be. The main parties must wish there was a bit more time to go before polling day, as they reckon the tide has further to turn. But the postal votes have gone out, and the expectation is that the race crisis enveloping Ukip has come too late to dent its chances. And as before they may be underestimating the extent of the voter rage that gives Ukip its energy.
The "you know the difference" about Romanians row still reverberates. Mr Farage has taken out a full page advert in the Telegraph as an open letter to "Dear UK Citizen", in which he defends his comments against "a predictable storm of protest and accusations of racism". He says "it is not racist to want to stop organised criminal gangs undermining our way of life – it is common sense". Presumably the ad was submitted before he made his more conciliatory remarks about being tired and getting it wrong. Wrong or common sense? Ukip may have to unpick that one today. Mr Farage says he regrets his words, and will hold a "carnival" for black and ethnic minority voters tomorrow. Why does that sound potentially disastrous? The Sun, which attacked Ukip as racist in a leader on Saturday, has returned to the fray with a belter from Trevor Kavanagh alongside a mock-up of Nigel Farage as a two-faced Jekyll and Hyde figure. "Is Ukip leader voice of nation…or bigoted menace – snake oil salesman offends & seduces". Trevoir voices his doubts about Mr Farage who "runs the party as his personal fiefdom". The tabloid has made a strategic decision to clobber Ukip, which in itself is interesting. The Mail rehearses Alan Sked's charge that Mr Farage once referred to "n*****" voters, while Patrick Wintour in the Guardian looks at the difficulties Ed Miliband is having with Ukip in the north, which he attributes to Labour's internal divisions over immigration. In the Telegraph, Boris issues a rallying cry against Ukip – "say no to no say".
On Saturday I interviewed Eric Pickles who, like other Tories, refused to describe Ukip as racist. When we spoke Mr Farage had not yet appeared on LBC, though I suspect that the Communities Secretary wouldn't have changed his mind, given that he went on to describe Ukip as "xenophobic", "uber nationalist" and its statements on immigration "shameful". The Tories are usually fearful of insulting Ukip voters, and prefer to let others do the pounding for them. The vigour with which the media has been pursuing Ukip, and exposing the sometimes odious views of some of its candidates, is impressive, but it will encourage the party's view that it is the victim of a politico-media establishment conspiracy. Nothing has emerged so far to contradict the expectation that Ukip will come first in the euros. But the past 48 hours have shown what the longer term outlook might be for Ukip as it struggles, with limited resources and an inexperienced machine, to cope with the sustained scrutiny that comes in the big leagues.
Document TELUK00020140519ea5j002mo
