{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"427"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel Farage has a 'weakness' for women his former flatmate says; Godfrey Bloom, the MEP, says that 'crumpet' is the Ukip leader's 'foible'
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
498 words
11 March 2014
09:33
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage has a weakness for women and "enjoys a bottle of wine" Godfrey Bloom his friend and former colleague has said.
Mr Bloom, who had the Ukip party whip withdrawn after he referred to women as “sluts", said that Mr Farage is "partial to crumpet" and that he enjoys a bottle of wine at lunch and dinner but is “not an alcoholic."
The MEP, who remains a member of Ukip, shared a flat with Mr Farage in Brussels for a number of years said the party had become the “Nigel Farge Ukip party" a development he described as “unfortunate."
Mr Bloom told The Times: “There’s a danger whenever you have a very hard working and charismatic leader that it looks like a one-man band."
He added: “We all have our foibles and our weaknesses – mine is real ale – Nigel’s is women. It is not something he has ever denied."
“He loves his bottle of wine at lunch time, and in the evening, but he’s not an alcoholic. It’s no secret he likes a sherbet. There’s nothing wrong with that - it’s part of his charm."
It has been alleged that Mr Farage, who is married to his second wife Kirsten Mehr and has two daughters, has visited lap dancing clubs in London and Strasbourg.
Mr Farage has also denied an accounts by a Latvian woman called Liga in the News of the World who alledged that she took Mr Farage to her home after they met in a pub in Biggin Hill, Kent, in 2006 where they made love seven times.
The Ukip leader is generally unapologetic about his unconventional image indulging publicly in pints of beer and cigarettes.
However Ukip founder Alan Sked, who has since left the party, said Mr Farage is an “absolute disaster" as leader suggesting he has betrayed the original premise of Ukip – a campaigning party against the control the European Union exerts over the UK - by focusing on issues such as immigration, wind farms and gay marriage.
Mr Sked told The Times: “He says he’s worried about fruitcakes but I think he’s one himself. He’s turned Ukip into his own fiefdom."
He added: “Nigel isn’t very bright. When he was a candidate for Salisbury, I used to get letters saying, ‘I’m glad your candidate believes in education but until he learns to spell I’m not going to vote for him."
Mr Farage said: “I don’t hide, I don’t change my message according to my audience, I try to just be me wherever I go.
“People either like you or dislike you, but if you try and pretend to be what you’re not, you always get found out anyway. So there’s no point in doing it."
Document TELUK00020140311ea3b002bn
