{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3745"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Elections 2014: Ukip's manifesto: immigration, Europe and that's it ... for now: Despite intense pressure, Nigel Farage refuses to engage on anything but his core issues. Will it work come polling day, asks Patrick Wintour
Patrick Wintour   
2,063 words
21 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
6
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Nigel Farage is coming to the end of a period of probably the most intensive scrutiny any unelected British politician has faced in decades, and with his opponents hoping that in the final few days his mask has slipped to reveal if not something dark, at least a buffoon, or better someone that unashamedly manipulates truths to feed fear and garner votes.
No one can accuse Farage of hiding. He has done all the tough interviews, and is confident that the recent flurry of calling him a racist has backfired since the public do not see him as such. It is a finding that Labour and Tory polling has also picked up. Farage himself believes voters will realise he has been subjected to a disproportionate media barrage. Almost as a result, he believes he is still on course to create the long forecast political earthquake when the European election results are revealed next Sunday.
If he has succeeded, one reason will be the simplicity of his message, and his self-discipline. Ukip, unlike the BNP, travels light. There is little complex ideology or historical philosophy, no discussion on England's spiritual roots, few tracts on national identity, and no critiques of elitist democracy penned by a Ukip court ideologue.
His lodestar is nostalgia not Nietzsche. Ukip is not neo-fascist, but - in Farage's own description - a patriotic party with a small p. Farage would not go near a balcony, save probably to be lean over and be ill. As a result much of the assault on Ukip has been directed less at him personally, or his thinking, and instead diverted to the homophobes, Islamophobes, white imperialists and eccentrics that have stood, or tried to stand under Ukip's purple. The midnight thoughts of his supporters on Twitter and Facebook have fed newspapers every day. Farage just brushes them aside as the irrelevant idiots and oddballs that latch onto any new political movement.
Throughout the campaign he has tried to stick rigidly to a simple dual-track message: Britain's communities are being overwhelmed by immigrants and the British government can do nothing about this so long as Britain remains in the European Union, a membership Ukip will end through a referendum.
By combining the emotive message about migrants with the abstractions of British sovereignty, the revolt on the right has become the revolt of the disenchanted. He explained the importance of the duality in an interview last year. He said "They [the voters] have made the connection. It took me bloody years to get immigration and Europe together, but I knew at the local elections this year it was now the same thing."
The message discipline on this has been very tight. So he told LBC: "It is completely pointless to talk about immigration figures and targets while we're members of the European Union, when we have a total open door to nearly half a billion people. We have an open door not just to 28 million from Romania and Bulgaria, 485 million people effectively now have British passports, they can all come to live in this country and so actually nobody can have an immigration policy, nobody can project or predict what will happen all the while we stay part of the EU. 485 million people can come and live here, every single one of them if they want to."
He has tried to suppress everything not to do with this dual argument. Thus, well before the elections, he made it clear that Ukip would be providing no domestic policy, even though it has nearly 2,000 candidates in local elections across the country.
Ukip's local elections manifesto, launched away from the scrutiny of Westminster reporters, is a glossy vacuity, promising referenda, weekly bin collections, no more wind farms and a promise to look at the case for shale gas. On housing, the party opposes Stalinist planning.
When Farage was asked by the BBC presenter Andrew Neil about the party's myriad plans for tax cuts, he said: "I'm not talking about any of those things." Neil persisted by suggesting the party would cut fuel duty and Farage replied: "No, I'm not talking about any of those things. I'm fighting a European election. That is the election we're fighting, that election's all about the European Union." He later said: "We have not agreed a manifesto for the general election. We will do over the summer."
Indeed, Farage has made a virtue of Ukip being a blank piece of paper, repeatedly ridiculing the Ukip manifesto written for the last election. He said "it was drivel, 486 pages of drivel, I didn't read it, nor did the party leader, it was a nonsense, and we've put that behind us and moved on to a professional footing. I said, I want the whole lot taken down off the website, we reject the whole thing, we'll start again with a blank sheet of paper."
The blankness of Faragism helps the party forestall internal divisions and remain attractive simultaneously to disillusioned Labour in the north and disillusioned Tories in the south. When extraneous issues have emerged in the campaign with which he is uneasy, his tactic has been to prevaricate. Asked whether he supported gay marriage Farage, once a libertarian, has avoided an answer by saying: "It is a can of worms."
He said while Britain remained a signatory to the European convention on human rights - not an EU body - there was a very big risk that the Church of England would be dragged through the courts in Strasbourg and possibly forced to conduct gay marriages against the will of the vast majority of churchgoers.
Similarly, on his EU allowances he has slithered around, promising an independent audit if it would settle the argument, then saying he would be not be singled out for a higher level of scrutiny and then backtracking when it was pointed out that Labour, Tory and Liberal Democrat MEPs all have their allowances audited independently. He now says Ukip MEPs will decide collectively if they should have allowances audited. A retrospective audit of his own spending is no longer offered.
But the mask has slipped somewhat over foreign policy. Just before the first LBC Europe debate with Nick Clegg, he sided with Vladimir Putin to claim it was probable that the chemical weapon attacks was mounted by Syrian rebels and not agents of President Assad.
Asked by Alastair Campbell, the former Labour communication chief, to name the politician he most admired, he chose Putin, and such is his hatred of EU foreign policy he found himself condemning the Ukrainian revolutionaries as credulous creatures of the European commission. "We have given a false series of hopes to a group of people in the western Ukraine, so geed up were they that they actually toppled their own elected leader," he said. "That provoked Mr Putin, and I think the European Union frankly does have blood on its hands in the Ukraine".
But it has been over cultural issues that Farage sounded more sinister than a saloon bar stockbroker. In his speech to the Ukip annual conference in Torbay, he said: "Whether it is the impact on local schools and hospitals, whether it is the fact in many parts of England you don't hear English spoken any more, this is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren."
Questioned about this at a subsequent press conference, Farage waxed lyrical about a lost Metroland: "Do I think parts of Britain are a foreign land? I got the train the other night, it was rush hour, from Charing Cross. It was a stopper going out and we stopped at London Bridge, New Cross, Hither Green, it was not till we got past Grove Park that I could hear English being audibly spoken in the carriage.
"Does that make me feel slightly awkward? Yes it does. I wonder what is really going on. I am saying that and I am sure that is a view that will be reflected by three-quarters of the population, perhaps even more."
That in turn has led to the growing contortions over Romanians and Bulgarians. Ukip posters appeared warning that 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians were after your job, and he has repeatedly highlighted the criminality of Romania.
In a Guardian interview, he said it was not just about numbers of Romanians but quality, adding: "People hate talking about this, but if you look at the Met crime figures for Romanian arrests, there have been 28,000 in London in the last five years. Is there a problem? Yeah. There is a problem."
Was he saying there is a culture of criminality among Romanians? He replied "Bound to be. You have to go and see it to understand it. I've visited camps in Romania and Bulgaria, I've got a pretty good understanding."
He was then asked "Should British people be wary of Romanian families moving into their street? Farage replied "Ask David Blunkett." The Guardian pressed him to answer and he replied: "Well of course, yeah."
By now Farage was stereotyping, and made matters worse when James O'Brien on LBC asked him to explain the difference between living next door to Germans - like Farage's wife, Kirsten -and Romanians. Farage said: "You know what the difference is."
In the final days of his campaign, he has been in danger of losing the agenda, and appearing obsessive, taking out full-page adverts containing partial or anecdotal evidence to prove the criminality of Romanians in London. His difficulties are numerous.
The Met's own figures show there has been no spike in Romanian crime since labour market restrictions against Romania were lifted in January. Poles are more likely to commit crimes, the figures show. His claim that 92% of ATM crime is committed by Romanians is based on three-year-old unpublished intelligence reported by one retired policeman in a TV documentary.
Farage now says his claim that 7% of crimes are committed by Romanians should have been that 7% of criminal gangs are from Romania. He now admits the figure was simplified. He says he has "no problem with Romanians. I have a big problem with Romania."
Labour especially is likely to have an intense postmortem on whether it should have gone for Farage more aggressively earlier, or whether establishment name-calling has just solidified his vote. Either way, the biggest test is yet to come. It has been said challenger parties are like bees. Once they have stung the system, they die. Farage has a year to prove this wrong.
Nigel Farage on . . .:
Immigration
'We have an open door not just to 28 million from Romania and Bulgaria, 485 million people now have British passports, they can all come to live in this country and so actually nobody can have an immigration policy, nobody can project or predict what will happen all the while we stay part of the EU'
Ukraine
'We have given a false series of hopes to a group of people in the western Ukraine, so geed up were they that they actually toppled their own elected leader. That provoked Mr Putin, and I think the European Union frankly does have blood on its hands in the Ukraine'
The last Ukip manifesto
'It was drivel, 486 pages of drivel, I didn't read it, nor did the party leader, it was a nonsense, and we've put that behind us and moved on to a professional footing."
Multicultural Britain
'Whether it is the impact on local schools and hospitals, whether it is the fact in many parts of England you don't hear English spoken any more. This is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren'
Captions:
Crowds outside the Whitgift shopping centre, in Croydon, chanted as they waited for Ukip leader Nigel Farage, who was due to attend
the Ukip carnival on Croydon high street in an attempt to counter accusations his party is racist Photograph: Dan Dannison/Getty
Document GRDN000020140521ea5l0000i
