{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2139"}
____
  
News
Migrant passports test scam
Michael Pickard   
351 words
17 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Lancs
2
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
THE Home Office has launched an investigation into claims that migrants who speak no English are able to buy documents showing that they have passed a supposedly "secure" language test.
Secret filming at an examination centre in London is said to have shown the certificates showing someone has a basic grasp of English - which are required by anyone wanting to remain in the UK permanently or to apply for British citizenship - were being sold for £500.
Immigration and Security Minister James Brokenshire said: "The Home Office takes any allegation of fraud extremely seriously and we have already begun a full investigation.
"We will take the strongest possible action against anyone who is found to have abused the rules - including the possibility of criminal prosecutions for fraud."
Ofqual, the examinations watchdog, was also said to be aware of the allegations and to be seeking further information "as a matter of urgency".
The investigation into the examination centre at Upton Park, which is run by Learn Pass Succeed, followed information from a whistleblower.
Uzwan Ghani, one of the directors of LPS, which has four branches in London, said the problem was confined to the Upton Park branch and that it had suspended tests taken at the centre.
He said: "I'm shocked that this has happened and am very concerned as to how it could have happened.
"We are very thorough when it comes to checking IDs of candidates before they take the test, so I will have to investigate which of the centres the test was taken in and who the assessor was. I've been in the business for five years and I've never come across something like this and I would not allow it. It is wrong and ridiculous."
MPs and campaigners warned the scandal could be part of a wider operation to provide passports to immigrants, at a time when 200,000 a year are being handed out.
The language exam must be passed alongside a separate Life in the UK test, which measures candidates on their knowledge of British law.
Document THEEXP0020140517ea5h0000f
