{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"3783"}
____
  
Observer Review Books Pages
The New Review: Books: FICTION: The 25-hour party people: Glow Ned Beauman Sceptre pounds 16.99, pp250
Tim Lewis   
488 words
27 April 2014
The Observer
OB
44
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
At the beginning of Ned Beauman's third novel, Glow, one worries it might all become a bit overwhelming. There are a lot of similes, perhaps a record number. It's May 2010 and our hero Raf is at a rave in Peckham about to try a new drug called glow for the first time. The powder is wrapped up in cigarette paper like a pork wonton; Raf spies a woman whose cheekbones are like a 1980s computer graphic; he thinks about speaking to her but the room is packed "like a rush-hour Tube carriage that's learned to vibrate to a determinate rhythm". And that's just the first paragraph. It seems an unsustainable density.
Individually, these descriptions are often wonderfully evocative. On Beauman's watch, unlovely south London will never again be so romantic: "In the gutter there are diamonds of safety glass," he notes of a smashed windscreen, "with which this morning's rain has mingled an alluvium of damp white blossom and a few fronds of synthetic wig hair caught on a chicken bone, like the shattered remains of a tribal fetish." Collectively, however, they slow the pace; they become more exciting for the author than the reader.
Beauman's previous novels - Boxer, Beetle and The Teleportation Accident - were bizarre and sometimes brilliant; the latter was longlisted for the 2012 Booker prize. Now 29, he was the youngest of Granta's Best Young British Novelists of 2013. With Glow, he returns with his first work set in the present day and also a more conventional thriller.
Conventional, though, only in relative terms. After Raf's first exposure to glow at the rave, a friend called Theo disappears and he tries to work out what happened to him. It's a conspiracy that ultimately links a London pirate radio station, Burmese immigrants and a corrupt global mining company called Lacebark - and foxes, skulks of urban foxes. Beauman is especially strong on odd details. In Boxer, Beetle, the protagonist had trimethylaminuria, which made him smell strongly of fish. In Glow, Raf suffers from a rare - but again real - condition called non-24-hour sleep/wake syndrome where his circadian rhythm is set at 25 hours, not 24. The omniscient narrator is on hand with another neat simile: "It's like his brain is wearing a novelty watch."
Complex themes are introduced, not least tangents into neuroscience and Burmese history, but we are rarely disorientated for long. The twists, when they come, are unexpected and satisfying.
Beauman has an ambition to write powerful, enduring fiction; when he strips away some of the excessive flourishes, he is close to succeeding.
To buy Glow for pounds 13.59 with free UK p&p call 0330 333 6846 or go to guardianbookshop.co.uk
Document OB00000020140427ea4r0003s
