{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2753"}
____
  
Features
Britain's lost its Greatness
470 words
27 February 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
43
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
£50 LETTER
I AGREE with Scottish Sun columnist Jane Moore doubting whether any of us still feel British any more.
It breaks my heart to see what our political leaders, past and present, have done to this country.
They are stripping away our culture and identity.
As a nation we only have ourselves to blame for always turning the other cheek. If only there were some people out there who could ignite our pride and passion and show our so-called leaders what ordinary indigenous people think.
MIKE WALLIS By email
JANE Moore's question "Do any of us feel British any more?" articulates what must be the feeling of millions who have seen their country of birth — and that of their parents, grandparents and even further back — compromised by migration and emigration.
It has been policy for UK governments to dilute what "British" means.
ANON By email
IT would be brilliant if Britain was still great, but we have lost our position at the world's top table. The EU treats us with contempt and America only pays us lip service. There is very little to be proud about.
COLIN MUIR Falkirk
BRITAIN has been eroded as a country for years. We have an opendoor policy to invite people in who have no interest in keeping our traditions. We have MPs who are only interested in themselves and we now have a Scottish Government that wants to split Britain up. Not much to be Great about.
DAVID MCDOWELL Edinburgh
BRITAIN was doomed the moment we sold out to the EU. We admitted then that we would accept rules from another country.
SAM MATHIESON Aberdeen
THERE is no spirit of togetherness any more. Scotland wants to separate from the rest of the UK. Thousands of immigrants are coming into the country. In the past, we would have pulled together. Now we don't even want to talk to each other.
HARRY YOUNG Glasgow
I HAVE thought for years that the powers that be are hell-bent on destroying anything British.
There should be one language spoken in English schools — and that is English.
Otherwise how can teachers do their job? Scotland has the right idea in wanting to get out of a melting-pot nation that is falling apart.
KAREL BOUGHTON By email
NICE to see Prince Philip took the swearing soldier playing football so well. Philip, pictured, could empathise with his utter frustration.
As one who has put his foot in it on a few occasions, he is a sport.
ROSALYN JONES By emai
ANOTHER stupid idea from an American — to make kids sexy.
Why not just let kids be kids, have a proper childhood and enjoy life? to much Beauty pageant mum Jessica Darden has lost the plot.
TONY KNAVES By email
Document THESUN0020140227ea2r000bm
