{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1167"}
____
  
NEWS
Visa auctions are a recipe for disaster, warn MPs
By Tom Whitehead   
555 words
21 March 2014
07:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Super rich migrants should not be allowed to buy their citizenship, says committee
Allowing super wealthy migrants to buy their way in to the UK in a visa auction would be a “recipe for disaster”, MPs have warned.
Proposals to offer “gilts for citizenship” were alarming and risked allowing the rich to sidestep immigration controls, a report by the parliamentary Home Affairs Select Committee said.
Members also fear foreign criminals may have slipped in to the UK after a judge last month said borders were a “leaking sieve”.
Foreign millionaires would be offered visas in exchange for donations to hospitals and endowments to universities, under proposals last month from the Government's official migration advisers.
The Migration Advisory Committee recommended wealthy foreigners and their families should be allowed to live in Britain indefinitely in exchange for endowments to good causes.
It also suggested an annual auction offering about 100 visas to the highest bidders.
A reserve price of £2.5 million would be set for sealed bids, with any sum above going into a "good causes" fund that could assist medical research, education and other projects.
The select committee warned the proposals could result in “selling settlement by auction, with little apparent ability to carry out due diligence on the individual, no expectation to learn English and only require them to actually reside in the UK for 90 days a year”.
Keith Vaz, chairman of the committee, said: “The Government must not sell citizenship to the highest bidder.
“This method has considerable benefits for the applicant but brings little benefit to the UK.
“We fail to see how this fits in with the Government’s desire for the UK to attract only the ‘brightest and the best’.
“The lack of due diligence on individuals is a recipe for disaster. Those who seek to acquire British citizenship should be fit and proper.”
The MPs were also concerned about the UK’s porous borders after a scathing attack by a judge last month.
Judge Richard Bray said they were like a “a leaking sieve" after hearing that an illegal immigrant drug dealer had been deported three times only to return on each occasion to commit more crimes.
Baksim Bushati, 37, from Albania, was jailed for seven years after 2lb of cocaine worth about £27,000, plus £14,000 in cash, was found at his home.
Between 2005 and last year he was sentenced in Britain to prison terms totalling nearly five years for violence, battery and possessing false identification. Despite being deported after each jail term, he returned to carry out more crimes.
Mr Vaz said: “The Warnings Index and our borders controls are still not fit for purpose and there is a real possibility that dangerous criminals have been able to enter the UK without the authorities knowing.
“We cannot permit this to continue and allow our borders to remain under-policed.”
The report also accused the Government of fuelled “anti-immigrant prejudice” by failing to commission estimates of the numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians who would come to Britain after labour market controls were lifted.
It said the Government's decision not to obtain official estimates played into the hands of those who "wish to inflame tensions about immigration for political gain".
Document TELUK00020140321ea3l000pr
