{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2095"}
____
  
Features; Opinion Column
If EU love your country, make your vote count
675 words
18 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
13
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
NO ONE ever asked the British people if we wanted our country changed out of all recognition.
Forty years ago, they asked us if we wanted to be part of a common market with our European neighbours.
Eager to be part of a peaceful, prosperous continent, millions of us voted yes — including a boy from Billericay with a Rod Stewart feather cut.
I was voting for the very first time. And half a lifetime down the road, I would STILL vote to be part of a common market.
But what no one in this country EVER signed up to was a loss of our national sovereignty, laws imposed by unelected foreign leaders and our borders thrown open to 27 European nations (so far).
When did we vote for any of that? Never.
Keep that in mind when you vote in the European elections this coming Thursday.
Remember that freedoms fought for by generations have been casually peed away by a political elite who never asked the British people if this was what we wanted.
For those of us who would not wipe our dogs on the EU flag, UKIP's endless controversies are an unwanted distraction from the real debate.
Yesterday's headlines were not about the denial of an EU referendum for 40 years — they were about Nigel Farage's comments that most British people would not want a house full of Romanians moving next door.
Is that racist or the brutal truth? It is a bit of both. But certainly the political establishment would much rather we were talking about outrageous racism rather than the outrageous democracy deficit at the heart of the EU. The controversy around UKIP is a way of stifling real debate about our future.
'There is nothing loony about that' We have heard a lot about the fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists of UKIP. And UKIP deserves to have a light shone on its fruitcake tendency who think that God sent the floods to punish us for gay marriage.
But the central policy of UKIP is that our country would be better off outside the EU. And there is nothing loony about that.
David Cameron, Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband are all singing from the same songbook on the EU. They all promise a referendum somewhere down the line when powers are transferred to Brussels. But that has already happened.
And denying the British people a chance to object in an EU referendum is gobbing in the eye of democracy. I feel under no obligation to prove my non-racist credentials to anyone. I live in a mixed-race family. There are two languages spoken in our house. My wife came to this country and made it her home.
I am totally in favour of immigration, if someone has something to contribute.
But let's have our borders open to the doctor from India, the teacher from New Zealand and the engineer from Japan. Not just anyone who has a crappy little EU passport.
For years the political elite has tried to smear ordinary British patriots as fruitcakes, loonies and racists.
When Gordon Brown called Gillian Duffy (a lifelong Labour supporter) a "bigoted woman" in 2010 for daring to mention EU immigration, he was only saying what they all believe.
We are led by second-rate men with first-class educations who know nothing of the real world. They despise the British people. Brown spoke for the lot of them. Remember that when you vote on Thursday.
In my heart and bones I do not believe the European elections will be decided by loonies, fruitcakes and closet racists. I think they will be decided by people who love their country.
And who want it back.
? I WAS in lovely Aberdeen last weekend and came away feeling less certain that you Scots are going to vote for independence. But if David Cameron wants to preserve the Union, the best thing he can do is keep his cakehole shut.
Document THESUN0020140518ea5i000jr
