{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"2108"}
____
  
Editorial
It's not the Euros, but the PM's response that counts
MATTHEW D'ANCONA   
1,270 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
22
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Are you a tamarin or a marmoset? A curious question for a sultry May weekend, I know. But it is prompted by an intriguing 2005 paper in Biology Letters, a journal published by the Royal Society.
In summary, the authors discovered that the common marmoset was better than the cotton-top tamarin at deferring gratification in order to obtain a larger quantity of food. They waited. The tamarins, in contrast, grabbed what pellets they could, as soon as they could. There is, in other words, a scientific basis for the quality of patience. As it happens, the explanation in the case of these little primates seems to be that the marmoset depends on gum, a product for which they have to wait, whereas tamarins feed on insects, which they seize when they can.
We live in a tamarin society: thanks to Amazon Prime, Netflix, Ocado and other marvels of the digital revolution, we are growing used to instant gratification of our wants. To say the least, politicians fit uneasily in this new eco-sphere. The days when they commanded deference are long gone. Sleaze, spin and expenses have nurtured outright distaste and hostility towards the political class and the lethal charge - so essential to the Ukip insurgency - that "they're all the same". Very few political achievements worthy of memory are fast: even those that appear sudden and instantaneous, such as Gordon Brown's granting of independence to the Bank of England, are usually the end of a long process of subterranean debate and evolution. We expect a lot from politicians and the State.
But they do not deliver with the speed to which we have become accustomed in most other spheres. Representative democracy is not an app.
This is the context in which, a week today, David Cameron will hear the results of the European elections. He will already know how his party has fared in 161 English local authorities (as well as the outcome in 11 new councils in Northern Ireland). But the European contest, in which all 46 million voters can take part, is much the greater test.
For a governing party taking painful measures, in the early stages of a recovery, a bad day in town hall elections is par for the course. But this year's election of 73 MEPs to represent the UK in Strasbourg has acquired a much deeper significance. It is Ed Miliband who should be sweating: as the man who hopes to be settling into No 10 a year from now, he has to trounce the Tories (and everyone else) in Thursday's elections.
Yet that is not the prism through which this race is generally being seen. It has become a battle between David Cameron and Nigel Farage for the soul of the Right, the opening of a chasm, deep and wide, between enlightened and reactionary conservatism, between global interdependence and xenophobia, between control of immigration and fear of immigrants. On Friday, in an astonishing LBC interview, Farage said the following: "I was asked if a group of Romanian men moved in next door, would you be concerned? And if you lived in London, I think you would be." This, at least, is candid. I also think it is despicable. But some will applaud Farage to the rafters. This is a moment to choose, to stand up and be counted.
The strong likelihood is that Ukip will indeed beat the Conservatives in the European elections (not a certainty: today's poll suggests, for the first time, that the Tories might finish slightly ahead of Ukip). It may even top the poll outright, which, in purely psephological terms, would be a remarkable moment in contemporary political history. A guerrilla band of reactionary insurgents - a cult of personality, really - would have trounced the two giants of British politics, Labour and Conservative, exploiting fear, promoting anxiety and sharpening division to pull off an extraordinary underdog victory.
As soon as the results are announced - assuming Ukip defeats the Tories - the Prime Minister will find himself caught in a blizzard of hostile blog-posts, columns, analyses by learned pollsters, and editorials. Nobody will tell him to respond to Ukip's success by being more Right-wing. But that is what they will mean. The phrases "mainstream values", "bread-and-butter issues", "Westminster bubble", "metropolitan class" and "Dog and Duck" will be dependably deployed. Farage's defeat of Cameron will be attributed to same-sex marriage, environmentalism, the existence of the Coalition ("tail wagging the dog" will be the cliché rolled out in that instance). Failure may be an orphan but, in politics, it never lacks stern foster-parents telling it why it was left all alone.
The European elections are not a make-or-break moment for Cameron. But how he responds most certainly is. A politician whose party has suffered serious losses in any election must display humility and recognise the signal he or she has been sent by the electorate. The greater question is what the signal means.
In their excellent new book, The Fourth Revolution: The Global Race to Reinvent the State, John Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge argue persuasively that too much is expected of modern government, in a democratic culture that is both cynical and increasingly impatient. "Such cynicism might be healthy if people wanted little from the government," the authors say. "But they continue to want a great deal… The dependency forces government to overexpand and overburden itself while the disdain robs government of its legitimacy and turns every setback into a crisis."
Exactly so. They also quote Plato's greatest anxiety about democracy - that citizens would "live from day to day, indulging the pleasure of the moment". This is yet another impulse that Ukip has harnessed. Even as it rages against modernity, it exploits the hyper-modern inability to concentrate, to defer gratification, and to pull together in the name of an outcome worth waiting for. They are toddlers in ties, these self-styled purple pimpernels.
The Coalition came into being to enable a strategy - principally a fiscal undertaking - to be undertaken. It is inconceivable that this strategy could have been pursued by a Tory minority government. Cameron can express regret for the errors he and his colleagues have made (the bungled NHS plan, the "Omnishambles" of 2012, the inter-party bickering) and their misplaced hope that the deficit could be wiped out in a Parliament. But that is no argument for changing the strategy itself. It is an argument for finishing the job.
However chastened he is by next week's results, the PM must respond by redoubling his commitment to see the job through. No snap reshuffle, no panicked stunts, no magician's misdirection, no premature dismantling of the Coalition.
So: he should stick remorselessly to the position on the EU he described in The Sunday Telegraph last week. George Osborne should persist with the fiscal tightening that is now delivering results. Theresa May should put the Immigration Act into practice. Iain Duncan Smith and Michael Gove should pursue their respective revolutions.
None of this will make the cacophony of criticism stop. No fiscal or educational or welfare strategy will wipe the smile off Farage's face. But, then again, what could? The next fortnight will belong to the tamarins. But, in the end, it is the patient marmosets who get things done.
Ed Miliband is the one who should be sweating-as the man who hopes to be settling into No 10 next year, he has to triumph on Thursday
Document STEL000020140518ea5i0008m
