{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1140"}
____
  
News
Rover and out! Pooch with a 'pilot' licence
Sharon Marris   
358 words
6 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
3
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
WITH goggles and aviator cap, she could almost be a real version of the cartoon dog Muttley.
But Callie the labrador, unlike Dick Dastardly's sneering and bumbling sidekick from the Wacky Races cartoon, is not only lovable but she has also completed 250–plus flying hours – easily enough to be a fully fledged pilot.
The canine captain has become the only dog in Britain to have her own Air Crew card, giving her access to the reserved channels at airport security and immigration as well as discounts and priority booking at airport hotels.
The three–year–old has flown 50,000 miles around the UK.
Callie, flying since she was 12 weeks old, spends most weekends with owner Graham Mountford in his Cessna 210 Centurion, visiting beaches in such far flung places as Barra in the Outer Hebrides, Perranporth in Cornwall and Caernarfon in North Wales.
Graham said: "I get a lot of comments and smiles when I land and people realise my co–pilot is a dog."
Callie has a special harness to strap her into the cockpit of the six–seater plane.
Graham, 50, of Leighton Buzzard, Beds, first took Callie flying because he thought "it would be fun to have her up in the plane with me".
He said: "I bought ear–protectors and the first time we just taxied around the airport to make sure she enjoyed it. We went on a short flight and she seemed very happy.
"Callie usually wears a fluorescent jacket – and as soon as she puts it on she knows she is going flying."
Her devotion to aviation was recognised when she and Graham went to an aero exhibition and found she had clocked up more flying hours than many people.
Graham made a tongue–in–cheek request for an Aircraft Owners and Pilots' Association Air Crew card for Callie – and was shocked when a membership pack arrived.
He said: "I have shown the card at some of the bigger airports and it always causes great amusement.
"Even the most glum security men break into a smile."
Document THEEXP0020140506ea560005u
