{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3228"}
____
  
Guardian Features Pages
G2: Last night's TV: I had thought the story of breakfast TV would be really boring. I was wrong
Tim Dowling   
858 words
9 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
21
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
As an immigrant I've found it necessary to construct a false memory of British popular culture from about 1970 to 1990, if only so people my age don't feel obliged to continually explain to me why the three-day week happened, or who Geoff Capes is. Whenever a gap in my understanding appears, I just nod along and look it up later. For this reason, my false memories are often suspiciously factually correct.
The Battle for Britain's Breakfast (BBC2) bridged one such gap. I was vaguely aware that the BBC and ITV conducted a 1980s morning ratings war, and that David Frost, a puppet rat and various fitness instructors were involved, but that was already more than I wanted to know. I therefore approached this programme as one would an hour of tiresome but necessary revision.
I was wrong. The story is both fascinating and vital to one's understanding of modern Britain. It perfectly illustrates the strange relationship the BBC has with its commercial rivals, and it accounts for both Gyles Brandreth and Loyd Grossman.
So allow me to explain to any youngsters out there how things were for us back then. Once upon a time there was no breakfast telly: the test card or Open University were your only options. People ate breakfast at breakfast time. Then in 1980 a new ITV morning franchise was awarded to TV-am, a company fronted by the so-called Famous Five (Frost, Anna Ford, Parky, Angela Rippon and newsreader Robert Kee). The BBC could not allow itself to remain dark while ITV was broadcasting at 6am, so it hatched a rival presented by Frank Bough and Selina Scott. BBC Breakfast Time was radically informal - sofa-based, casually attired and chatty - and it got a fortnight's head start, launching on 17 January 1983.
Two weeks later Frost and co hit the ground crawling. TV-am's first morning dawned with an hour of hard news, followed by Good Morning Britain, which itself began with news. On launch day this was followed by an interview with Norman Tebbit. The critics were mostly positive, but viewers weren't interested. It was, as one interviewee put it, "ponderous, arrogant and boring".
Advertisers fled, and debts mounted. Bad-guy-from-the-future Jonathan Aitken deposed Peter Jay as TV-am's chief executive, prompting Anna Ford to throw a glass of wine in Aitken's face. Ford was sacked, as was Rippon. Greg Dyke was brought in to rescue "ailing TV-am", an organisation so strapped for cash it couldn't pay its star presenters. At one point the electricity was nearly cut off mid-broadcast. This is roughly where the puppet rat comes in.
Whenever I'd heard about Roland Rat saving TV-am before - usually on one of those Why the 1980s Sucked shows - the story was always told by Roland himself, who invariably overstated his contribution. It made a nice change to hear something about his creator instead. "He was the most boring man in the world until he put his arm up a rat's arse," said Dyke, "in which case he became funny."
More important than the rat was the BBC's decision to let its star presenters take the whole summer off, giving Dyke a chance to mount a rearguard attack. After TV-am out-sofa'd the BBC with its giddy informality, the Beeb inexplicably went back to a desk-based format. Greg Dyke lost control of TV-am to Bruce Gyngell, the only man ever to look upon Gyles Brandreth and say, "I like your style." Having won the ratings war, Gyngell promptly lost the franchise to a consortium headed by Greg Dyke. For TV-am, the war was over.
It was a tale that benefited from having most of its main characters still alive to tell it afresh. There was little evidence to back up Greg Dyke's assertion that Roland Rat was funny, and rather a lot to support the counter position, but perhaps you really had to be there.
The Call Centre (BBC3) is the sort of show I feel I ought to take against: airless and manipulatively edited, it seems to consider the lack of a pat, idiotic narrative to be reality's greatest shortcoming. But it has a few things going for it - call centres are, by necessity, populated by thick-skinned extroverts, so there's no need to audition anyone. There is something genuinely melancholic in the soul-destroying work of cold-calling, though the programme makes as little of this as possible. And I have warmed to boss Nev Wilshire. He reminds me a little of Roland Rat - cheeky, irritating and irrepressible, a vital ingredient in a cheap TV recipe that could save BBC3. Except it didn't.
AND ANOTHER THING
In the US, breakfast television started in 1952. By 1983 we were all watching MTV in the morning.
Captions:
The irrepressible Roland Rat . . . The Battle for Britain's Breakfast
Document GRDN000020140409ea490000u
