{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3339"}
____
  
News
Ukip's Asian poster girl walks out on 'racist' party
Georgia Graham   
438 words
14 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
6
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A BRITISH Asian leader of Ukip's youth wing has quit the party, labelling it "racist" and "terrifying".
Sanya–Jeet Thandi, who had been introduced at the Ukip conference as a future leader, said the party has abandoned core supporters and now appealed to the "stupidity of ignorant anti–immigrant voters for electoral gain".
Miss Thandi, 21, appeared on Channel 4 News this week to defend her membership, but has now resigned and is urging other Ukip supporters to boycott the impending European and local elections.
Miss Thandi, who joined Ukip at 17 as events co–ordinator of the youth wing and spoke at the party conference, said new Ukip posters pointing the finger at immigration "epitomise" what has gone wrong with the organisation.
The party leader, Nigel Farage, has recently sought to rid Ukip of its racist image by appearing at a rally flanked by 40 ethnic–minority supporters. At an event in London, he said: "I don't care what you call us, but from this moment on, please do not call us a racist party."
This strategy, Ms Thandi said, was not "good enough" to reverse the "form of racist populism" that had developed in the party over the past three years.
In the past few weeks, several Ukip candidates have been exposed as harbouring racist views. Andre Lampitt, who featured in the party's election broadcast, was suspended after saying Ed Miliband was "not a real Brit" and describing Islam as an "evil organisation".
Another supporter said that Lenny Henry, the comedian, should emigrate to a "black country".
Mr Farage said people with "offensive and idiotic" views had managed to join the party, despite his efforts to vet candidates and a ban on former BNP and National Front members.
Ms Thandi, a privately educated London School of Economics student born to Punjabi parents, joined Ukip because she said David Cameron was "going soft". Three years ago, she agreed with Ukip's policy on immigration because current policy favoured Europeans over other migrants when her grandparents had had to "work so hard" to come to England, she said.
Miss Thandi, who grew up in Kent, became one of Mr Farage's biggest cheerleaders, telling The Times that Mr Farage was "a babe" and describing Godfrey Bloom as "cute and so kind and hilarious, he just says things for the reaction. Lovely guy, but a bit misunderstood".
However, announcing her resignation on The Guardian website, Miss Thandi said people with "racist views" had been slipping through Ukip's checks "time and time again".
Document DT00000020140514ea5e0005o
