{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"1367"}
____
  
Features
GEORGE'S CUNNING NEW TAX PLAN IS... PINCH NICK'S IDEAS
BY JAMES FORSYTH   
1,084 words
2 March 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
37
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
George Osborne went to see Tory MPs on Wednesday night to solicit their suggestions for the Budget, which is only three weeks away. But as the Chancellor talked, it became clear he was planning a brutal political power play: nabbing the credit for the Lib Dem's most popular policy.
Several Tory MPs pushed Osborne to do something about those people being dragged into the 40p rate of tax. They feel many of their natural supporters - who aren't rich and are earning about £40,000 a year - are being clobbered by a band that was meant for the wealthy.
But Osborne responded that the priority had to be increasing the tax-free allowance. Sensing that many in the room were uncomfortable about prioritising this Lib Dem initiative, Osborne made his move.
He said that boosting people's tax-free allowance had cut income tax for everyone earning up to £100,000 and polled better than any other Government economic policy. He said the polling also revealed that hardly anyone knew it was a Lib Dem idea.
Osborne's answer convinced everyone that the tax-free allowance will be increased again in this Budget, going up to £10,500. But the Chancellor has decided that if he's going to do this, he - not the Lib Dems - is going to get the plaudits for it.
The Lib Dems are seething. Those close to Nick Clegg fume that the Tories are being two-faced. One ally complains: 'In every Budget meeting they say, "Nick, this is your tax cut. How are you going to pay for it? What are you going to give us for it?" ' So the Lib Dems are on a war footing. Clegg will use his speech to the party's spring conference next weekend to again call for an increase in the tax-free allowance in an attempt to keep hold of the issue. And the Tory response? Ignore them. One of those involved in drawing up Tory strategy tells me: 'Responding to what they do belittles us.'
The Tory leadership also knows this increase in the tax-free allowance is crucial to showing this is not just a government for the rich but has things to offer voters on low and middle incomes, too.
This makes it imperative that the policy becomes a Tory one in the minds of voters. The plan is to airbrush the Lib Dems out of the picture so they can concentrate on their other opponents.
A senior No 10 source says: 'The PM feels his real fight is with Labour and UKIP.'
Tories believe the economy is their key weapon. The party's new five-point message, sent to Tory MPs with a letter from Cameron encouraging them to repeat it at every opportunity, is focused exclusively on the economy.
Cameron will make a big speech on the subject this week, which will try to humanise the Government's economic message. One of those involved says: 'We have to keep saying that we have a plan and don't let those other buggers mess it up again.'
The leadership is acutely aware they trail in the polls, in some key marginals by 12 to 14 points. But they hope, as voters begin to feel better off, they'll be persuaded Cameron merits another term.
 
ESSEX GIRL SAVES POSH  BOYS FROM A MAULING
Priti Patel is being lined up for promotion in the next Tory reshuffle. She already serves on David Cameron's policy board but No 10 has bigger plans for her.
Patel, 41, is regarded as that rare breed: a Tory who can ably - and credibly - attack Labour and Ukip. She will, I'm told, have an increasingly prominent role doing this in the run-up to the European Elections. She has been earmarked to take the fight to Labour over the extent of union influence in the party.
Patel, left, is a straight-talking Essex MP. She reaches parts of the electorate more privileged Tories struggle to. She went to a comprehensive school and her parents are Ugandan Asian immigrants. It is not lost on No 10 that she offers a corrective to the idea the Tories are a party of rich, white men. Tellingly, when a female Tory MP claimed last week that an Old Etonian clique was writing the Party's manifesto, it was Patel who was sent in to dismiss the claim and defend the leaders.
Patel has not always been a Cameron loyalist. She was one of the 81 MPs who rebelled to vote for an In/Out referendum on Britain's membership of the EU before the next Election. But she has now decided to come on board. One colleague says: 'Even in private, she talks like a Minister now.'
Expect to see her promoted to Cameron's front bench.
***
 
THE CHANCELLOR was nonplussed at a meeting of the 1922 Committee when a Tory MP suggested the economy could be boosted by allowing more Saudi maids into the UK. If Saudis found it easier to bring over their domestic staff, more would come here and spend money. With the Government struggling to control immigration and No 10 concerned net migration will be higher in 2015 than it was in 2010, we can safely assume this idea won't be in the Budget.
***
 
BATTLE FOR BRITAIN IS FAR FROM WON
In Whitehall there's increasing satisfaction with how the Government's anti-independence salvoes are hitting their targets. Senior sources believe Alex Salmond's case for independence is close to being holed below the water line. As one declares: 'Exocet missiles keep slamming into the side of his craft.'
The Government intends to keep up this barrage. There'll be challenges to the Scottish First Minister on how an independent Scotland would fund its pensions and benefits system and keep its wind energy sector going.
But what excites No 10 is the expectation that more businesses will come out against independence. They believe this will persuade Scots that it is too much of a risk to leave the Union. There is, though, concern that Downing Street wasn't prepared for BA boss Willie Walsh saying that Scottish independence could be a 'positive development'.
'The symbolism of British Airways coming out for Scottish independence won't be lost on people,' says a source. The battle for Britain hasn't been won yet.
 
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140302ea320000v
