{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2903"}
____
  
News
Salmond isn't offering independence but oblivion
Alan Sked   
819 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
23
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Vote yes and Scotland will shrivel into an EU province — and it'll be Cameron's fault, says Alan Sked
Lord Heseltine in an infamous article in The Spectator some years ago looked forward to a time when Britain as a state would have no more historical or political significance than Mercia. The United Kingdom, he hoped, would be absorbed within a United States of Europe. Theoretically, this might yet happen if the European Commission were to establish a federal government by treaty as the final solution to the euro crisis. For British Eurosceptics this has always been their greatest nightmare, although today, any such treaty would legally trigger a referendum and most likely a no vote.
There is, however, another nightmare scenario that could be played out. Although a federal treaty may be three or four years off, Britain by then might have already ceased to exist.
Scottish independence could already have been sidelined had David Cameron allowed Scots residing everywhere in the UK to have a vote; or had he insisted that more than a simple majority would be needed to secure change; or had he even allowed — as the Scottish National party government in Edinburgh itself first demanded — that "devo max" (the greatest possible autonomy within the UK) be included as an option. Instead, he insisted on holding a single-question referendum, albeit one to be held at a time of Edinburgh's choosing and with votes being granted for the first time to 16-year-olds, as the SNP demanded. So now he faces a rising tide of nationalism in Scotland that rises further every time he or his English cabinet colleagues intervene in the debate.
Where does Europe fit in? The obvious response to Alex Salmond, Scotland's first minister, should be that he is not offering Scots independence at all and is a political fake. He is offering them precisely the same sort of historic oblivion that Heseltine wished and still wishes for Britain. His Scotland, far from becoming independent, will become a province of a federal EU. Salmond is so desperate to be a good European that, until the euro crisis, he wanted an independent Scotland to adopt the euro as its currency. But whatever its currency, he insists that if Scotland votes yes, it must remain a member of the EU and that all objections to its continued membership are political bluster.
Inside the EU, even today, Scottish law is subordinate to European law; inside the eurozone, Scottish budgets would be subject to approval by Brussels; inside the EU parliament, an independent Scotland would have a mere seven seats instead of 59 at Westminster; while Scottish oil, agriculture and fisheries, immigration policy, VAT levies, health and safety issues, tariffs, interest rates and increasingly foreign policy and financial legislation, would all be controlled from Brussels. Far from being independent, Scotland would be a minor, outlying province of what many other small European nations already see as Greater Germany.
Why is none of this pointed out in the present British debate? Because all the restrictions on Scotland's independence apply equally to England and the UK. And all our leading parties accept these restrictions. Cameron, in fact, would rather risk losing Scotland than attack the EU and upset his "friends" in Brussels and Berlin. Worse still, he is simultaneously engaged in a delicate round of negotiations with Brussels to improve marginally the position of the UK within the EU. Yet the loss of Scotland would irreparably weaken whatever standing he has in these negotiations. Hence our deluded prime minister cannot show up the true extent of Salmond's hypocrisy over Scottish independence without highlighting his own with regard to the UK as a whole.
The EU is the only winner in all this. It may pretend to show sympathy for the British government regarding Edinburgh's separatist claims, yet if an independent Scotland wished to remain in the EU, Brussels would hardly refuse to welcome it. Indeed, it would be able to laugh off Cameron's attempts at renegotiation, if Scotland were already boasting of its new "independence" within the EU. Cameron would deservedly look extremely silly. The EU, meanwhile, would have divided and conquered, brought about the end of Britain, while our own national leaders, by dint of their cowardice, silence or Europhilia would have connived in it. Indeed, Labour, the Liberal Democrats and possibly even Cameron would still be paying homage to Brussels — along with Heseltine — as Britain was being wiped off the map.
With luck, my fellow Scots will vote to remain in the United Kingdom, but if not, you will know who to blame for the break-up of Britain.
Alan Sked is professor of international history and former convener of European studies at the London School of Economics For those in peril in Scotland's shipyards, Business, p8
Document ST00000020140330ea3u000na
