{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"938"}
____
  
News
Ukip is not a serious option, says Cameron
Sam Coates ; Francis Elliott   
516 words
3 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
10
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron made a spirited attack on Ukip and its leader, Nigel Farage, yesterday as he launched the European election campaign, in which the Conservatives are expected to come a distant third.
The prime minister, who regularly sidesteps talking about Ukip, said the party was "all talk and no delivery", which could not deliver a referendum.
A YouGov poll at the weekend put the Tories in third place in the Euroelections, with 19 per cent support, well behind Ukip on 31 per cent and Labour on 28 per cent.
Beginning the Conservative campaign at a JCB vehicle plant in Newcastle-under-Lyme, Staffordshire, Mr Cameron took aim at his rivals: "I don't need to discredit Ukip — they do a good enough job themselves. Their own leader admits they 'cannot change a thing in Brussels'. This is who we're up against: Labour — all short-term gimmicks and no long-term plan. Ukip — all talk and no delivery.
"The choice is clear: if you want a serious party with a credible long-term plan and a party that's delivering on that plan, then you only have one choice: you have got to vote Conservative."
Ukip responded to the Tory launch with another stark campaign poster highlighting immigration from the EU.
It shows an escalator running from the English Channel up the White Cliffs of Dover with the slogan: "No Border. No Control. The EU has opened our borders to 4,000 people a week." Mr Farage said: "This is, in my view, the most powerful image of the entire European election campaign. It is designed to bring home to the British public just what membership of the EU means as regards controlling our own borders."
After launching his campaign, the prime minister took time out to meet the teenager with incurable cancer who has raised more than £3 million for charity.
Mr Cameron visited 19-year-old Stephen Sutton, who is being treated for multiple tumours at Birmingham's Queen Elizabeth Hospital. Mr Sutton was later discharged. During the visit, lasting about 15 minutes, Mr Sutton, whose fundraising for the Teenage Cancer Trust has won backing from people around the world, posed for pictures alongside the prime minister, his mother, Jane, and the consultant treating him. Afterwards Mr Cameron said: "He's amazing, just an inspiration."
Meanwhile, Ed Miliband endured a dressing-down over the state of the NHS in Wales from relatives of patients. He was repeatedly challenged over why the Labour-led administration in Wales refuses to hold a public inquiry similar to that held into failures in England.
Gareth Williams, whose mother, Lilian, died two years ago, said: "The scandal in Mid-Staffordshire in England resulted in a public inquiry. We desperately need one in Wales. The first minister, Carwyn Jones, has repeatedly refused to hold one. I'm now calling on you, Mr Miliband, to back our calls for a public inquiry in Wales. The way in which hundreds of patients are being neglected is a national scandal."
Document T000000020140503ea53000cl
