{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"403"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Labour's job scheme won't fool the voters
470 words
11 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
21
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
ong-term unemployment remains a serious problem in this country. Even as the economy recovers and the number of those out of work continues to decline, persistent joblessness is hard to shift, especially among the young. The mainstream political parties no longer seem inclined to connect this directly to the unprecedented levels of immigration we have seen in recent years, not least because they are powerless to prevent young Eastern Europeans travelling here to work.
Labour, therefore, wishes to address this issue in its time-honoured way - by getting taxpayers to underwrite a job guarantee scheme for people who are unemployed for more than two years, with the Government picking up the tab for the minimum wage and national insurance costs. The jobs in the private or voluntary sector would last six months and those who refused to take part would face penalties.
Labour did try similar schemes when it was last in office — only for long-term unemployment to increase. But what is really problematic is the proposed financing of this programme. Rather than paying for it by spending less, Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, proposes to restrict the tax relief on pension contributions for those who pay the 45p top rate of income tax to 20p. At present, relief is available at the same rate as the tax paid.
Many in this group will be further clobbered by a proposed levy on executive bonuses to pay for the rest of Labour's back-to-work scheme. In total, around 300,000 taxpayers are being targeted to fund the programme. These are the same people who currently contribute 30 per cent of all income taxes. They also face an increase in the top rate to 50p, also promised by Labour - along with, for good measure, a mansion tax on their properties.
Doubtless this plays very well among voters who cannot dream of such wealth. But Labour's reliance on a relatively tiny group of people to fund the bulk of its social spending is pernicious. Moreover, to target pensions yet again - as Gordon Brown did in his first Budget in 1997 - sends a clear message across the income spectrum: don't bother to accumulate any savings because the Government will eventually come after them.
Had Mr Balls unveiled plans to abolish the employers' NI contribution for young workers, for instance, then we might be inclined to believe that he had some new ideas. But he hasn't. This is a signal that Labour in office will behave just as before - taking money from savings to throw at schemes that will not work, while asking voters to judge it on the purity of its intentions. We must not be taken in again.
Document DT00000020140311ea3b0005u
