{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"110"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Ukip leader seeks 'democratic end' to EU
661 words
3 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
9
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
← continued from page 1
proper immigration policy. Let's stop giving away pounds 55m a day as a membership fee to a club that we don't need to be a part of . . . I would urge people: come and join the people's army, let's topple the establishment who have led us to this mess."
Farage claimed immigration had led to a cut in real wages of 14% since 2007. "It's good for the rich, because it's cheaper nannies and cheaper chauffeurs and cheaper gardeners, but it's bad news for ordinary Britons." He highlighted a report by the anti-immigration group MigrationWatch that raised the prospect of 130,000 EU immigrants arriving in Britain every year.
He said: "I fear there is going to be a very big migratory wave from the Mediterranean . . . It [immigration] has left the white working class, effectively, as an underclass and that, I think, is a disaster."
Clegg countered by bringing out an old Ukip leaflet claiming Britons would be reduced to living on a reservation like the Native Americans if the open door to the EU continued.
Farage had been urged by his advisers to appear as an avuncular Ronald Reagan figure, but he became more apocalyptic near the end when he warned that the EU would break up in a violent way if voters across the EU were not given a vote on whether to remain members.
He said: "I want the EU to end but I want it to end democratically. If it doesn't democratically I am afraid it will end very unpleasantly. We are already, in some countries, beginning to see the rise of worrying political extremism . . .
"If you take away from people their ability, through the ballot box, to change their futures because they have given away control of everything to somebody else then I'm afraid they tend to resort to unpleasant means."
Clegg repeatedly accused Farage of wanting to turn the clock back to a simpler bygone age in which women stayed at home. He said: "I don't believe in the dishonesty in saying to the British people that you can turn the clock back.
"What next? Are you going to say we should return to the gold standard or a pre-decimal currency or maybe get WG Grace to open the batting for England again? This is the 21st century, it is not the 19th century."
He said Farage's politics would isolate Britain, describing it as a "sort of Billy No Mates Britain - well it will be worse than that, it will be Billy No Jobs Britain, a Billy No Influence Britain".
Before the debate Farage had caused consternation when he suggested it was likely that the chemical weapons used in the Syrian conflict had been deployed by the Syrian opposition, and not by President Assad, a judgment that conflicts with the view of the UN and almost the entire western political establishment.
Clegg said: "This isn't some sort of pub bar discussion - this is a serious issue about how we stop the slaughter, the displacement of millions of people, women and children being sexually abused, terrible violence on an unimaginable scale and all Nigel Farage can say is that he [Putin] has played it brilliantly."
But Farage mounted a full-throated attack on EU foreign policy and a called for an end to British military intervention. He told the deputy prime minister: "You were absolutely hell-bent on getting involved militarily in the war in Syria and I personally am delighted we didn't go to war in Syria and we're not going to get involved, I hope, in military conflict in the Ukraine. The British people have had enough of endless foreign military interventions."
Captions:
Nigel Farage and Nick Clegg prepare for the battle that opinion polls showed as a victory for the Ukip leader Photograph: BBC
Document GRDN000020140402ea430008w
