{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"952"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Do Londoners even know the rest of us exist?
ALLAN MASSIE   
834 words
20 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
18
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Yes, the capital is one of the world's great cities, but an unbalanced UK is in no one's interest
William Dunbar, the greatest Scots Renaissance poet, called London "Flower of cities all". Not many Scots today might agree. The SNP's campaign often seems focused on independence from London rather than from England. Not every Englishman would agree either. It's 200 years since that Radical Tory William Cobbett called London "the Great Wen", disfiguring his country. Resentment of London is widespread in the English provinces, especially in the North.
Nevertheless, London's vitality is undeniable. It has just come top in PwC's "Cities of Excellence" survey, displacing New York. It is described as "an economic powerhouse", "an urban gateway" (whatever that is), and "a centre for culture, education, study and innovation".
That it is most of these is undeniable. The glories of London, the City–State, have been loudly trumpeted, not least by Boris Johnson, its mayor. London is a political capital, a business capital, a cultural capital. The City of London dominates the British economy. London is a media centre, and the media naturally seldom look beyond it. (The BBC may have transferred operations to Salford, but nobody doubts that the Corporation is London–centred.) The magnetic attraction of London exerts a pull all over the country.
Of course, all great cities do this. The metropolis trumps the provinces. Yet London now does so to an unusual degree. It wasn't always like this.
There was a different balance in the 19th century, when so much of the economic activity, and therefore of the wealth, was concentrated in the North and Midlands, and in west–central Scotland too. Birmingham, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle and Glasgow were great Victorian cities, generators of much of the nation's wealth, evidence of which is still to be seen in municipal buildings, universities, art galleries, theatres, concert halls, many paid for by local industrialists.
Ideas came from the provinces, too. The movement for Free Trade was launched in Manchester with the agitation for the repeal of the Corn Laws. Leading politicians often had a provincial base: Peel, Cobden and Bright in Lancashire, Joseph Chamberlain in Birmingham. Gladstone, despite Eton and Oxford, never quite lost his Liverpool accent. Edinburgh rivalled London as a publishing centre; George Eliot and Joseph Conrad were published by Blackwood's. The provincial Press flourished. The Manchester Guardian and The Yorkshire Post were powerful and influential organs of opinion. In the Thirties they both opposed Appeasement, as did The Glasgow Herald, while the metropolitan press approved it.
The modern City of London's success is remarkable. It is the financial capital of Europe, sucking in foreign investment, tempting American banks, Russian oligarchs and other footloose tycoons to establish themselves in London, forcing up house prices, but enabling the City to generate enormous wealth and pay vast amounts of tax. And yet, while enjoying such success, it is resented, because finance capitalism, with its use of private equity, its zeal for mergers and takeovers, and its concentration on shareholder value, has done great damage to manufacturing industry by its encouragement of shorttermism, and lack of interest in investing for the long haul. Sir Joseph Bamford, the creator of JCB, one of Britain's few privately owned multinationals, believed that the company's success depended on keeping its distance from the capital.
London is magnificent, invigorating, a true global city, and, by any standards, an enormous success. Its ability to reinvent itself and, with remarkable ease, to accommodate immigrants from all over the globe is extraordinary. The London housing market is a thing to wonder at, even if one consequence of the astronomical prices is to convert middleranking employees into long–distance commuters.
Yet non–Londoners may be forgiven for thinking it is all a bit much. London unbalances the United Kingdom, let alone England. The English provinces are fighting a losing battle, unable to compete with the capital's attraction.
They may reasonably feel that if HS2 is ever built, London will again benefit more than the North. And it's reasonable to wonder if Londoners ever lift their gaze and look at the rest of the country, if some of them even know it exists.
There is only one area of English life where the provinces seem to hold their own, indeed more than hold their own. This is, of course, football. Any fears that the magnetism of London would enable Chelsea and Arsenal or even Tottenham Hotspur to dominate the game and monopolise the prizes have been dispelled. In football, Manchester and Liverpool still rule. This keeps them cheerful, but may also be a sad commentary on the state of the nation. The economic and even intellectual leaders of the 19th century are now best only at kicking a round ball into a net.
Comment on Allan Massie's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140520ea5k00020
