{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1823"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Your pension may depend on a million new immigrants
Kerry Gill   
909 words
23 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
12
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
ONE needn't be a statistician to work out that the only way a separate Scotland could afford its growing pensions and welfare bill would be to increase taxation, cut the weekly pension, or both.
Finance Secretary John Swinney has privately admitted as much. And former Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown last night explained why a new Scottish state would have to fund a pensions bill in its first year nearly three times its expected North Sea oil income.
It is a pretty horrendous prospect. None of us – except the smug, wealthy, left–wing chattering classes who could easily afford it – wants to pay even more tax. Equally, none of us wants to face an old age spent in penury as Mr Swinney, presumably left in charge of our finances after a split from the United Kingdom, slashes the weekly pension. What a choice.
But there is a third way to fund the inevitable pensions shortfall and, hopefully, the staggering welfare bill that Mr Swinney would have to deal with – no fewer than one million new immigrants.
It has been officially estimated – and the SNP Government has not, so far as I know, denied it – that one million migrants would be needed to finance our ever–growing pensions bill.
It has already admitted that "controlled migration" – a weasly phrase if ever there was – could be the way to improve the present, dangerously low ratio of tax–paying workers to pensionable dependants.
The thinking is that all these immigrants would come here, take up jobs and pay their taxes, thereby countering the effects of a rapidly increasing older, non–productive generation of OAPs.
ALEX Salmond has already stated that the immigration policy of a separate Scottish state would be more "relaxed" than that imposed by the rest of the UK. It is part of his aim of demonstrating that Scots are more socially accepting and kinder than the "cold–hearted English", a shameless fabrication that only the thickest of his followers believe.
Immigration, however, is not a subject Mr Salmond wishes to dwell on because he knows perfectly well that most ordinary folk – outside the wealthier, left–leaning social enclaves of Edinburgh and Glasgow – view the prospect of an extra million immigrants with alarm.
One million new arrivals, about the same as the populations of Edinburgh and Glasgow put together, would create a major imbalance in Scotland's population. Indeed, because most would tend to group together in the main conurbations, that imbalance would quickly turn into ghettoisation.
Within the smart streets of Glasgow's West End, or Edinburgh's Stockbridge, immigration means middle–class foodies being able to buy ground melon seeds and honey preserved kumquats. Elsewhere, it means the destruction of social structures that have grown organically over centuries.
To put this into perspective, in 2011–12, Scotland attracted 45,116 migrants from the rest of the UK and 35,900 from overseas. In the same year, however, more than 42,000 Scots moved south of the Border and more than 26,000 went overseas, leaving net immigration of less than 13,000. And most of those leaving were young people.
Mr Salmond may say he welcomes "talented people" who want to work in Scotland, but he doesn't admit to the sheer number, or further concede that many of these immigrants do not come here to work – some beg, and a small but significant minority arrive with no other intention than making a living out of crime.
While tens of thousands of new immigrants to Scotland will come with the best of intentions, will be prepared to contribute to our society and settle their families here, it is obvious that a percentage will have every intention of becoming part of the dependency culture, or worse. Many of us are the descendants of immigrants ourselves. I am, and you may be. Immigration is good for a country, broadening its outlook. It brings new expertise, there is a willingness of those who arrive to integrate and do the best for themselves and their families and, therefore, improve society.
Where would we be without the business acumen of Jewish immigrants, the style, design abilities and culinary skills of the Italians, the entrepreneurial determination of Indians and Pakistanis? Our universities and hospitals would have ground to a halt without immigrants.
BUT immigration in the past was gradual, taking place over decades, if not centuries. Those who came here did so to settle, improve their lives and give as much to Scottish, or British, society as they took out.
The idea of a country being asked to increase its population by almost one fifth in less than 40 years – as the SNP Government proposes – is irresponsible and will only lead to widespread resentment and seriously risk social unrest.
Mr Salmond and his willing helpers – the very people who will live comfortably apart from the new arrivals – enjoy telling us that Scots' attitudes to immigration are different to those of the English. That is not so. A recent Social Attitudes survey found that Scots and English – and presumably Welsh and Northern Irish – had much the same view. It is this: we welcome people from abroad – as our institutions, the NHS, our schools, our shops, and our history, demonstrate – but only in sensible, sustainable and productive numbers.
'It will only lead to social unrest and resentment'
Document THEEXP0020140423ea4n0006b
