{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3500"}
____
  
NEWS
Middle-class ethnic minority voters could help Tories win election
By Steven Swinford Senior Political Correspondent   
1,289 words
21 April 2014
19:09
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
"Upwardly mobile" ethnic minorities more likely to vote Tory as Labour risks losing traditional support from black and Asian voters who move to the suburbs, report finds
The rising number of middle-class ethnic minority voters could help tip the election in favour of David Cameron, new research has found.
Research by Demos, the think tank, suggests that Labour risks losing its traditional support from black and Asian voters as they move to the suburbs.
The report by Trevor Phillips, the former Labour politician and former head of the equalities watchdog, and Richard Webber, a professor of geography at University College London, suggests "upwardly mobile" ethnic minority voters are more likely to turn Tory.
The report states: "There is a great deal of evidence to suggest that any emerging volatility amongst the UK's 5million ethnic electors may turn out to be at least as significant as the 3million who tell pollsters they might support Ukip in the forthcoming election."
The report suggests that second or third generation immigrants could lose their "reflex" support for Labour, and that those moving to traditionally white middle-class areas are less likely to vote Labour.
It states: "The expectation would be that succeeding generations of minority voters may drift away from their parents reflex support for Labour - or at the very least might not inherit the first generation immigrants hostility to the Conservatives.
"The other factor that could boost the Tory share of seats is a secular out-movement of ethnic minority families from the inner city neighbourhoods in which they first settled.
"The process is accelerating in London in particular due to the combination of spiralling inner city housing costs and changes to the benefit system."
An analysis of polling data suggests that ethnic minority voters are significantly more likely to vote Labour in non-white neighbourhoods than those which are predominantly white.
In non-white areas, 60 per cent of ethnic minorities vote Labour, compared to 48.1 per cent of voters in white neighbourhoods.
The analysis suggests that large numbers of Indian voters are particularly likely to stop voting Labour as they move to predominantly white areas.
Mr Phillips suggests that this makes Conservative-held seats which are targets for Labour such as Hendon and Wolverhampton South West less vulnerable because of the presence of "upwardly mobile Indian heritage, Tory voting electors".
The cluster effect - and why Labour cannot count on ethnic minority voters any more
By Trevor Phillips and Richard Webber
Amongst the many surprises awaiting Ed Miliband’s new American strategist, David Axelrod, will be the discovery that the British political class knows almost nothing about the ethnic and cultural composition of their electors, and generally speaking cares even less. The consensus is that minority voters lean to Labour and undue attention to them will simply send white voters galloping off to UKIP.
Axelrod will need all his persuasive powers to convince his new masters that this wisdom should have been thrown out with the tank tops and flares. Analysis of the effect of recent demographic changes, using unique software we have developed, suggests that future elections may well turn on thus-far unforeseen behaviour by key ethno-cultural groups.
The Tories are already wrestling with Lord Ashcroft’s recent finding that their support languishes at around 16% amongst minority voters; the former Conservative vice-chairman has warned David Cameron that his party can never win a majority of seats in the Commons with this dire showing. Their master strategist, Lynton Crosby, will have noted that in his mayoral election victory of 2012, many working class whites deserted Ken Livingstone in favour of Boris Johnson, whilst minorities went solidly for Labour.
Axelrod himself will come armed with even more convincing recent evidence. In the 2012 Presidential poll, Mitt Romney led by over 20 percentage points in white America, whilst Obama won a lower share of the white vote than any Democrat since the Reagan walkover in 1984. His 60-point advantage amongst black and Hispanic voters gave him a narrow 50.5% to 48% win in the popular vote - yet this turned into a decisive 332 – 206 electoral college victory. How come?
First, more minority voters turned out than in previous elections, whilst fewer whites showed up, so the white vote was itself less dominant. Second, the minority vote is becoming more evenly spread. There are now minority voters in districts that used to be all-white; some so-called “purple”, or swing states have turned Democratic blue. A recent study published by the prestigious Brookings Institution showed that if black and white turnout rates had been similar to that in 2004, we could have seen a dead heat – or even the election of the first Mormon President.
Our work, based on a survey of 2,400 minority voters in the UK, provided by YouGov, shows that similar factors will count here in 2015; and that Axelrod, Crosby and their Lib Dem equivalent, the South African Ryan Coetzee, will need all their experience from home in the coming contest.
In our sample, Labour outpolls the Tories by about 50-24 amongst all minorities; but the detailed picture is less straightforward.
In areas where minorities represent more than 30% of the electorate, they are even more likely to vote Labour. We call this “the cluster effect” - when surrounded by other minorities, these voters tend to copy the left-leaning behaviour of their communities.
When they move to more mixed areas, about a fifth desert Labour.
Second, Labour desertion isn’t uniform across groups. Pakistani, Muslim and Black African voters remain loyal wherever they live. But Indian-heritage Hindu voters desert Mr Miliband, with the Labour vote plummeting from around 39% in cluster areas to 13% in mixed areas – a drop of two thirds.
But is any of this significant given the numbers involved? We think it is; and having examined the 100 most marginal constituencies in the UK we identify three kinds of seats vulnerable to the cluster effect:
- Seats with small Conservative majorities and large numbers of Indian voters will be less likely to change hands because of Labour desertion. Examples are Hendon and Wolverhampton South West
- Seats with small Conservative majorities and large numbers of non-Indian minority voters may tilt to Labour because of the inward migration of upwardly mobile black or Pakistani voters; watch Enfield North and Dewsbury on election night
- Seats where the level of turnout by different ethnic groups in the constituency may be decisive; the three-way hyper-marginal of Hampstead and Kilburn is a spectacular example
Outcomes in other - apparently less marginal - seats, such as Harrow East and Harrow West, Derby North and Tooting will all present novel challenges for local politicians.
The British political establishment may not be ready for the challenge of a diverse electorate. Our politicians feel uncomfortable with the idea that identity can trump economic self-interest; we regard it as vaguely tribal, an uncivilised form of behaviour. But as elsewhere in Europe – indeed in the UK itself - ethnic loyalties can produce extraordinary political behaviour.
Looked at from this angle the importation of expensive foreign consultants by the three party leaders looks rather less like an exotic bit of me-too-ism, and much more like a traditional British trait: borrowing ideas from the rest of the old Empire, and pretending we thought of them first.
Trevor Phillips is co-founder of the data analytics company Webber Phillips, and the former Chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission. This is an extract from Issue 2 of Demos Quarterly, published on Friday 25 April at quarterly.demos.co.uk
Document TELUK00020140421ea4l0038p
