{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2625"}
____
  
Features
Can the Stones keep rolling after this?
Will Hodgkinson   
967 words
19 March 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
44
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The tour is on hold but with millions depending on it for a living, this show must go on, says Will Hodgkinson
The Rolling Stones have cancelled tonight's concert in Perth following L'Wren Scott's suicide. "All I can tell you is that Mick is absolutely devastated and that everyone from the band members to the sound engineers are being hugely supportive," a spokesman for the Rolling Stones said yesterday. "He's in such a state. I was with L'Wren a lot, and anyone who met her will tell you what an amazing person she was."
Now comes the dilemma of whether to continue with a world tour of the biggest rock'n'roll band on the planet. The Stones are due to play Adelaide on March 22 and four more dates on a stadium tour of Australia. Will they or won't they? It's a similar dilemma to the one faced by Pete Townshend and Roger Daltrey in 2002 when John Entwistle died in a Las Vegas hotel room on the eve of The Who's world tour. The tour was cancelled immediately on the news of Entwistle's death, but after taking advice from members of Entwistle's family, Townshend and Daltrey decided to continue, Townshend going on to explain that to cancel the tour meant putting the small army of people employed to keep a major rock show on the road out of work.
"My immediate mission is to complete this tour in good heart and to remember John in my quiet and private times," said Townshend at the time. Entwistle's son Christopher said of his father: "He lived for music ... This is what he would have wished."
With their 50 And Counting tour of 2012-13 limited to 30 dates, the Stones' last massive-scale outing was the Bigger Bang tour of 2005-07, which sold 4.5 million tickets over 147 concerts and grossed £355 million, second only to U2's 360º tour of 2009-11. Cancelling a tour of this size is not easy. When Lady Gaga was forced to end the sold-out North American leg of her Born This Way tour on doctor's orders because of a hip injury in February 2013, 200,000 tickets, worth about $25 million, were refunded.
In his incredibly energetic fronting of Rolling Stones shows, Mick Jagger seems to defy the laws of science, ageing and exhaustion, but there's too strong a disconnect between the good times Jagger brings to audiences and the deeply personal tragedy of Scott's suicide for him to jump straight back into his Jumping Jack Flash persona. It's likely that at least some more of the dates won't go ahead.
Should that happen, press releases are written, promoters are notified, and the process of moving about 150 musicians, backing singers, immigration lawyers, travelling accountants and road crew back to their respective homes gets under way.
The financial implications are not as dire as they at first seem. Myriad forms of insurance cover a tour of this size, including the expenses involved in ending the tour, lost revenues for performers and promoters and advertising costs. And for a band with the Stones' pull, rescheduled concerts are more likely than outright cancellations. When Bono's back surgery forced the postponement of 16 of U2's stadium shows in 2010, the dates were rescheduled for the following year and fans held on to 97 per cent of tickets.
The Stones are, however, a large business. They are global, they pay taxes, they employ many, and their biggest revenue stream comes from touring. Since 1989 they have grossed more than $1 billion from concerts.
"When we first started out, there wasn't really any money in rock'n'roll," Jagger told Fortune magazine in 2002. "Obviously there was somebody maybe who made money, but it certainly wasn't the act."
The big change came after the disaster at Altamont Speedway in 1969, when a free gig led to the death of a young fan at the hands of the Hell's Angels hired as security. After Altamont the band hired a tour director, frequently the late Bill Graham, to cut deals with local promoters, who would take 10 to 15 per cent of ticket sales after the cost of the show. Then, coming in to manage the band's 1989 Steel Wheels tour, a Canadian promoter called Michael Cohl revolutionised the model.
Cohl offered the Stones' financial advisor, the Bavarian aristocrat Prince Rupert Loewenstein, $40 million for 40 shows, resolving to cut out local promoters and book the tour himself. Cohn found new revenue streams in corporate sponsorship deals and merchandise. The band members had to take physicals for Lloyds to insure the tour. (Even Keith Richards passed.) Meanwhile, Jagger worked on revolutionising the stadium concert experience. Steel Wheels took in more than $260 million worldwide, a record at the time for a rock act.
It's likely that Jagger will take time out but return to the tour eventually. It's possible that the band will dedicate a concert to Scott, as they did for founder member Brian Jones in July 1969 with a free concert in Hyde Park. Planned as an introduction for their new guitarist Mick Taylor, the concert became a tribute to Jones after his death three days earlier.
"This whole thing runs on passion," said Keith Richards in 2002, on why the Stones keep going against the odds. "Even though we don't talk about it much ourselves, it's almost a sort of quest or mission." That mission may prove to be Jagger's saviour.
Since 1989 the Stones have grossed more than $1 billion from live concerts
Document T000000020140319ea3j0001c
