{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1247"}
﻿Nigel Farage: 'Ukip is the patriotic party'; In an interview with The Telegraph on the eve of Ukip's spring conference in Torquay, Nigel Farage explains why he thinks his party has changed the agenda on Europe and immigration
By Christopher Hope   
689 words
28 February 2014
10:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The UK Independence Party's 20 year political journey will culminate at May's elections in "the biggest political shock in modern British history", Nigel Farage says.
The Ukip leader said that the European and local elections in May were "the moment we have been waiting for" which he hoped would create an unstoppable momentum to carry the party through to next year's general election.
In an interview with The Telegraph on the eve of Ukip's spring conference in Torquay on Friday, he said: "We are on the verge of perhaps causing in three months time the biggest political shock that has been seen in modern British history."
He added: "These are the stakes. This is how high it is. We will use these elections to tell the British political class where to go. I am going to tell them don't get mad, get even. Vote Ukip and let's cause an earthquake in British politics on May 22nd.
"This is the moment we in Ukip have been waiting for. We have spent 20 years, often very chequered ears on a huge big dipper. And this is, this is it."
Mr Farage said he would be wrapping Ukip "unashamedly" in the union flag at the party's spring conference today in Torquay.
Speaking to The Telegraph at a motorway service station on his way to the conference, he said: "We are unashamedly the patriotic party. There is nothing to be ashamed of.
"We have made EU scepticism respectable, we have made debating immigration respectable and lets make being proud of who we are as a country once again respectable.
"This is the moment Ukip has waited for. There would not even be a debate on a referendum or anything we have done in the past three and a half years, but we if we get this right we can create a momentum that is unstoppable going in 2015."
 Why do you supprt ukip? Party supporters reveal their views 
Mr Farage said that Ukip "has a chance of coming" first in the European elections, pushing Labour into second place.
Ukip will fight 2,500 out of the 4,200 council seats being contested in May - an increase on the 1,700 the party fought last year.
The party would make immigration the dominant issue of the campaign.
He said that the Office of Budget Responsibility's forecast that an increase in Britain's population to 88million by 2070 would lead a one per cent increase in Britain's gross domestic product "you can keep that".
He said: "Even if huge mass immigration and a population that spirals upwards of 80million means that we are all marginally better off I don't want it. There are some things that are more important than money.
"It would be marginal anyway but the point I am making is that life is about more than GDP statistics. It is about society, community, it is about our country, it is about how we want to live."
Mr Farage also moved to paint Ukip as the working class party.
He said: "Every party has its pockets of strong support. The biggest level support we have in this country is ordinary decent people.
"In a sense the sort of people who used to voted for Thatcher in 1979. In class terms we have become the working class party."
Last week Mr Farage accepted an invitation to debate whether Britain should remain inside the European Union with Nick Clegg, the deputy Prime Minister. Mr Farage said talks were advanced, and the televised debate would be in early April.
Mr Farage said he would step up his campaign for Ukip to be allowed more peers in the House of Lords after the May elections. The party currently has just three, despite winning 23 per cent of the vote at last May's local elections.
Document TELUK00020140228ea2s003bk
