{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1821"}
____
  
NEWS
General attacks Nigel Farage over burning flag poster
By Matthew Holehouse and Peter Dominczak   
807 words
23 April 2014
13:43
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip poster showing burning Union Flag is 'disrespectful', says former head of the British Army Lord Dannatt
Nigel Farage has been condemned by the former head of the British Army over a poster showing the Union Flag on fire.
Lord Dannatt, the former Chief of General Staff, said the Ukip campaign poster was “disrespectful and inappropriate”. Soldiers have “given their lives” protecting the flag and it should not be used a political football, he said.
Yesterday Nigel Farage insisted only the "chattering classes" had been offended by Ukip's posters warning about the threat to British jobs posed by European immigration, as Labour MPs said they were “racist”.
Launching his party's European election drive, Mr Farage defended a series of adverts warning immigrants are "after" British jobs, saying mainstream politicians are "outraged because we are telling the truth." Immigration will "dominate" the month-long campaign and Ukip are the only party in tune with the concerns of "real people doing real jobs," Mr Farage said.
Lord Dannatt commanded British forces in Kosovo and was head of the Army from 2006 to 2009. He sits as a Crossbencher in the House of Lords.
The poster, unveiled by Mr Farage in Sheffield yesterday, shows a Union Flag with a burning hole in the centre, revealing the EU's blue and gold stars. The caption reads: "Who really runs this country? 75 per cent of our laws are now made in Brussels."
Lord Dannatt told the Telegraph: "I'm certainly not happy about it.
"As an ex-military man I'm minded that a regiment has two colours - the regimental colour, a flag - and it has the Union colour, the Queen's colour, and people have given their lives protecting those.
“We should respect and revere the Union flag and not involve it in the way that it is being involved in a political campaign. It will be counter-productive."
Mike Gapes, a Labour MP, said the campaign was designed to "sow fear, animosity and hatred towards immigrants" and likened Mr Farage to Marine Le Pen, the leader of the French far right.
Nicholas Soames, a Tory MP and grandson of Sir Winston Churchill who chairs a cross-bench committee on migration, said: “At a time when our country really needs to come together, the Ukip campaign is deeply divisive, offensive and ignorant.”
The billboards were funded by Paul Sykes, the tycoon behind the Meadowhall shopping centre, who said there would be "no limit" to his future spending.
Mr Farage yesterday pledged to cut net migration to 30-50,000 people a year under an Australian-style points system that would only allowed skilled migrants without criminal records.
However, the Ukip leader faced charges of hypocrisy because he employs an EU migrant: his German wife, Kirsten, who is paid £25,000 in expenses as his secretary.
Mr Farage insisted he is not denying a British worker a job because there is no Brit who can work as many hours as she can.
Asked if she was "taking someone else's job", Mr Farage said: "No, because I don't think anybody else would want to be in my house at midnight, going through emails, getting me briefed for the next day."
"Nobody else could do that job. I don't know anybody who would work those kinds of hours."
He said she is a "a very different situation to the mass of hundreds of thousands of people coming in and flooding the lower ends of the labour market."
In signs the Ukip leader is becoming frustrated by the growing scrutiny that accompanies his party's success in the polls, he said he is being "singled out" from hundreds of MPs and MEPs who also employ their relatives.
Ukip faced further embarassment when it emerged one of the "voters" pictured in the party's new manifesto is one of Mr Farage's senior aides.
The document carries an image of "Lizzy Vaid, Devon" with the caption "I'll be voting Ukip because they're the only party listening to what people want."
But Miss Vaid is Ukip's events manager and an assistant to Mr Farage, who lives with his press officer Alexandra Phillips. She also appears in the party's television election broadcast.
Mr Farage said she was a "sincere" supporter of the party who chose to work for him, and suggested she was singled out because she is mixed race. "Most parties use actors. We use Ukippers," he said.
The campaign launch took place in Sheffield, Mr Farage said, because the city is represented by Nick Clegg, the pro-EU Deputy Prime Minister, and David Blunkett, who as Home Secretary oversaw Labour's immigration policy when access was granted to eastern European citizens.
Document TELUK00020140423ea4n001uq
