{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1849"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Cable widens rift in coalition over Tory immigration 'scare stories': Business secretary: I need a tin hat when I discuss it: Immigration minister says rapid rise is bad for the UK
Alan Travis, Home affairs editor   
567 words
6 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
6
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Open warfare has broken out between Vince Cable and his cabinet colleague, Theresa May, over immigration with the Liberal Democrat business secretary saying that every time he puts his head "above the parapet" by talking positively about migrants he feels he needs "a reinforced tin hat".
Cable, in a Mansion House speech tonight, is to attack the Tories' net migration target, claims of benefit tourism and concerns over EU migrants, saying: "We just have to stop treating people coming to work here as if they are a problem. We need to kill off all the scare stories."
But in his first speech as the new immigration minister James Brokenshire will today renew May's weekend rebuke to Cable for suggesting the rapid rise in net migration is good for Britain.
Brokenshire, who took on the immigration portfolio last month after Mark Harper stepped down amid controversy surrounding the immigration status of his cleaner, will reject claims that a rapid increase in EU migration is good for the country. He will go further than May in his language, and claim that those who benefit from immigration are either employers who want cheap labour or the "wealthy metropolitan elite" who want cheap tradesmen or services.
He will insist immigration can cause displacement - keeping UK workers out of a job - despite claims that Downing Street is delaying publication of a report showing such effects are overstated.
The clash of positions between Cable and Brokenshire is the sharpest foretaste yet of the open party political battle on immigration that will take place between the coalition parties before May's European elections. Both sides pre-released parts of their speeches to the media in advance to ensure maximum impact.
The business secretary will acknowledge immigration is deeply unpopular after years of pressure on living standards and worries about jobs and housing.
He says he responds to concerns on the doorstep by saying: "I am intensely relaxed about people coming to work and study here bringing necessary skills to Britain - provided they pay their taxes and pay their way."
A marked reduction in immigration from the EU would mean an increase in the budget deficit and a slower reduction in public debt: "The same is true of overseas students who pay full market tuition fees, cross-subsidise British students and help to keep our universities financially viable," he will say.
Cable will seek to meet concerns about the rising number of EU migrants by pointing out that the 1.6 million employed in Britain make up only 5% of the workforce and it is not a one-way street, with 1.4 million British citizens living elsewhere in the EU.
Brokenshire says of those who have tried to claim that the rapid increase in net migration is good for the country: "Well, just like the home secretary, I disagree."
He will insist that it remains the aim of Conservative ministers to reduce net migration - the annual flow of people coming to live in Britain minus those going to live abroad - to the tens of thousands from its current total of 212,000 and rising.
The Liberal Democrats have never signed up to that target.
Document GRDN000020140306ea360002e
