{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"159"}
____
  
NEWS
Ofsted: give poor pupils priority places at top primaries
By Graeme Paton Education Editor   
486 words
3 April 2014
14:43
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ofsted recommends giving poor children priority access to the best primary schools as part of a radical overhaul of early years education designed to stop deprived pupils falling behind
Children from deprived families should be given priority places at primary schools as part of a drive to close the gap between rich and poor, according to the head of Ofsted.
Sir Michael Wilshaw said the school admissions code in England should be overhauled to give poor children more access to the best education.
In a report, the chief inspector said that children from low-income families who are admitted to an adjoining nursery school should then be allowed to jump the queue in the race for full primary places at the age of five.
It directly contradicts current admissions rules that ban the practice because of concerns it requires parents to make vital decisions about children’s education at the age of two or three – when many are unsure which school to choose.
At the moment, most parents apply for reception places starting in the September after children turn four.
The recommendation is likely to prove controversial particularly in many inner-city areas where there is already a huge squeeze on primary school places.
Currently, just under 7,000 primary schools – around a third – have their own nursery provision.
But Ofsted wants this number to grow significantly, suggesting that children get better early education when taught by fully-qualified teachers.
All three and four-year-olds in England are currently entitled to 15 hours of free early education each week. Two-year-olds with parents on benefits or earning less than £16,190 are also entitled to free childcare.
In the report, Ofsted said: “The admissions code for schools should be changed to give priority consideration to children who have taken up a funded early education place in that school from age two.”
Some 600,000 children a year start primary schools in England. But last year large numbers of pupils in cities such as London and Bristol were left without places because of a surge in applications.
It has been put down to a rising birthrate combined with immigration in some areas.
In his speech, Sir Michael said: "Admissions policy should change to give the poorest children priority in securing places in reception at the best schools.
"But to get this priority, it would be on condition that they take up their funded early education place there from the earliest age possible, and attend regularly."
State-funded academy schools – typically primaries – can already prioritise pupils from poor homes when they are oversubscribed.
Sir Michael also suggested that the current 15-hour funding provision was “not enough”, suggesting more money should be invested in childcare for poor pupils.
“The earlier underperformance is tackled, the greater the progress later on,” he said.
Document TELUK00020140403ea430030d
