{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1508"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Expect passport checks, May warns Scots: Fears over migration in an independent Scotland No vote would mean more devolution, says Cameron
Severin Carrell Scotland correspondent   
1,044 words
15 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
4
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The British government would expect passport checks between Scotland and England if a looser immigration policy were adopted north of the border after independence, according to Home Secretary Theresa May.
Her view is at odds with the Scottish government's aim of keeping passport-free travel.
Risking attacks for misrepresenting Scottish government policy and her own department's stance on border policy, she claimed that the SNP administration's pledge to pursue "healthy population growth", outlined in the white paper on independence, will "undermine" Tory policies south of the border.
"If the people of Scotland vote to leave the UK there would be profound changes for migration policy," she said in a speech at the Scottish Conservative party conference in Edinburgh yesterday.
"Buried deep in Alex Salmond's White Paper is the admission that, just like the last Labour government, a separate Scotland would pursue a looser immigration policy. That would undermine the work we have done since 2010, and the continuing UK could not allow Scotland to become a convenient landing point for migration into the United Kingdom.
"So that would mean border controls between a separate Scotland and the United Kingdom," she said. "Passport checks to visit friends and relatives. A literal and figurative barrier between our nations."
The Scottish government's independence white paper said that Scotland should join the Common Travel Area between the UK and Ireland, which allows free movement between both countries and will soon include a universal visa for both countries.
In January, Alistair Carmichael, the Scotland Secretary, had agreed it would make sense for Scotland to join the Common Travel Area provided it dropped plans to have more liberal, open immigration rules than the UK.
Earlier in the day, David Cameron pledged that the Tories would back plans to give Scotland more tax and law-making powers, stepping up the battle to win over undecided voters before September's independence referendum.
The prime minister said that increasing the Scottish parliament's powers to raise and set taxes was "the right thing to do" and would not be a consolation prize for Alex Salmond's nationalist government in the event of a no vote.
In a move to help build a united platform in favour of greater devolution from all three UK parties, Cameron told the Scottish Tories it was a "blatant" nationalist myth that a no vote would mean the end of the road for further powers.
"Let me be absolutely clear: a vote for no is not a vote for no change.
"We are committed to making devolution work better still, giving the Scottish parliament greater responsibility for raising more of the money it spends, Cameron told the party's spring conference, which has attracted a record 1,100 delegates.
"So here's the recap: vote yes - that is total separation. Vote no - that can mean further devolution; more power to the Scottish people and their parliament, but with the crucial insurance policy that comes with being part of our UK."
Cameron's pledge lacked any detail, but is designed to further clarify the options facing Scottish voters in the referendum, with the Liberal Democrats and Labour producing blueprints to give Holyrood greater control over income tax rates and other minor taxes.
Blair Jenkins, chief executive of the Yes Scotland pro-independence campaign, leapt on Cameron's use of the word "can" in his speech as evidence of the Tories' half-hearted and "vague" promises.
"We now know this is a sham," Jenkins said.
Tory officials rejected that, insisting that Cameron used the word to mean "will" and was wholly committed to further tax powers.
This represents a significant softening of Tory attitudes to further devolution. The Scottish Tory leader, Ruth Davidson, was elected in 2011 after describing new powers to allow Holyrood to modify the UK rate of income tax by up to 10p from 2016 as a "line in the sand".
But with opinion polls repeatedly showing that a majority of Scotland's voters want more powers than those offered in the Scotland Act, the Tories are considering more independence on income tax as part of a closely-guarded review by Lord Strathclyde, the former leader of the House of Lords, due to be published in May.
Scottish Labour's leader, Johann Lamont, is due to publish the party's devolution commission plans next week. The party is expected to propose a Scottish-run income tax system, which has been endorsed by Gordon Brown, and control over other minor taxes and benefits.
In a speech designed to make a positive case for the UK, Cameron cited his own Scottish roots - a Scottish great-great-uncle served in the first world war - adding that the recent Winter Olympics and this summer's Commonwealth Games in Glasgow gave fresh evidence of the strength of the union.
The Scottish skipper of the UK curling team, Eve Muirhead, had said that representing Team GB was a "great, great feeling", and more than a quarter of volunteers for the Commonwealth Games were coming from outside Scotland.
"It is a great feeling," Cameron said. "It's not about subjection or colonialism or dry pragmatism. It's about being part of a bigger team. A family of nations."
With Scottish police helping English forces during the 2011 riots, or Scottish patients routinely using English hospitals, these parts of the UK were not parts of a foreign country.
While the nations were sometimes argumentative, "we're there for each other", Cameron said. "And let's not forget how unique and precious that is. When you look around the world, so often, tragically, neighbourliness has been lost and replaced by wars and feuds. We don't do that. We don't slam doors and turn compatriots into foreigners."
Cameron added that recent warnings from banks such as Lloyds and RBS, and from firms such as BP and Shell, proved that the economic and financial risks of independence were not bluff and bluster or bullying.
Captions:
Theresa May said tough border controls could be brought in if Scotland became independent Photo: Ken Jack/Demotix/Corbis
Document GRDN000020140314ea3f000bj
