{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3328"}
____
  
News
Most Britons want to quit EU, reveals Brussels poll
Alison Little   
505 words
14 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
4
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
MOST British voters want to quit the EU, damning research conducted by Brussels' own researchers has found.
Forty–seven per cent of Britons believe the UK should leave, with 41 per cent disagreeing and 12 per cent recorded as "don't knows".
According to the Eurobarometer survey of nearly 28,000 people across Europe, only 32 per cent thought their own country "could better face the future outside the EU".
Fifty–eight per cent disagreed and 10 per cent have no opinion.
The UK figures are a boost for hopes that the in–out referendum promised by David Cameron before the end of 2017 – after he renegotiates the membership terms – could result in a UK exit.
Anti–Brussels campaigners said it was some of the strongest evidence yet of British voters' wish to leave the EU.
Evidence
And they chided Eurocrats for failing to mention the UK finding in their press release about the poll. It was headlined: Eurobarometer Survey: Trust And Optimism Are Growing Across The EU.
Alan Murad, of the Get Britain Out campaign, said: "These figures highlight the overwhelming support for a British exit from the EU and the UK Government must take action.
"It is imperative the British people are allowed to decide the future of Britain's relationship with the EU as soon as possible."
The press release said 34 per cent of Europeans had a positive image of the EU – up three points from November – with 26 per cent having a negative view.
In Britain, about 46 per cent of people were "pessimistic" about the EU's future while a rock bottom 66 per cent said they did not trust Brussels and 34 per cent viewed the EU negatively, the detailed survey showed.
Meanwhile, the Open Europe proreform think tank has said the European Parliament should lose its right to increase the EU budget or to veto trade agreements made by member nations.
The role of Westminster and other parliaments in European decisionmaking should be strengthened to make the EU more accountable to voters, rather than increasing MEPs' power, it added.
OPINION: PAGE 12
MIGRATION TARGET'CAN BE REACHED'
DAVID Cameron insisted last night that his target for cutting immigration was still "achievable" – despite a continuing flood of new arrivals from EU countries.
Official figures are expected to show today that at least 30,000 Romanians and Bulgarians came to Britain since the beginning of the year.
Net migration soared to 212,000 last year, raising fears that the Home Office will not meet its target of reducing the annual figure to "tens of thousands" before the next general election.
Mr Cameron said he had not given up on the target but conceded the Government has limited powers to control net migration. "The target remains, I think it is absolutely achievable," he told senior MPs.
But he accepted there were "big increases" in the numbers of newcomers from economically struggling eurozone countries, including Spain, Italy and France.
Document THEEXP0020140514ea5e0008p
