{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"3583"}
____
  
Observer New Comment Pages
THE RULES AN ETIQUETTE GUIDE TO SPEAKING OUT
Rafael Behr   
664 words
23 February 2014
The Observer
OB
46
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
When to speak out
When silence is no longer an option, it may be time for you to speak out. But it may also be time to give silence another try, especially if alcohol is involved. If you have drunk so much that it would not be legal to drive somewhere in order to speak out, assume that silence is in fact still an option.
Other times when it is appropriate to suppress the urge to speak out: when queuing for security at the airport; when provoked to outrage by something you have seen in the Daily Mail; when the person on the receiving end of your outrage is a low-ranking employee of the company or agency that has made you angry; when you are alone in the room.
Speaking out and free speech
Once it has been established that the time has come to speak out, make sure you choose the right grievance.
Some people struggle to make their voices heard. If you write newspaper columns bemoaning the demise of freedom of expression, you are not one of those people.
Headlines declaring that no one is allowed to debate a subject - usually immigration - are a sign that debate on the subject has been mandatory for years.
If what you are speaking out against involves a shadowy network of international puppet-masters pulling the strings of government, do not waste your time trying to speak out through established mainstream media. They are in on it too.
Famous people speaking out
Celebrities sometimes like to speak out on issues they care about. These should not bear any relationship to issues they know about. (Thus David Bowie is entitled to speak out against Scottish independence and George Clooney can call for the Elgin marbles to be returned to the Parthenon.) Although these interventions may appear ridiculous, they are preferable to rock musicians and film stars speaking out against how much tax they have to pay.
Movie stars are sometimes appointed by the United Nations as special ambassadors. This bestows on them the power to have important issues mentioned briefly in italics at the end of the interviews they do when promoting their new films.
When nothing more vacuous or less helpful could be said by a famous person on a contentious topic, it is said to have crossed the Prince Charles threshold.
Religion and speaking out
Most religions encourage speaking out against injustice and wickedness, except when offences are perpetrated by clerics, in which case it becomes God's will that no one speak out. God's will can be very confusing. People who speak out against established religious authorities are usually heretics but, on occasion, may also be prophets. It all depends how many disciples they have. A prophet is a heretic who is good at sales.
Speaking out in church
If you do actually know of a reason why two people should not be lawfully married, raise it well in advance and in private rather than wait for that moment in the ceremony when the priest asks the congregation.
Good forums
Mid-morning television Easy questions from docile interviewers.
US presidential inaugural address The world is listening and you still have moral authority from not yet having invaded anyone.
Group therapy No one will criticise.
Not-so-good forums
The comments thread of national newspaper websites Foam-flecked hysteria is part of the deal; no one is taking anyone seriously apart from the people who take everything far too seriously.
Radio phone-ins Like the comment threads, but with a presenter who can cut you off.
The House of Commons Too much shouting; no one can hear you.
The House of Lords By the time you have made it here, anyone who cares what you have to say has heard you say it already.
Speakers' Corner There's a reason why it isn't called "listeners' corner".
Rafael Behr
Document OB00000020140222ea2n0001r
