{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1176"}
____
  
News
Illegal immigrant uses his 5 children to fight deportation
Paul Jeeves   
454 words
21 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
17
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
AN illegal immigrant has mounted a "human rights" battle to stay in the UK after fathering five children here in six years.
Mohammed Zulfiqar, 55, smuggled himself into Britain on a fake passport.
Now he will receive legal aid so lawyers can lodge a claim that he is entitled to "the right to a family life" instead of being deported home to Pakistan.
Zulfiqar paid £15,000 to a mystery Mr Fix-It for forged travel documents so he could enter the UK illegally in 2002.
But after spending 11 years under the radar of the authorities he was arrested when he applied for a licence to work as a doorman using a bogus passport to support his application.
Counterfeit Checks revealed that the man named in the passport had reported it stolen, while a national insurance number quoted by Zulfiqar belonged to a dead man.
Last night Zulfiqar's wife claimed she did not speak any English when approached at the family home in Bradford where the couple lived with their five children aged under six.
It is understood he is preparing to use Article 8, "the right to family life", of the European Convention on Human Rights legislation to demand the Home Office allow him to stay in Britain.
Details of his case emerged at Leeds Crown Court, where Zulfiqar was jailed on Wednesday for 21 months after being found guilty of using the fake British passport last August to gain employment, and possessing the Pakistan passport with counterfeit endorsements.
In mitigation Zulfiqar's lawyer Lisa Julian confirmed her client had a wife with health difficulties, plus five children under six and was trying to fight deportation proceedings.
The judge, Mr Recorder Keith Miller, described the passport as "a sophisticated forgery". He said: "I believe you know much more than you are prepared to divulge about the circumstances in which you acquired the British passport and the stamps on the Pakistani passport.
"What is clear is that you are in this country illegally."
He said in the worst cases false documents such as those held by Zulfiqar could be used to engage in acts of terrorism, although that was not the case here.
Prospective Ukip MP David Simister said: "This case is just typical of the way the Human Rights Act is seized upon by people who are illegally living in our overcrowded country and lawyers all too willing to cash in.
"Because we are in the EU we have no option but to adhere to the Human Rights Act."
Last year 200 offenders, including rapists and muggers, successfully challenged removal from Britain by citing Article 8.
opinion: page 12
Document THEEXP0020140321ea3l0004c
