{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1902"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Give us the facts
310 words
7 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
19
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
The Government has released a report, rather reluctantly, that shows that the impact of immigration upon the employment of native Britons is limited during a "buoyant market" – but that there is no doubt that low–skilled British workers were displaced by migrants during the recent recession. This gives power to the argument of James Brokenshire, the new immigration minister, that migration might be welcomed by a "wealthy metropolitan elite", but is the bane of working–class Britons.
It is ironic, perhaps, that it is the Conservatives that are making this argument, given that their traditional constituents are more likely to be members of the very elite that Mr Brokenshire identified as the source of the problem. But politics is full of surprises – and the Left's support for mass immigration is paradoxical, too. Its members claim to represent the working class, yet they have pursued policies that run counter to its economic interests. Notoriously, Labour promised in government that opening up Britain's employment market to Eastern Europe would bring just a trickle of people. Instead, it drew millions, creating competition over low–skilled jobs and putting horrendous pressures on public services. Worse, any critics of this approach were subjected to lazy charges of racism.
The most important thing when dealing with such a heated subject is to base your argument on facts, not wishes or prejudices. Which is why it is so disturbing that this latest report took so long to reach the public, despite having been produced last year. Downing Street is accused of blocking publication for fear that it might have contradicted its claims about the urgency of reducing immigration. Such calculated behaviour, on such a sensitive and complex subject, is inappropriate. Voters deserve a debate that is informed by all the data available.
Document DT00000020140307ea370004h
