{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2006"}
____
  
NEWS
Prime Minister must stop fighting 'futile' war on drugs
By Georgia Graham, Political Correspondent   
611 words
29 April 2014
15:58
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Prime Minister should abandon the war on drugs to woo young voters, according to a Conservative think tank backed by senior ministers including Theresa May and Francis Maude
David Cameron must abandon the “futile” war on drugs if he is to win over young voters, an influential Conservative think tank has said.
Bright Blue, a Conservative think tank backed by senior ministers including Theresa May and Francis Maude, urged the Prime Minister to make the pledge to reform current drug legislation a cornerstone in the Conservative manifesto in an effort to attract new voters.
One of a series of policy proposals in the organisations “The Modernisers’ Manifesto”, the provocative plan suggests that drug reform would appeal to young and ethnic-minority voters while saving millions of pounds in policing costs.
The suggestion that the Conservative party should consider decriminalising drugs was put forward by Ian Birrell, a journalist and a former advisor to David Cameron.
Mr Cameron briefly flirted with the policy after becoming Tory leader in 2005, he wrote in his article for the manifesto, reproduced in The Independent.
The Prime Minister abandoned the idea because of the fear of “hostile headlines”, he added.
Mr Birrell, a former deputy editor of The Independent, said changes since then had made the cause of decriminalisation right and electorally advantageous.
“It is hard to think of another policy with the same potential to challenge popular conceptions of conservatism,” he wrote.
The policy is likely to be unpopular with figures such as Mrs May, the Home Secretary, and other figures in the Conservative right but chimes with Liberal Democrat policy on liberalisation of drug laws.
Nick Clegg has already said they will set up a Royal Commission to overhaul Britain’s drugs rules and some within Labour would back a similar approach.
Ryan Shorthouse, director of Bright Blue, said it time for the Conservatives to enter the debate on drug policy in Britain.
He told The Independent: “What is clear is that much more needs to be done on the development of drugs policy in the UK as the current situation is both economically and socially damaging,” he said.
“We believe that the Conservatives at the next election need to be seen to be taking on the big, difficult issues facing society and not be distracted by the Ukip agenda of Europe and immigration.”
Mr Shorthouse said Bright Blue would not go as far as Mr Birrell in advocating the complete legalisation of drugs but partial decriminalisation needed to be looked at.
Last year the Deputy Prime Minister accused the Conservatives of refusing to look "imaginatively" at new ways of tackling the UK's drugs problem and said Britain was not “winning the war” on drugs.
"I find it very frustrating that my Conservative coalition partners are not prepared to look more openly" at changing drugs policy, he said.
Nigel Farage , the leader of the UK Independence Party, declared this month that while he has “never taken drugs” he supports their decriminalisation.
Speaking in a phone in with Telegraph readers, Mr Farage said the war on drugs had been lost “many, many years ago” and that it was time for them to be legalised – despite strong opposition from his party.
Other controversial policies put forward by the think tank include abolishing universal winter fuel payments and excluding students and highly skilled workers from the Government’s net migration target.
It also suggests introducing a requirement for new teachers to have at least a 2:1 degree in core subjects and abandoning automatic pay rises for doctors and nurses.
Document TELUK00020140429ea4t003bi
