{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"901"}
____
  
News
BOTTLED IT? ME? PULL THE OTHER ONE
Tim Shipman   
1,920 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
2; National
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage has dodged a tricky by-election but he's on course to beat everyone on May 22, writes Tim Shipman, Political Editor
The Forum in Bath might have been designed as a UK Independence party venue. A converted 1930s cinema with echoes of a bygone age, it encapsulates UKIP's blend of box office politics and a very British provincialism.
It was here, at 7.21pm last Tuesday, as he prepared to address 1,000 people at his largest rally of the European election campaign so far, that Nigel Farage, the party leader, heard the news that would allow him to dominate the week in politics.
The resignation of Patrick Mercer as MP for Newark over a cash-for-questions scandal gave Farage the chance to perform on a bigger stage. With his party rising in the polls in the run-up to the elections on May 22, the chance to become UKIP's first MP seemed to be within his grasp.
At 7.25pm, five minutes before he was due to speak, Farage made a mobile phone call to Patrick O'Flynn, UKIP's director of communications. The leader was already doubtful that standing in the by-election would be a good idea.
"He knew very early on that he wasn't going to do it," a senior party figure said. But O'Flynn, a former Daily Express commentator with a shrewd cynicism about politics, realised they could use the speculation to drown out a clamour about poorly vetted UKIP candidates whose racist, homophobic and plain bizarre outbursts were attracting growing coverage.
"We decided to have a bit of fun for several days," the source said. "Nigel would say he was interested and we would keep it hanging and there would be a feeding frenzy that would drive Tory high command nuts. It would paralyse them." Farage approved the plan.
At the end of the rally the leader declared Newark "seriously tempting" and promptly retired to the Hop Pole, a 16thcentury pub in nearby Limpley Stoke, for the inevitable pint with a press officer, Alex Phillips, and a BBC correspondent, Norman Smith. In Westminster, where more than 100 MPs and journalists had gathered for drinks at the InterContinental hotel, the talk was of little else.
Less than 12 hours later the game was off. Speculation that Farage would run had reached the front pages and the decision was taken to "close it down". Farage used Wednesday's Today programme on Radio 4 to explain why he would not stand in Newark.
"I don't want to do anything that deflects from the European election campaign," he said. "I think UKIP could cause an earthquake in British politics, from which we can go on and win not just one parliamentary seat but quite a lot of parliamentary seats."
Waiting at the BBC's Millbank studios in Westminster were Kenneth Clarke, the cabinet minister whose Nottinghamshire seat borders Newark, and his parliamentary private secretary, Ben Wallace. Hearing Farage's words, Wallace began clucking loudly and waggling his arms like a chicken's wings flapping. Within minutes the consensus on social media was that Farage had "bottled it".
He was swiftly compared to Gordon Brown and David Miliband, who failed to seize their respective moments to win a general election and the Labour leadership.
So was dodging Newark a strategic masterstroke or a waste of the best opportunity Farage will ever have to break the mould of British politics? More importantly for the two main parties, can his seemingly inexorable rise be stopped or will he prevent the Conservatives from winning the next election? TODAY'S YouGov poll for The Sunday Times finds that UKIP is still on course for victory in the Euro elections. On 29%, the party is a point clear of Labour and seven ahead of the Tories. Twice as many voters think UKIP has the best immigration policy as support Tory plans. Only 18% think Farage should have stood in Newark; 54% of UKIP supporters say he did the right thing.
Farage now believes he has made "one of the best decisions I have ever taken". Even as the tease strategy unravelled, he still managed to be the biggest news story two days running. Allies point out that a recent study ranked Newark as UKIP's 248th most winnable seat. A friend said he could have won the by-election but "it would have been trickier to hold it next year. If you win at the general election, it's a five-year deal." Party figures want him to confine his search for a Westminster seat to his home county of Kent. His effort to oust John Bercow, the Commons Speaker, from Buckingham in 2010 failed because he was seen as a carpetbagger.
"We've learnt our lesson," an ally said. "He needs to run a local campaign and we need Nigel near the television studios in London if we're going to capitalise on the result after May 22."
Likely seats include South Thanet, where the Tory europhile Laura Sandys is standing down, neighbouring North Thanet plus Folkestone and Dover.
Farage is also keen to promote a cast of new faces to share the spotlight. One of those is the East Midlands MEP Roger Helmer, who defected from the Tories in 2012 and is expected to run in Newark.
"He is an old pro," said a UKIP insider. Helmer, 70, has also come under the spotlight for comments made 14 years ago in which he described homosexuality as "abnormal and undesirable". But his views pale beside those of other UKIP candidates.
Andre Lampitt, who appeared in an election broadcast, branded the Prophet Muhammad a "pedophile" [sic]. William Henwood resigned as a candidate for Enfield council after calling for comedian Lenny Henry to emigrate to a "black country". Demetri Marchessini, the party's sixth-largest cash donor last year, took to Channel 4 News on Wednesday to air views on rape, slavery and gay lust, and his belief that women should be banned from wearing trousers.
The Tory campaign chief Lynton Crosby has told aides that Farage's followers have "never had any proper scrutiny. He needs to get some." UKIP accuses the Conservatives of digging up dirt. A source close to David Cameron defended the onslaught, saying: "This is a competence issue. Farage said he would vet all these candidates. It's pretty basic to do a Google search and find out that someone has called the Prophet Muhammad a paedophile. They're amateur hour." Tory high command believes the focus on extremist candidates is having an effect. Its private polling shows that some voters have reached "hesitation point" over backing UKIP.
But Tory MPs are not convinced it is the right approach. "I know we've got researchers dishing out filth on Farage but they forget why people vote for him. They vote for him because he isn't us," said a northern MP. "There's no love for us out there and no sense of wanting to reward us."
The willingness of voters to turn a blind eye to UKIP's excesses is striking. Anthony Wells, of YouGov, said: "Even if people think the criticisms of UKIP are fair, they don't necessarily diminish their support — 60% think the accusations about some of UKIP's candidates being racist or extreme are fair but only 21% say it has damaged their view of UKIP."
IN DOWNING STREET, a determination to make the government's arguments is mingled with a sense of futility about whether they will make any difference on May 22.
The Conservative campaign, outlined at Cameron's election launch on Friday, will highlight the prime minister's record of cutting the Brussels budget and the conviction that only he can give voters a say on the EU. "I will deliver this in-out referendum," he said. "Labour won't. UKIP can't. I will."
It is easy to forget that UKIP was struggling in the early part of the year. Then Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister, challenged Farage to televised debates on Brussels. Farage won — comfortably in the first debate, decisively in the second — and has not looked back. The hope of team Clegg that its man would gain credit with voters for a principled stance has failed to materialise. Nick Harvey, the Liberal Democrat MP for North Devon, said Clegg had been right to confront Farage "because at the time we were on seven or eight points and that could see us losing all our MEPs. Get 10% or 11% and we might keep half a dozen."
However, the party has fallen back to 7% in today's poll, in fifth place behind the Greens. Clegg aims to make a virtue of the Lib Dems' status as "the party of in [Europe]" but an ally said: "Realistically if we get in single digits we could lose the lot."
Labour is on course to win several hundred council seats on May 22. Yet as one disgruntled frontbencher asked: "If we do well, is anyone going to notice? It's going to be wallto-wall UKIP."
Ed Miliband's strategy is to ignore Europe and "road test" his party's message for the general election next year. "It's cost of living stuff, really," one insider said. However, UKIP's focus on immigration has peeled away a chunk of Labour's working-class support. John Denham, an MP close to Miliband, accused the party last week of making a "complete hash" of its response to UKIP. It was a mistake to call Farage's party racist, he said.
For its part UKIP will also continue to hammer home its main points. Farage was in Dover yesterday to unveil a poster depicting an escalator for immigrants up the white cliffs. Senior party figures say they will continue to promote the notion that they are fighting a "Lib-Lab-Con pro-European Establishment".
If a UKIP triumph on May 22 seems ever more likely, future prospects are less clear. Farage's allies admit their best hope of a real breakthrough is to maintain enough momentum to get 10% of the vote at the general election next year. They speak hopefully of creating a new era of four-party politics in Britain.
For the Tories, a crisis is coming. Cameron's closest aides speak hopefully of UKIP voters in 2014 behaving like a man who is about to get married. "People say they'll vote UKIP and come back to us next year," said one senior figure. "It's like a wild stag do in Las Vegas. It's the final fling before you settle down."
But even if UKIP support is slashed dramatically, it could be Miliband who ends up in No 10. As a Conservative MP put it: "It will get very hard for Dave when 50 Tory MPs wake up on May 23 and realise that if the results are even slightly replicated next year they will lose their seats. UKIP got 3% in the last general election. If they get 6%, 7%, 8% next time, we'll lose 50 Conservative-Labour marginals. Labour wouldn't need to win a single extra vote."
If you feel like a chicken tonight, Nigel, that's because you are one, Rod Liddle, page 25 How UKIP are you?, News Review, page 7
WE KNEW THERE'D BE A FEEDING FRENZY THAT WOULD PARALYSE THE TORIES
Document ST00000020140504ea54000pu
