{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1525"}
____
  
Friends: The One with The Other Woman; Dave's advisers suggest that a well-chosen affair could do wonders for his electoral prospects
By David Thomas   
598 words
15 March 2014
18:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Dave was in a splendid mood as he arrived for his weekly strategy meeting with the Central Office whizz-kids Julian and Sophie.
“You can’t tell me I should be more like Nigel Farage this week!" he chortled. “He’s been accused of having an affair and paying for his mistress with EU funds. This’ll prick the Ukip bubble all right – no pun intended, ho-ho!"
The two young masterminds did not seem amused, however. “Actually, PM, what with the upcoming Euro-elections and the likelihood we’ll come third behind Ukip and Labour, we still think you should go the Farage route," Julian said.
Dave was aghast: “But I can’t be any ruder about immigrants, just to appease that mob. Sam and I can’t get a dinner-party invitation in Notting Hill as it is."
“We’re not talking immigrants," Sophie explained. “This is all about your problem with women."
Dave sighed: “Not this again! Look, it’s terribly hard to find women for top jobs. None of them were at school with me, for a start."
“That’s not the problem, PM. The issue here is sex. We believe voters will love the Farage story. They’ll think, 'He drinks, he smokes, he loves the ladies and he’s getting Brussels to pay for it. Brilliant!’"
“But surely women don’t like a man accused of cheating on his wife?"
Sophie sighed. “Actually, PM, there’s something deliciously appealing about a naughty boy. Clinton, Boris, even Hollande all gained by being ladykillers. One sort of thinks, 'If all these other women want him, he must be worth having.’"
“We’re looking at a serious case of sexual under-performance," Julian cut in. “We’ve gone back to a 2013 pool that asked women which party leader they’d like to sleep with. The winner, was Nick Clegg, with Farage second, Miliband third and, I’m sorry, PM, but you came last."
Dave couldn’t believe it.
“I must be sexier than Ed Miliband! The man’s a gormless Wallace and Gromit puppet."
“Well, he received 20.5 per cent of the vote and you only got 13.5 per cent," Julian insisted. “But we think there’s an answer. You should have an affair, preferably more than one."
“But I love my wife!"
“I know, PM," said Sophie, reassuringly. “But Samantha will understand that some things are more important than love."
“I doubt it. Anyway, who am I supposed to have this affair with?"
“Bit of a problem there, PM," said Julian. “We made inquiries among female celebrities known for their active private lives, but we couldn’t find any takers. Basically, PM, we’re fishing in a small pool. At 13.5 per cent, you’re a minority interest."
“But we do have one other suggestion," said Sophie. “We think you should make a play for the Danish PM, Helle Thorning-Schmidt. You’ve already set the ball rolling with the selfie at Mandela’s memorial. And she works across every demographic. She’s blonde, she’s sexy and she’s got that whole Borgen thing going on for BBC Four viewers who just aren’t buying into Brand Cameron at the moment."
“And she’s married to Stephen Kinnock, so you’d be getting one over on Labour. Literally," Julian added. “Buy a ticket and climb aboard, Prime Minister. It’s your only hope."
Document TELUK00020140315ea3f004n0
