{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2122"}
____
  
News
Despite all those so-called 'car crashes', the Ukip bandwagon rides on
By Tim Stanley   
810 words
17 May 2014
16:54
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Another day, another “Ukip car crash moment”. They’ve crashed that old banger so many times it’s amazing that they’re still on the road. The latest accident was Nigel Farage窶冱 appearance on James O窶傳rien窶冱 show on LBC. Lefty O’Brien’s a brilliant journalist and a nice guy, but he makes Owen Jones look like a Monday Club member – so it’s no surprise that he hammered Farage hard on immigration and expenses. For once, the Ukip leader handled it badly. Partly because of some of the things he’s said about Romanians are simply indefensible and partly because O’Brien’s rage was so pure that he struggled to defuse the situation with his usual bonhomie.
Ukip’s foes will say that Farage is finished on the grounds that anyone who sees the interview couldn’t possibly vote for him and his party. But there's two problems with that:
* Ninety-nine-point-nine per cent of Britons won't watch the video because they’ve got better things to do with their lives.
* Anyone who is already emotionally committed to voting Ukip probably wouldn’t change their mind if Nigel Farage got drunk, tattooed the Union Jack on his forehead and ran across the white cliffs of Dover shouting his own name.
The Euros aren’t a general election, so people will take greater risks with their vote than they normally would. And Ukip isn’t a mainstream party, so people don’t judge it by the same high standards. By this point in British history, the voters have all grasped that Ukip’s a little bit right-wing and they aren’t particularly surprised to discover that it attracts fruitcakes. But a significant number of them don’t care because they are bitterly frustrated with the state of the country and see voting Ukip as the loudest (even rudest) way of registering their anger.
Here窶冱 a historical parallel from a book what I wrote about American political history. In 1996, TV pundit Pat Buchanan entered the New Hampshire presidential primary as an incredibly conservative Republican. After winning two caucuses and placing second in Iowa, he shocked everyone by nudging into first place in the New Hampshire polls on an anti-war, anti-immigration, pro-life, economically populist ticket. The Republican Party and the media rallied against him, dredging up every awful thing he’d ever written about women, gays and lesbians, the South Koreans etc. And a couple of days before the vote, they thought they’d hit pay dirt when they discovered that one of Buchanan’s campaign chairs had shared a platform with a white supremacist. Despite all of this, the right-winger still won. Why? Because Buchanan had a solid base of supporters who rallied to their man under attack, who hated the establishment so much that they didn’t care what he said or did, and who were financially so bad off that they voted enthusiastically and in large numbers. The attempt to destroy Buchanan's reputation actually validated his claim to be the outsider candidate and confirmed that voting for him was the best way to register discontent. Crucially, his candidacy died out soon after in the primary process because the wider Republican Party never actually wanted him to be nominee. They were just flirting with radicalism.
There are similar dynamics at play in Britain, 2014. The attacks on Farage also confirm that he’s a revolutionary, despised by the mainstream – and the establishment is expressing the same sense of outrage that the attacks aren’t dragging him down. He, too, is running in a contest that the voters don’t regard as definitive and in which they feel comfortable about “throwing their vote away” on making a grand statement about the direction of their country. One interesting difference is that Buchanan’s team were fiercely loyal and always stood by each other: Ukip is considerably more fractious. Yet another libertarian has publicly dropped their support on the grounds that the party is talking too much about immigration. An odd complaint to make given that Ukip always has been in favour of tighter controls and that the EU/immigration questions are inseparable. It’s because of our membership of the EU that the issue is an issue at all.
The key point is that Ukip doesn’t play by the usual electoral rules, so don’t be surprised if all these car crashes fail to dent it. Britain is going through a period of political realignment of which the Ukip revolt is probably a symptom rather than the cause. It is an almost revolutionary moment, and the whole point of revolutions is that political orthodoxy is suspended for the duration.
Document TELUK00020140517ea5h004ed
