{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"874"}
____
  
NEWS
School becomes first to make history compulsory up to 18
By Graeme Paton Education Editor   
797 words
5 May 2014
07:31
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Brighton College becomes the first school in the UK to make history compulsory up to the age of 18 following claims too many children are missing out on a proper understanding of UK and world events
A leading private school is to make history compulsory up to the age of 18 amid fears pupils across the UK currently drop the subject earlier than in any other European country.
Brighton College in East Sussex is believed to be the first school in Britain to force all pupils to take history in the sixth-form.
Teenagers will be given an hour of the subject each week irrespective of whether they choose it as one of their A-level options, it was announced.
In the lower-sixth, pupils will be taught a broad chronology of British history starting with the Romans, Anglo-Saxons and Vikings and ending with the Victorians.
The upper-sixth will focus on world history and politics with a particular emphasis on the development of the UK, Russia, China and the United States on the international stage.
The announcement was made as Richard Cairns, the Brighton College headmaster, insisted it was a "disgrace" that pupils were currently allowed to drop the subject just three years into secondary education.
History is compulsory up the age of 14 in state schools.
The Government insists the overall number of pupils taking it at GCSE level in England has increased over the last decade.
But a recent survey by The Historical Association found that the number of schools barring some pupils from history had risen by around a quarter in the last 12 months and more than doubled over a two-year period because of concerns it was too hard.
Mr Cairns said: "History is not compulsory beyond the age of 14 in Britain. It is a disgrace that we are the only country in the European Union where this is the case.
"This also means that most history is studied in primary schools, usually in bite-size chunks with no obvious connections between topics.
"Children are introduced to the Egyptians, the Tudors and Victorian women. It is as if they are on a journey through the history and periodically they are blindfolded.
"They leave the world of ancient Rome to find themselves chained to the railings outside Buckingham Palace with Emily Pankhurst."
Brighton, which charges up to £20,400 a year for day pupils and £32,800 for boarders, said all pupils would take part in the history hour in the sixth-form. Classes will also be compulsory for those sitting separate A-levels in the subject.
The lower-sixth will focus on the "story of our land", Mr Cairns said, looking at the impact of the Romans, Anglo Saxons and Vikings, the significance of 1066, England's complex relations with Europe during the Middle Ages, the Magna Carta, Agincourt and the Spanish Armada.
In the upper-sixth, pupils will study world events, focusing on the UK, Russia, China and the US. Topics will include Russia's relations with other former Soviet states such as Ukraine and how the Boxer rebellion and Japanese invasion of China in the 30s shaped Chinese attitudes towards the West.
The plans will be announced at a conference staged at Brighton College this week, which will also feature an address from Michael Gove, the Education Secretary.
Mr Cairns said: "Education should be about providing young people with a cultural hinterland.
"They should be able to recognise Roman influences on our language and architecture, they should be able to distinguish different forms of architecture, understand the impact of immigration on England over centuries not decades, and explain why Britain is so often both insular and global in outlook.
"And we owe it to young people to find time in the curriculum to explain major issues of global politics. They need to understand Russian sensitivities towards the Ukraine - and Ukrainian sensitivities towards Russia. They need to understand China's traditional suspicion of the west.
"They need to understand that China and India were global economic powers well before Britain was. They need to understand why Germany is so reluctant to intervene in world affairs while France and Britain strive to punch above their weight."
The Department for Education has said entries for GCSE history in England were actually at a 16-year high in 2013, with pupil numbers increasing by 17 per cent in 12 months.
It follows the introduction of the English Baccalaureate - a new league table measure that marks out pupils who gain good GCSE grades in a range of academic disciplines including history or geography.
A spokesman said it had "helped schools focus on core subjects including history".
Document TELUK00020140505ea550005n
