{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"858"}
____
  
NEWS
A nation so many are proud to call their own
By Telegraph View   
473 words
6 May 2014
01:01
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A majority of members of ethnic minorities in this country consider themselves British - a reminder of how important and splendid a concept Britain is
On the face of it, new research by the Policy Exchange think tank into modern Britain suggests that our country is changing at a staggering rate. By 2050, it says, one in three people in England and Wales will come from an ethnic minority, a demographic change driven by higher birth rates as well as immigration. Further, the report also suggests that, among the five largest minority groups, only 20 per cent of those surveyed identified themselves as English, compared with more than 60 per cent of white people. Among many, those figures will understandably prompt a concern that our sense of national solidarity is being eroded.
There is, however, a more positive story contained in the figures. Because while ethnic minority citizens may not call themselves English, on the whole, a good majority describe themselves as British. Among British Indians and Pakistanis, more than 60 per cent consider themselves British; among Bangladeshis, that figure is 74 per cent. The numbers are lower among black Africans and Caribbeans, but none the less, the picture is a heartening one. Britain has taken these citizens (or rather, in most cases, their parents or grandparents) in, and made them its own; and they, in turn, make Britain theirs.
It is a reminder of what a unifying concept Britain is. It includes separate nations in a single state, allowing each their own identity while binding them into a larger whole; it has welcomed, over its long and varied history, invaders and refugees and immigrants, and been changed by all, while remaining fundamentally the same. Its constancy in the face of change, like its unity from divided parts, ought to be a contradiction, and yet it is not.
There is much to be proud of in this idea; yet it is under attack on two fronts. One is to the north: Alex Salmond and his Yes campaign will try to tear the Union apart later this year, when the referendum on Scottish independence takes place. For all his soothing noises about how nothing will really change, Britain, as we know it, may no longer exist.
The second is to the south, where Nigel Farage and Ukip are leading the polls for the approaching European elections. While it is true that uncontrolled immigration carries risks, the tone of Ukip’s campaign is entirely at odds with the inclusive picture of Britain that the Policy Exchange research paints.
Fortunately, Mr Salmond and Mr Farage do not represent the country as a whole. As today’s report shows, Britain is a nation that even its newest citizens are proud to call their own.
Document TELUK00020140505ea5600565
