{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2298"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Plymouth: Labour encounters emotion and anger on the doorstep
John Harris   
1,040 words
21 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
7
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The door of the bungalow swings open, and the woman who answers it - she works for Plymouth city council so will not give her name - looks indifferently at a Labour party leaflet. "I'm a grafter," she says. "You're not doing nothing for me."
Then her husband appears. Brian Wilson, a 68-year-old retired council cleaner and lifelong Labour voter, is clearly annoyed. "Mr Farage is the only one telling the truth about Europe," he says. In vain, a solitary Labour party canvasser tries to start a forensic discussion about Ukip's free market economics and Farage's belief in flat taxes - but it sounds like emotion and raw anger being met with clinical policy wonkery, to nobody's great benefit.
We're in the Stoke council ward, west of Plymouth city centre. Wilson's local Ukip candidate, I tell him, has been the subject of reports about his somewhat out-there activities on Facebook: online membership of two far-right groups, as well as his apparent endorsement of a defamatory essay linking Prince Charles - via Jimmy Savile - to paedophilia. What does he make of all that?
"I can't really say," he says. "All I'm going by is what they say on Europe . . . anyway, you only know what you've been told. They're just getting a bad press, that's all."
Unlike those swaths of the south-west where the Liberal Democrats are the chief anti-Conservative force, Plymouth has long been split between Labour and the Tories; its place in the English left's mythology going back to that renowned native of Plymouth, Michael Foot. He was an MP here between 1945 and 1955, before that infamous splitter David Owen eventually took over.
With 32 seats out of 57, Labour has run the city council since 2012 and, with the 19 wards under contention tomorrow being evenly split between the two main parties, its people are looking to increase their grip.
Ukip is running a full slate of candidates, and talking up its chances. At the last European elections Farage's party finished first in Plymouth, and even Labour expects it to do the same again; the more interesting question is whether Ukip will take any seats on the city council. Labour high-ups are adamant that if that happens it will be Tory seats that go, while others see the city as a case study in Labour's overlooked vulnerability to the same threat.
The pored-over academic treatise Revolt on the Right identifies Labour-held Plymouth Moor View (one of the city's two Labour/Tory marginals) as one of the top five parliamentary seats that might be vulnerable to Ukip. This is traceable to the seat's demographics - essentially, a preponderance of what the book calls "left behind" voters - and what has happened there electorally: in 2010 Ukip managed a creditable 7.7% of the vote, and at the last city council elections the party got 20% of the poll.
By way of proving that all this is being taken very seriously, on the day of my visit there is a Ukip public meeting at the guildhall in the city centre. But, as if to confirm the party also has work to do, it's a somewhat damp squib: around 30 people listen to Tony McIntyre, a candidate for the European parliament, talking about what he inelegantly calls "the immigrant problem we've got in this country".
The leader of the city council is Labour's Tudor Evans. He traces Ukip's local strength to "a huge strand of Euroscepticism", but insists that if it advances, it will be at the expense of the Tories. "We know that Ukip are taking votes off the Labour party," he tells me, "but they're taking more votes off the Tory party. That's all we need to happen: as long as we can maintain our share of the vote, we're ahead."
If a few hours of canvassing is anything to go by, plenty of habitual Labour voters will dutifully turn out this week. It may be some measure of internal jitters that among the piles of mail shots at Labour's HQ is one aimed at people thinking of voting Green. None of this seems to augur well for 2015; if there is going to be what Westminster insiders call a "change moment", it will somehow have to arrive very late in the electoral day.
So it proves in Southway, a post-war housing development half an hour's bus ride from the middle of Plymouth, in the Moor View constituency. Graham Elsworth, a retired Royal Marine tending his garden, says he has already voted by post, but won't be drawn on who got it. When I mention the prospect of local people voting Ukip, he issues a curt verdict. "They would do, wouldn't they? Because they're pissed off."
On the other side of his fence is 42-year-old Karen Mackenzie. "Think about all the factories we used to have round here," she says. "We ain't got nothing now. All anyone's doing is building more and more houses."
Around the corner is a forlorn-looking shopping centre. Outside the Co-op supermarket is 77-year-old Michael Nanfield, a retired store manager who once voted Labour but is now thinking about supporting Ukip. He mentions Farage - "He's a character, isn't he? I've got my doubts about him as well, mind" - and his own gripes with the EU: red tape, its fisheries policies and what the UK's membership means for immigration.
He then talks about Ed Miliband. "Let's be honest: he hasn't got a clue," he says. "He hasn't got a clue. Public school, isn't he?" Actually, no, I tell him. He went to a comprehensive school.
Nanfield's eyes scrunch up slightly, and he shoots me a look with which any political journalist will be familiar, conveying the idea that anyone who defends mainstream politicians must be part of the same odious conspiracy. "Really? How do you know that? Are you related to him?"
Document GRDN000020140520ea5l0006h
