{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3617"}
____
  
NEWS
David Cameron hoping for Merkel support over EU negotiations; David Cameron is hopeful that Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, will this week support his bid to renegotiate Britain's relationship with the European Union.
By Peter Dominiczak Assistant Political Editor   
520 words
23 February 2014
22:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Downing Street believes that Angela Merkel will this week use a major summit in the UK to back David Cameron’s bid to renegotiate Britain’s relationship with the European Union.
Mrs Merkel will this week travel to the UK and become the first German Chancellor to address both Houses of Parliament.
Number 10 hopes that she will offer a boost to the Prime Minister’s bid to reform the EU by calling for a treaty change that could allow Mr Cameron to change Britain’s relationship with Brussels.
William Hague, the Foreign Secretary, said on Sunday that Germany is Britain’s “most important partner" on seeking reform of the EU.
In a bid to cement the close ties between the two leaders, Mr Cameron has arranged for Mrs Merkel to address MPs and peers, followed by lunch in 10 Downing St and tea with the Queen at Buckingham Palace.
Mr Cameron has promised to renegotiate Britain's relationship with Brussels and then give people a vote on membership by the end of 2017 if he wins the next election.
Any suggestion from Mrs Merkel that treaty change could happen before 2017 would represent a major boost for the Prime Minister.
Mrs Merkel has previously suggested that she is in favour of treaty change.
Mr Hague said that negotiations on Britain’s relationship with the EU will not start until the 2015 election.
However, he said that Germany will be Britain’s key partner in pushing for a more “flexible, competitive and democratically accountable" union.
Mr Hague told the BBC’s Andrew Marr programme: “We will be discussing the ideas that we have in common and, as you know, it's our intention after the next general election to improve Britain's relationship with the European Union."
Asked whether the leaders will discuss reform of the rules that allow the free movement of immigrants within the EU, Mr Hague said: "I'm sure these subjects will come up. Germany also has strict benefit rules, Germany does not want its benefits system to be abused.
"We support the principle of the free movement of workers, and many British people have rightly taken advantage of that in the rest of Europe.
"But we don't support people moving from one country to another because of the incentives of different benefit systems.
"With Germany we have a lot of common ground on that and there will be no problem discussing that."
Last year Mr Cameron was invited by Mrs Merkel to the German Chancellor's private residence, a visit which was cited as a strengthening personal friendship.
The scale of the welcome for Mrs Merkel is in stark contrast to last month's Anglo-French summit with Francois Hollande, the French president.
Mr Cameron met Mr Hollande for a few hours at an airfield in Oxfordshire and then had a pub lunch.
Document TELUK00020140224ea2n000xt
