{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3706"}
____
  
Features
Advocacy competition: do notions of 'political correctness' stifle diversity?
Edward Fennell   
1,103 words
22 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
3
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ideas, policies and language are now under scrutiny as never before, says Edward Fennell
Changing public attitudes and progressive legislation have turned the United Kingdom into a more inclusive society. Yet in reality, have recent events shown that our "diversity" is limited in its scope?
Have perceptions of which ideas, policies and language are acceptable inhibited rather than promoted genuine diversity? Are there more prescriptive lines around what is "appropriate" for people and organisations to do and think? In short, do notions of "political correctness" stifle diversity of speech and behaviour?
This is the topic of this year's The Times/ Herbert Smith Freehills Student Advocacy Competition. Open to all students registered at a British educational institution, there are prizes worth a total of £7,000. Shortlisted entrants will also have the chance of a one-to-one coaching session in advocacy skills with Ian Gatt, QC, head of advocacy at Herbert Smith Freehills.
Students submit skeleton arguments and YouTube presentations (see panel) and five shortlisted finalists will be invited to make their case before a judging panel in London in September. The judges look for quality of argument and power of advocacy plus an ability to respond to penetrating questioning. Successful entrants are likely to offer a reasoned analysis of the question and have their own strong view.
The debate has reached the highest ranks of the judiciary. Recently Lord Neuberger, president of the Supreme Court, said: "Possibly as a counter-reaction to the permissive society, a combination of political correctness and moral reaction appears to be developing ... I fear that it may risk spilling over into a censoriousness about what views people can publicly air as to the merits of diversity or other issues which indirectly relate to diversity. As has been said on more than one occasion, freedom only to speak inoffensively is a freedom not worth having.
"The more that arguments and views are shut out as unacceptable the less diverse we risk becoming in terms of outlook. And the less diverse we become in terms of outlook, the more we risk not valuing diversity and the more we therefore risk losing diversity in practice."
The concept of "political correctness" is not new. Its roots lie in the ideological debates between communists and socialists in the early years of the last century. Over time, the idea seeped into both American and Western European discourse as embodying a code of language (or jargon) and attitudes that have been approved by the cultural or political authorities.
Step outside that code and you might find yourself in trouble. In Stalin's Russia that could mean execution or the gulags. In the UK it might mean the termination of one's career. No wonder, then, that "political correctness" is viewed with suspicion by some parts of society.
Today the term is used more as a smear than as a watchword. "If you don't happen to like a development in, for example, the field of multiculturalism or equal opportunities, then it is far easier to belittle it by branding it as 'political correctness gone mad', than engage in a reasoned debate," Gatt says. "It is now used as a way of undermining or devaluing positive advances."
Is it too easy, though, to reach for an array of -isms — racism, sexism, ageism — to gag consideration of ideas that might merit debate? Jeremy Clarkson's mumblings of the nursery rhyme Eeny, Meeny, Miny, Mo are one thing; and views may differ as to whether the veteran DJ David Lowe should have lost his job for playing a 1930s recording of The Sun Has Got His Hat On, which unbeknown to him, contained the n-word.
In these cases, some might argue that knee-jerk accusations of prejudice are more in line with a (thought) police state than a liberal democracy. Indeed, does reaching for the 'ism word provide a shortcut to discrediting an argument or attacking an individual without permitting an airing of what might be complex issues or reflecting on the matter of intent?
Some attitudes and programmes, it may be argued, are being adopted formulaically without examination of their implications. This month, a county council demanded that churches perform same-sex marriages when, of course, churches have a legal opt-out. There is therefore a growing view that some people and ideas are being excluded under the guise of 'political correctness' — itself a new prevailing orthodoxy.
Recent history has shown that shutting down of discussion because it was seen as "politically incorrect" has been unhelpful. The Labour party now acknowledges that side-stepping debate on immigration while in government was a serious misjudgment that stoked later problems.
While political correctness can be seen as substituting one set of prejudices for another, it is also true that by changing the language we use, we change the way we think. By eschewing belittling or patronising words or references — say to women, ethnic minorities or people with disabilities — we can clear out negative implications.
So, for those ever-vigilant to protect society, there is an understandable anxiety not to give the oxygen - and respectability — of publicity to hateful ideas and expressions. Allow them to circulate and admit the possibility of a relapse into bigotry, prejudice and persecution. However despised, political correctness can be seen as the safeguard of a civilised community. Or is it the best traditions of freedom of speech that ensure the proper testing of ideas and examination of policies that a mature democratic society deserves?
How to enter
Entrants should prepare a skeleton argument (maximum 400 words), with a video presentation of no more than 90 seconds, to capture all or part of the written argument. They should upload their video to YouTube and post the link to the "Herbert Smith Freehills/The Times Advocacy Competition 2014" page on Facebook, then email the skeleton argument to advocacy.competition@hsf.com by noon Monday, July 14, 2014.
In their email, entrants should confirm that the video has been uploaded and state their Facebook name. Shortlisted candidates for the final on September 4 will be notifed by August 1. The five finalists will make full presentations and face questioning from the judging panel led by Lady Justice Rafferty at Herbert Smith Freehills offices. The winners will be announced at a champagne reception after the presentations. Details at: www.herbertsmithfreehills.com/student-advocacy.
Prizes: First prize £3,000, second prize £2,000, third £1,000 and £500 each for fourth and fifth.
Freedom only to speak inoffensively is a freedom not worth having
Document T000000020140522ea5m000e0
