{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3029"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel Farage puts ethnic minority Ukip candidates centre stage in bid to kill racism row
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
687 words
8 May 2014
14:02
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
This is my Clause Four moment, says Nigel Farage, as he appears at rally surrounded by black and Asian supporters
Nigel Farage last night hailed his party’s “Clause Four moment” on racism by appearing on stage surrounded by black and Asian supporters.
The Ukip leader sought to draw a line under allegations of racism that have blighted his party’s European election campaign with a large rally in London that saw a string of ethnic minority candidates insist they feel welcome in a party that has pledged to radically curb immigration to Britain.
Appearing alongside around forty Ukip candidates of different ethnicities, Mr Farage likened the night to the 1994 conference at which Tony Blair amended the Labour constitution to shed its commitment to nationalised industries.
He said: “Let this picture of me on the stage with these wonderful men and women from all their different backgrounds, and their united belief in being British and in wanting this country to be free, independent, self-governing and proud, let this be Ukip’s Clause Four moment.”
Polls suggest Ukip could come first in the European elections in a fortnight’s time, driving the Conservatives into third place. The Newark by-election follows in June.
But a string of Ukip candidates have been exposed as harbouring racist views. Andre Lampitt, who featured in the party’s election broadcast, was suspended after saying Ed Miliband was “not a real Brit” and describing Islam as an “evil organisation”.
Another supporter said Lenny Henry, the comedian, should immigrate to a “black country”.
Mr Farage said people with “offensive and idiotic” views had managed to join the party, despite his efforts to vet candidates and a ban on former BNP and National Front members.
But he insisted they did not represent the party, and said the main parties had focused on them because they cannot challenge his “bombproof” arguments for withdrawal from the European Union.
"I don't care what you call us. You can call us right-wing, left-wing, you can call us small minded - I don't care what you call us."
He said: “I don’t care what you call us, but from this moment on, please do not call us a racist party.”
He said Britain must build stronger ties with the Commonwealth, he said, but it can only end "open door" immigration from Eastern Europe by withdrawing from the EU.
Winston McKenzie, a Jamaican-born former boxer, was met with a standing ovation when he said he had challenged Mr Farage for the leadership. He said: “What does that say about Ukip being racist, a black man running for the leadership? I’m black and I’m proud and I’ll shout it out loud.”
Pauline McQueen, a council candidate in Tower Hamlets, East London, criticised "spoilt, middle class" protesters who had gathered outside the venue, adding: "How dare they call us racist when being a black Jew, and being 60 years of age, I know what racism is?"
Steven Woolf, the party’s economics spokesman, said he was proud to be British, mixed race and a member of Ukip, and told a heckler who had infiltrated the rally he had been called a “n-----“ at school.
Amjad Bashir, the party’s small business spokesman who was born in Pakistan, said Ukip had been the victim of “evil lies” and said it is the “most representative party in British politics.”
He said: “I find racism – and I have experienced it – abhorrent. Take a look at all the faces and skin colours represented on this stage and tell me Ukip is a racist party.”
Suzanne Evans, the party’s communities spokesman, said Ukip wanted to give immigration “its positive image back” with a work permits system that would cut the number of people coming to Britain.
The country must stop turning a blind eye to "outdated cultural practices" such as female genital mutilation and forced marriages, she said. “Ukip won’t send anyone home,” she added.
Document TELUK00020140507ea57006va
