{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1433"}
____
  
Features
THE WEEK IN WESTMINSTER
366 words
4 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
28
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
TUESDAY, MARCH 4
Commons: Foreign and Commonwealth Office questions. Ten Minute Rule Motion: Sale of Tickets (Sporting and Cultural Events). Two estimates day debates: i) Defence and cyber–security; ii) Private rented sector. short debate on access to new treatment for patients with pancreatic cancer.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: Future of Scotland and north east England post–2014; Patient medical records and NHS England care data; Future of the A303; Domestic violence in West Essex and Harlow; HMRC enquiry centre closures.
Lords: Transport for London Bill, Third reading. Questions. Cooperative and Community Benefit Societies Bill [HL], Committee of the whole House. Citizenship (Armed Forces) Bill, Third reading. Gender Equality (International Development) Bill, Third reading. Leasehold Reform (Amendment) Bill, Third reading. Northern Ireland (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, Third reading. Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill, Report stage. Orders and Regulations: Public Bodies (Abolition of the National Consumer Council and Transfer of the Office of Fair Trading's Functions in relation to Estate Agents etc.)
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 5
Commons: International Development Questions. At noon, questions to the Prime Minister. Supply and Appropriation (Anticipation and Adjustments) Bill, Proceedings. Debate on the Francis Report. Short debate on the tax arrangements for community interest farmers' markets.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: Autism Act and Adult Autism Strategy Review; Specialist advocacy and peer support for families of fatal domestic violence victims; Tolling on the Severn bridges; Ponciau and Esclusham community assisted mapping scheme; Mental health services in south–east Essex.
Lords: Questions. Immigration Bill, Committee of the whole House (Day 2). Short debate on the Director of Public Prosecutions' Guidelines on prosecution for assisted suicide.
THURSDAY, MARCH 6
Commons: Business, Innovation and Skills questions. Statement on the future business of the House. Select committee statement on on the publication of the Ninth Report from the Defence Committee: Future Army 2020. Two backbench business debates: i) Security situation of women in Afghanistan; ii) Welsh Affairs. Short debate on Bedford Magistrates Court.
Westminster Hall: Debate on Contribution of women to the economy.
Lords: Questions. Debate on the contribution of women to the economy of the United Kingdom, to mark International Women's Day.
FRIDAY, MARCH 7
Commons: Not sitting.
Lords: Not sitting.
Document DT00000020140304ea340003q
