{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3089"}
____
  
Features; Opinion Column
Extremist schools aren't immigration they're colonisation
Katie Hopkins   
577 words
25 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
11
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
"HOPKINS - shut up, sit at the back of the classroom and wear this veil."
I know what my two word response to that would be — the second would be "off."
But in British schools allegedly commandeered by Islamic extremists, girls are being forced to do exactly that. They sit at the back, faces hidden because they are worth less than boys.
Inspectors have been sent in to assess the damage of these so called "Trojan horse" schools in Birmingham — and it is extensive.
The curriculum is madrassah, an Islamic way of teaching which misses out all the sensible stuff kids need to know.
They can't teach much biology because it involves rude things like sex. But school inspectors point out studying reproduction is needed for GCSE.
The schoolkids do get to listen to external speakers, though. One was said to be an Al-Qaeda supporter who advocates the stoning of homosexuals — how very New Age.
It is important to remind ourselves that most faith schools are doing a great job, turning out polite kids and achieving better than average results.
But if accepting other faith schools means we also have to accept extremists into the heart of our cities — then it is too high a price to pay.
The Prime Minister has been reinforcing Britain as a Christian nation underpinned by British values, and he is right.
It doesn't mean we go to church every Sunday.
But it means we will stop to help a stranger in need and try not to steal anything (other than the occasional multi-pack of toilet rolls on the hook at the back of the trolley).
But Muslim faith schools run by extremists have no place in our great country.
We must always make sure children are being taught, not radicalised.
Radicalising young people is like incubating monsters in your airing cupboard. When they hatch in the middle of the night they will destroy everything that matters to you without remorse. It is too easy for thoughts to be planted in children's heads that antiterror squads will be dealing with for generations to come.
The original Trojan horse was a ploy to defeat the city of Troy. Do we have a new city of Troy, now called Birmingham? Have extremists already got inside the gates of the city?
Michael Gove has sent the former head of Scotland Yard's Counter-Terrorism Command to investigate. Ofsted has sent a bloke called Michael.
I am putting my money on the guy from the Yard.
These schools are not British by any definition I understand — yet they are on our soil and paid for by the British taxpayer. Some of these schools are 100 per cent Muslim.
This is not immigration. This is colonisation of British soil.
I have had enough of protecting the rights of people who choose to come to our country. It is time we protected the culture of this great country which attracted them here in the first place.
A POLAR bear has had a cub in a Russian zoo.
That's it. But I had to write something for the picture editor to allow me to put in this really cute snap of the baby bear cuddling up to mum.
My daughter says the mother is like me — hairy, scary and liable to rip someone's head off at any time.
Protect culture
Document THESUN0020140425ea4p0006w
