{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2236"}
____
  
Business
Britain's man in a suitcase on a mission to double exports
KIKI LOIZOU   
1,719 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
He lifted BT out of the doldrums and left it with a booming share price, but can Lord Livingston do a similar rescue job on Britain's overseas trade?
It's 7.30am in Warsaw. Beyond the walls of the British ambassador's home on the Vistula River it's bright and bitterly cold. Yet inside, Lord (Ian) Livingston, amped up on coffee and scrambled eggs, is simmering with energy.
The former chief executive of BT is only five months removed from chucking in his £9m-a-year job to take on the unpaid role of minister for trade and investment.
He has clearly lost none of the zeal he needed to whip the telecoms giant into shape; by the time he sits down to talk about UK plc he has already been up and working for two hours. But there are still things that take some getting used to in Livingston's new life of working for free.
"My son has just got a job with Accenture. He's now the family's biggest earner," he laughs. His daughter has just been offered a job with McKinsey. "They have to earn to look after their old man."
It was last June that David Cameron summoned the 49-year-old Scot to a meeting at No 10 to ask him to follow Lord (Stephen) Green, the former HSBC chairman who was in the role for almost three years. Three weeks later Livingston told BT he was leaving. The prime minister, he says, "is a good salesman". Ultimately, the lure of office was too great. "I've got an immigrant background," says Livingston, "and sometimes I think of what would have happened to my family if they hadn't moved to Britain. This is a chance to give something back."
He is about to set off on his first trade mission, not far from the town of Plotz, where his grandfather, a Polish Jew, was born. It's a whirlwind tour of eastern Europe, with 60 small companies and The Sunday Times in tow.
From Poland on to the Czech Republic, Slovakia and finally Hungary. Four countries in four days. In that sense the routine bears a striking resemblance to his old job. Yet success as a public servant is much less easily defined. During Livingston's five years at the top of BT, the company's share price shot up from 75p to more than 300p. He poured billions of pounds into fibre-optic broadband across Europe before buying football broadcast rights to launch BT Sport in an attempt to chip away at the dominance of BSkyB.
Cameron is hoping his new minister can engineer a similar surge for the UK abroad. Expectations are high. In January, the chancellor set a target to get Britain exporting £1 trillion of goods and services by 2020. In 2013, exports were worth £501.4bn, up 1.4% on the previous year.
A half a trillion pounds increase in seven years? "There's no point not being ambitious," Livingston deadpans.
He wants small and medium-sized companies to lead the revolution. This week he is championing underdogs such as Wensleydale Dairy Products and the Fine Bedding Company.
It may seem a lot to ask milk and mattresses to put the British economy back on its feet. Yet Livingston, a bundle of Scottish intensity, is unbowed.
He joined BT from Dixons, where, at 32, he became the youngest FTSE 100 finance director. Before that he worked at 3i, following a stint as a trainee accountant with Arthur Andersen.
Given half a chance, his inner numbercruncher bursts forth in flurries of figures, fractions and percentages. His middle-class Glaswegian accent thickens with excitement.
"The trade deficit has been reduced from £3bn to £1bn. If we can be worth 2% of China's imports, that could be halved. The CBI says mid-market companies could be worth £50bn of Britain's exports. Currently, one in six of them export, whereas one in three Italian firms do."
He exhales. And then he's off again. "What I'm saying is that there's a lot of opportunity. We need to look at what these customers, these countries, need. Then we need to find the British talent to solve their problems."
For Baron Livingston of Parkhead — he was ennobled last summer — that means a treadmill of glad-handing and back slapping, early starts, long speeches and a few oft-recycled jokes that, invariably, become lost in translation.
He memorises statistics and learns how to greet and toast in the lingo his foreign audiences will understand. He smiles a lot, retains eye-contact when conversing, and delivers speeches like he wants to punch the air with excitement.
It all seems rather exhausting. "There's no downtime," he chuckles. Nowadays he rarely has the chance to get to a home game at Celtic, where he is a nonexecutive director, and it's obvious he is missing football. He spends a while talking about Celtic's highlights and the time he sat in front of Billy Connolly, Susan Boyle and Rod Stewart.
But there's one memory that pains him more than any other. "When Paul Gascoigne scored for England [at Euro 96], I was sitting behind the goal," he says. "It's still one of the worst moments of my life."
When it comes to Scottish independence — as it invariably does — Livingston is firmly in the "no" camp. "My wife Debbie is English and we work better as one," he says, holding his head in shame at the joke.
"There are a lot of Scottish businesses that feel threatened to speak up if they are anti-independence. It's disturbing," he says with a frown. "That's not how a democracy works. You can still be a proud Scot and be part of the United Kingdom. There would be a period when Scotland is not part of the EU which will affect free-trade agreements. That's why you have the likes of Standard Life expressing concern."
Next Livingston will head to Germany, then Israel, the Gulf of Mexico and Canada. He will visit 10 countries over 14 days and open some of the 40 British business centres for companies exploring foreign markets.
Everywhere he goes he will be wearing his Marks & Spencer suits with pride, as he did when he ran BT. Livingston has never been a spendthrift. He takes delight in the fact that his wedding anniversary is on February 15, allowing him to snap up cheap flowers after Valentine's Day.
Questions from audiences and foreign counterparts will start off light and predictable before he is unavoidably asked about his view on the tensions between Ukraine and Russia. "The priority is to do the right thing for Ukraine," he says, resorting to the diplomacy that comes with his duty. "Russia shouldn't be acting this way in the 21st century. Longer term there is a price to pay for this."
Russia is home to about 600 British companies and between 2009 and 2012 exports to the country grew by more than 75%, from £4.3bn to £7.6bn. "We have to avoid intensifying the issues."
Livingston softens when he talks about what he believes to be one of his biggest achievements. Five years ago, he gave BT staff the chance to invest up to £225 a month in shares priced at 68p. More than 20,000 workers took up the offer.
"Those who did now have shares worth about £100,000. Secretarial staff, drivers and engineers [are] paying off their mortgages — people write to me and say it's changed their lives. That means something and it reaches me here," he says, putting his hand to his chest.
It's no wonder that on his last day in September, the giant LED screen at the top of the BT Tower in central London read: "Thanks Ian".
During his last year as chief executive, he earned almost £9m in salary, bonuses and share incentives and still has shares stashed in a blind trust. "I don't know what my assets are. It was eye-wateringly expensive to transfer them. I hope the fund managers are doing a good job."
Now the minister must dash. He has a day full of meetings and speeches, briefings and tours. More importantly, he has a business plan he needs to execute. "It's one part strategy and nine parts execution. It's what I know. I may be part of government but I'm not sure I'll ever be a politician. I'm a businessman."
The life of Lord Livingston
VITAL STATISTICS
Born: July 28, 1964 Marital status: married with one son and one daughter School: Kelvinside Academy, Glasgow University: Manchester First job: trainee chartered accountant at Arthur Andersen Salary: unpaid Homes: Elstree, Hertfordshire, and a flat in Westminster Car: Volkswagen Golf Favourite book: Candide, by Voltaire Favourite film: Cool Hand Luke, starring Paul Newman Favourite music: Meatloaf Favourite gadget: iPad Last holiday: Canada Favourite charity: Jewish Care
WORKING DAY
The minister usually wakes at 5.30am and works at his flat in Westminster for an hour before walking to work, getting a coffee and porridge on the way. In a recent typical day in the capital Lord Livingston had meetings with London &Partners and the deputy mayor of London, several of his ministerial colleagues, and the Australian high commissioner. He also had a meeting with Japanese investors at 10 Downing Street, which he hosted with the prime minister. He is obliged to be in the Lords for voting.
A day in London is not that common, however. Livingston estimates that he spends 75% of his time outside the capital, either touring the country talking to businesses about exports, or overseas promoting Britain as a good place to invest in and do business from. His travel schedule for this month takes in 11 countries in central and eastern Europe, the Middle East and North America.
DOWNTIME
Livingston likes the theatre "but I don't have time to go", he says. He also like concerts. He saw Bruce Springsteen at the O2 and before that Rod Stewart, whom he knows from Celtic football club matches.
Document ST00000020140309ea39000jf
