{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"292"}
____
  
NEWS
Michael Gove and David Laws at war over free schools
By Tim Ross Political Correspondent   
476 words
10 May 2014
22:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Leading Lib Dems step up their campaign against the Tory Education Secretary, accusing him of raiding £400 million from a budget for new school places to fund his "pet project"
A major Coalition row broke out last night after Liberal Democrats accused Michael Gove of raiding £400million from a fund to ease overcrowding in classrooms to “lavish” on his flagship “free schools”.
David Laws, the Lib Dem Schools Minister, was said to have raised serious concerns after the Education Secretary proposed using the money to fill an £800million shortfall in the budget for the free schools.
However, Mr Gove overruled Mr Laws and senior Lib Dems are now furious that the Education Secretary has put his “ideological” obsession with free schools ahead of the need for more school places.
One source said the budget for Mr Gove’s “pet project” of free schools was “out of control”.
Councils in parts of London and the South east, as well as other urban areas, are facing an intense demand for primary school places as a result of rising immigration and higher birth rates.
Last September the Local Government Association, representing councils, warned that almost half of England’s school districts were facing a shortage of school places, with some as much as 20 per cent.
Government sources disclosed that Mr Gove cut the “basic need” budget, from £2.75 billion to £2.35 billion between 2015 and 2017 to help fund an overspend in the Free Schools budget of around £800million between 2013 and 2016.
The basic need budget is given by the Department for Education to local authorities to ensure that there are enough school places. Councils can use the money to build new schools or expand existing ones to meet rising demand and £400 million would have provided up to 30,000 new places, a senior government source said.
“Everybody knows there’s real pressure on school places at the moment and the Secretary of State for Education knows better than most,” the source said.
“It is nothing short of lunacy to slash the amount of money available for new school places to lavish on free schools. Michael Gove was warned by the David Laws that this was a bad idea but the zealot pressed on anyway.”
A Conservative source described the claims as “nonsense” and "pathetic" behaviour from the Lib Dems.
The source added: "They voted for free schools and backed them from the start. For the Lib Dems to now attack them is frankly risible."
A spokesman for Mr Gove said the Lib Dem claims were "simply not true".
"The suggestion that we are cutting money for new places in areas of need to pay for free schools where they are not needed is totally wrong," he added.
Document TELUK00020140510ea5a004sb
