{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3835"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion; Leading articles
Lipstick on a Pig
699 words
26 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
20
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The three main parties have all hired foreign strategists to help to define their election campaigns. Not even the best can change political facts
One of the ironies of a general election campaign in which immigration is bound to feature heavily is that the three main party strategists are all from overseas. Labour has just signed David Axelrod, the American political veteran who planned Barack Obama's successful bid for the White House. The Conservative campaign is being overseen by Lynton Crosby, the hard man of Australian politics who helped keep Boris Johnson in City Hall. The Liberal Democrats rely heavily for strategic advice on the polling wisdom of the South African Ryan Coetzee.
Although it is good to put a face to the campaigns of the main parties, it is important not to make a fetish of the ability of foreign recruits to change the weather. Some political facts are unavoidable and strategy is, as the Clinton aide James Carville memorably phrased it, no more than "putting lipstick on a pig".
No expensive foreign import into Conservative party central office can alter the fact that David Cameron struggles to make headway in the vital electoral plains of the north of England. The Tories still have a serious blue-collar problem that is also an urban problem. Mr Crosby has to devise a way to achieve the unprecedented feat of adding votes for a governing party that has been forced to cut public spending. Austerity has been necessary and successful but it is never popular. He will also have to solve the central strategic conundrum for Conservative electoral prospects, which is how to win back voters tempted by Ukip without alienating the floating centrist voters that the party also needs to command a clear win.
By the same token, Mr Axelrod is too wise and experienced to fool himself that he can wish away the poor ratings that the Labour leader Ed Miliband is enduring. He joins Labour just at the moment that the argument on which it has rested its claim to office — that Labour is the party to fix the cost of living crisis — is starting to run aground now that average wages are at last running higher than inflation. Mr Axelrod inherits the stubborn fact that Labour, rather than the Conservatives, still takes most of the blame for austerity for being in charge when the economy tanked.
The strategic position of the Liberal Democrat party is even more parlous. Having chosen to enter a coalition with the Conservatives, the Lib Dems can no longer claim to be either the party of protest or a party of the left. The choices that government imposes on a leader — such as abandoning a foolish promise to abolish tuition fees — have made a pariah of their leader, Nick Clegg. The party is languishing on a single-figure percentage of the vote with no obvious route to recovery.
The strategic dilemmas all point to the fact that in politics negative campaigning is easier than positive. A party may be divided about what it stands for but it will always be united about what it is against — it is against the other parties. Mr Axelrod has been hired for his ability to sharpen a message. Mr Crosby is no shrinking violet, either, as his brutal destruction of Ken Livingstone in the London mayoral contest showed. Although it might be an exaggeration to say that 2015 will be the most negative election campaign yet — the Tories in 2005 and Labour in 2010 both fought quite dirty — the electorate will have some vivid descriptions of the shortcomings of all parties to look forward to.
That said, voters are not stupid. All three of the political strategists are experienced enough to know that a message works only if it connects with a truth. Political strategists do not create the truth; they can only sharpen it. The central truth for 2015 will be whether the Conservatives can take enough of the credit for a recovering economy to ensure victory. Conversely, it will be whether the fear of Labour ruining that recovery is so strong that it ensures defeat.
Document T000000020140426ea4q0001h
