{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3490"}
____
  
News
Farage defends Ukip's 'racist' anti-immigration ad campaign
OLIVER WRIGHT WHITEHALL EDITOR   
532 words
22 April 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
4,5
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News
Ukip has been accused of launching a "crass" and "racist" advertising blitz in an attempt to increase its support ahead of next month's European elections.
The party unveiled a series of posters yesterday - under the slogan "take back control of our country" - that are due to appear on hoardings across the UK over the next few weeks.
One poster shows a builder begging, with the caption: "EU policy at work. British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour."
Another states that 26 million unemployed people are "looking for work", adding: "Whose jobs are they after?"
But the campaign, which is being funded by a £1.5m donation from the former Tory supporter and millionaire Paul Sykes, attracted an immediate backlash from Ukip's political opponents. Labour MP Mike Gapes said they were "racist" and he appealed to "all decent British Commonwealth and EU citizens" to register to vote in May's polls.
The former Conservative minister Lord Debden said they showed that Ukip stood for the "worst in human beings: our prejudice, selfishness, and fear".
Meanwhile a spokesman for the Deputy Prime Minister, Nick Clegg, who recently appeared in a televised debate with Ukip's leader, Nigel Farage, added that they were "just a crass way of campaigning that we have come to expect from Ukip".
Mr Farage, however, dismissed the concerns of the "chattering classes".
"These posters are a hard-hitting reflection of reality as it is experienced by millions of British people struggling to earn a living outside the Westminster bubble," he said.
"Are we going to ruffle a few feathers? Yes. Are we bothered about that? Not in the slightest. Ukip is hugely grateful to Paul Sykes for his magnificent contribution to the great cause of restoring Britain's ability to be a self-governing nation. The political earthquake I have spoken of is on its way."
Mr Sykes said the posters would be the biggest advertising campaign in Ukip's history. "The European elections are the most important for many years," he said.
"We have the chance to support a party that represents a complete break with the past. The other parties, whatever their merits, are content to work within the existing Brussels straitjacket.
"An overwhelming victory for Ukip will break the political mould in the UK, forcing Labour and the Lib Dems to back a full-scale referendum."
The posters will be displayed in two waves over the next four weeks and be accompanied by adverts in digital media.
The row came as Mr Clegg dismissed Ukip's claim to be a party of political outsiders, describing it instead as an arm of the "longstanding Eurosceptic establishment".
The Liberal Democrat leader said Mr Farage's assertion that he was leading an army of "insurgents" was implausible in view of the strong current of Euroscepticism that existed in the Conservative Party and in the media.
Instead, Mr Clegg implied that it was the Liberal Democrats who were the insurgent underdogs, because they were confronting the "Eurosceptic establishment" directly in the European election campaign by fighting on an unashamedly pro-European platform.
Document IND0000020140422ea4m0001b
