{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2581"}
____
  
David Cameron must make 'enthusiastic' case for EU membership; David Cameron must make a 'full and enthusiastic' case for Britain's membership of the European Union, Tory minister Damian Green says
By Tim Ross Senior Political Correspondent   
1,057 words
17 March 2014
06:46
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
David Cameron must begin campaigning now for Britain to stay in the European Union, a group of former Cabinet ministers and senior Conservative MPs says today.
One of Mr Cameron's own coalition ministers joins the group to launch a new pro-EU campaign which threatens to reopen Tory divisions on Europe.
Eighteen leading Tories, including several government aides, have written articles for a new report to be published on Monday by the party’s European Mainstream group.
In the essays, seen by The Telegraph, the MPs collectively demand that the Conservatives campaign vigorously for Britain to stay in the EU instead of “being marginalised at the fringes" of Europe.
Damian Green, the policing minister, will speak at the launch of the paper in London. In his own essay, he warns that Britain will lose vital opportunities for greater economic “prosperity" by leaving Europe and calls on his colleagues to promote the case for the UK’s “full and enthusiastic" membership of the EU.
“I welcome the chance to engage the public in a serious debate about our future. Bring it on," he says.
“For the moment, though, we need to start making the basic economic case that we are Better Off In."
The pamphlet comes just weeks before the start of the campaign for May’s European Parliament elections.
It will be seen as a response to the increasingly agitated eurosceptics in the Conservative Party who are demanding a tougher stance from the Prime Minister to combat the electoral threat from the UK Independence Party.
On Sunday, Mr Cameron used an article for The Telegraph to outline his seven key goals for renegotiating Britain's EU membership. He urged voters to back his party in May's European Parliament election to help deliver the changes he wants to see.
But many Tories fear Ukip will rout them at the European elections and then fatally undermine their chances of winning a majority in next year’s general election by splitting the right-wing vote.
The Prime Minister announced last year that he would hold an in/out referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU if the Tories win a majority in 2015.
He would first seek to renegotiate the terms of EU membership to get a better deal for Britain before putting the resulting arrangements to a referendum by the end of 2017.
The 62 MPs in the European Mainstream group are broadly supportive of Mr Cameron’s strategy.
In the foreword to the pamphlet, they say they are “fundamentally united by our believe that the UK national interest is best served working for changes within the EU, not being marginalised at the fringes.
“This group believes that the nation would best be served by the Conservative Party campaigning for a ‘yes’ vote in any future in/out referendum."
Mr Green, the policing and criminal justice minister, said membership of the EU gave Britain “greater prosperity" and more “influence in the wider world" but that these arguments now needed to be made strongly for a new generation.
The MP for Ashford issued a call to arms to his colleagues to make the case for Britain’s future in Europe ahead of the 2017 referendum.
He praised the Chancellor, George Osborne, for arguing for major reforms to Europe to protect those countries, such as the UK, which did not want deeper integration.
“There are even more important opportunities ahead which will make Britain more prosperous and which are only available through our membership of the EU," Mr Green said. The greatest of these is the developing trade partnership deal between the EU and the USA.
In what will be a provocative gesture to many right-wingers in the party, Mr Green quoted Baroness Thatcher as a pro-European warning in 1975 against “turning our backs" on Europe.
“The best setting for Britain’s entrepreneurial spirits to flourish is a reformed EU. Conservatives have a big and important case to make, not just about the need for reform, but about the need for Britain to continue to play a leading role in Europe."
Laura Sandys, the Tory MP for South Thanet and the convenor of the European Mainstream group, issued a thinly veiled criticism of her eurosceptic colleagues.
“Some people have a disappointingly defeatist attitude to the UK’s status on the world stage," she said.
Other contributions come from the former energy minister, Charles Hendry, the former Foreign Office minister Alistair Burt, the former agriculture minister Richard Benyon, and Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the former foreign secretary who is now chair of the Intelligence and Security Committee.
The former defence minister, Sir Peter Luff, said Britain must “robustly oppose" any EU plans for joint defence policies which would compromise the UK’s national security. But he said there were valuable opportunities for British firms to compete for business in Europe’s defence industry.
Tobias Ellwood, the MP for Bournemouth East and parliamentary aide to Jeremy Hunt, attacked the “Little Englanders" who propose a “seemingly isolationist, anti-EU approach" to immigration. He also criticised the “open doorites" who justify an over-reliance on EU migrants to keep Britain working.
He said European migration is now the EU’s “Achilles heel" and must be reformed to regain public confidence.
Senior Downing Street figures privately admit that Ukip represents the greatest threat facing the Tories. Mr Cameron is determined to show Ukip supporters that he has absorbed their concerns about Europe and immigration but the pamphlet demanding a clear pro-European campaign from the Tories is unlikely to help.
Caroline Spelman, Mr Cameron’s first environment secretary, said: “What motivates me more than anything else to fight to stay in the EU is simply for the sake of jobs, especially for future generations. When 50 per cent of our trade is with the other 27 countries of the EU, why on earth would we leave?
“The idea of returning to a mythical autonomy as an isolationist state has to be challenged by the reality that we have always had more influence by building alliances, and a trade alliance is the best guarantee of jobs."
Document TELUK00020140317ea3h001bc
