{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1589"}
____
  
News
Farage v Clegg: the unexpurgated version (with added clichs and dubious statistics)
By Tim Stanley   
1,043 words
27 March 2014
16:31
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
NICK FERRARI: Good evening and welcome to a truly historic occasion. This is the first time that two party leaders – Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage – have debated on television the future of Britain's relationship with the EU. And it's also the first time in history when more people have participated in a TV debate than actually watched it. We'll start with opening statements. Mr Clegg?
NICK CLEGG: Hola!Tonight I want to discuss jobs. Because all Nigel Farage ever talks about is the billions of pounds that we put into the EU. He never mentions all the vital employment opportunities we get out of it. If we leave, we put at risk the livelihoods of literally hundreds of Polish-to-English translators, wheelchair diversity recruitment officers, and wind farm repairmen. My friends, that’s what this debate is really about. Jobs, jobs, jobs. J.O.B.S. And organic farming subsidies.
NIGEL FARAGE: Nick's obviously going to spout on about "jobs" and "economics" and "facts" – but what really matters is this: Britain has a history and culture that’s very different from Europe. We don’t like big government, we don't like regulation, we don’t eat horses and we don’t walk around naked on public beaches. Nick Clegg doesn't get that because he's part of the Westminster elite. Whereas Ukip represents the people who just want to build a conservatory without being hassled by Belgian eco-crats or lucky heather sellers. Not much to ask, but then I can remember when you could still buy a pint of beer with a thruppeny bit.
FERRARI: Before everyone switches over to Emmerdale, can we talk about immigration?
CLEGG: Look, having open borders does mean that hard working people come here to work. But they in turn provide essential services and jobs. Without those migrants, who would be nannies to our children? Who would tend our ornamental gardens? Who would we hire to play piano at cocktail parties…?
FARAGE: Pull the other one, Nick, it's got bells on it. You know, this is exactly the kind of elitism that is driving less well-educated voters into the arms of Ukip. Only the other day a bloke I met in a pub with an online doctorate in conspiracy theories told me that some 48 million people have come to Britain in the last year alone. And roughly 72 million of them have given birth on the NHS. You do the maths.
FERRARI: Mr Farage, could you say something outlandish about the European Court of Human Rights, even though it technically has nothing to do with this debate?
FARAGE: Isn’t it strange that a little old lady in Deal can sell some liquorice in pounds and ounces and she’ll be put in front of an EU firing squad? But try to deport a terrorist back to the country that his great-grandparents came from and the European Court of Human Rights says, “Non!” How Nick Clegg can defend that, I don’t know. But, then again, I’m not an onion-munching far-left hippie who thinks trees are more important than people.
CLEGG: Prego. Once again, things are not as simple as Nigel Farage makes it out to be. The Court defends the rights of all of us. The right to vote, the right to marry, the right for prisoners to an occasional holiday in the south of France. But isn’t what really matters in all of this … jobs? And constantly bashing the EU in this way puts the jobs of tens-of-tens of human rights lawyers in real jeopardy, many of whom are struggling to pay mortgages that run into the millions of pounds.
FERRARI: Gentlemen, assuming that by now that the only person still tuned in is someone who went to the shower and forgot to turn the TV off, I’d like to give you the chance to explain some politically awkward past statements. Mr Clegg, in 2008 you promised to give the people a referendum if you formed a government. What happened to that promise?
CLEGG: You have to understand that we made that pledge at a time when circumstances were very different.
FERRARI: You mean the economy was stronger and jobs didn’t seem threatened?
CLEGG: No, I mean that we never thought we had a cat in Hell’s chance of ever forming a government. Now that we have, there's no way we'd put the EU to a vote. We might be incompetent, but we're not idiots.
FERRARI: And, Mr Farage, you produced a leaflet in the Eastleigh by-election in which you claimed that 112,000 Azerbaijanians were resident in Hampshire – even though Azerbaijan is not currently in the EU. Where did you get that figure from?
FARAGE: A cab driver.
FERRARI: Gentlemen, your closing statements. And can you keep it short because I’m on a parking meter?
FARAGE: They have a saying where I come from: “My golf club house, my rules.” What’s wrong with Britain governing itself, passing its own laws, keeping its own money and stamping out the evils of street corner loitering and witchcraft on its own terms? This May, vote Ukip and send a message to the mainstream parties: “We hate you so much that we’d even vote for these right-wing fruitcakes to show it.”
FERRARI: Mr Clegg?
CLEGG: The world is only getting bigger: by 2050 we’ll be twice the size of Neptune. Do you want Britain to go it alone? Or would you rather we stayed inside the EU, where – together – we have the clout to compete with countries like Ukraine or Chad? If we don't, we could haemorrhagejobs – and that’s what this debate is really all about. Jobs. Particularly my job, which Vince says I might lose in 2015. Thank you and konichiwa.
FERRARI: That concludes tonight’s debate. According to our snap poll, 98 per cent of you thought David Cameron and Ed Miliband won. Coming up next on LBC radio, Katie Hopkins challenges Mo Ansar to a game of Buckaroo…
Document TELUK00020140327ea3r00461
