{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2997"}
____
  
Features
Chauvinists still no joke
Matt Baylis   
546 words
9 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
41
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
THERE'S a famous case that law lecturers use to explain to students the difference between the intention of an act and the way it is perceived. It involves two boys, long-term pals and playmates. Let's call them Bill and Ben. One day, horsing around with a battered pistol as they'd often done before, Bill shot Ben in the head and killed him.
Neither boy had expected the gun to be loaded. Bill had had no intention of killing his best friend. What the courts took into account, however, was not what had been in Bill's mind but what had been in Ben's.
Having had no suspicion the gun worked, Ben had been entirely happy to have it pointed at his head and by the time he'd realised he shouldn't be happy, he was dead. That textbook case ought to be aired a bit more often because, as BLURRED LINES: THE NEW BATTLE OF THE SEXES (BBC2) explained, a whole generation seems to have a problem understanding the line between intention and perception.
Even if you're not au fait with social media and your encounters with the internet run only to ordering the groceries, you'll be aware that some shocking language and images are out there.
Much of these, as presenter Kirsty Wark discovered, seem to be directed by men at women.
Historian Mary Beard was subjected to streams of vile personal abuse merely for daring to appear on Question Time.
Caroline Criado-Perez, who had campaigned to have a woman on a banknote, received bombing and rape threats.
It doesn't affect only women who dare to enter public life. Wark met a young woman who regularly encounters vile, threatening approaches from men when playing online games.
There was enough depressing material here to have made several hours of hand-wringing, what-sortof-a-society-have-we-turned-into documentary footage. Wisely, Wark kept it down to the choice examples and spent more time trying to find out why.
It seems to be an unholy alliance between the "lad culture" of the Nineties and the anything goes culture of the internet.
What became clear, at least, from Wark's inquiries was that no joke, quip or comment is quite without consequences.
A few interesting experiments showed how men's attitudes to women and the harassment of women were changed for the worse when they'd been exposed to chauvinist humour.
Having said that, there's nothing funny about the consequences of this way of thinking and behaving towards women. Perhaps the key question for joke tellers, professional and otherwise, is: "Am I being funny or simply cruel?" I rather wish Chris Lilley, star and creator of the new Australian sitcom JONAH FROM TONGA (BBC3), would go through that process more often.
Some of his characters, such as spoilt Sydney schoolgirl Ja'mie, are beautifully observed.
His disaffected, Pacific islander immigrant teen Jonah, however, just feels rather like a mickey-take of a genuinely disadvantaged group of people.
If a British show featured a blacked-up actor pretending to be a youngster from a housing estate in London, it would rightly be canned.
Lilley's creation deserves the very same.
Document THEEXP0020140509ea590001x
