{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"604"}
____
  
NEWS
Nick Clegg sings Britain's praises; Nick Clegg praises Britain while warning freedom and tolerance are at risk from a tide of far-Right extremism
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent in York   
623 words
9 March 2014
14:07
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nick Clegg today sang a hymn of praise to Britain, including tea, the Shipping Forecast and football, as he warned freedom and tolerance are at risk from a tide of far-Right extremism which is sweeping Europe.
The Liberal Democrats are the true party of patriots that will defend British values from a "dangerous" trend of hosility to foreigners.
He placed Ukip alongside Hungary's Jobbik and the French Front National, indicating Nigel Farage is the "acceptable face of blame" and his party offers "anger and bile".
Mr Clegg wants to frame May's European elections as a straight fight between the two parties. It will be a contest of "Great Britain" versus "little England", he said.
"We are the guardians of a modern, open and tolerant Britain," Mr Clegg claimed.
In a speech that echoed John Mayor's paean to a country of warm beer and invicible green suburbs twenty years ago, Mr Clegg hailed the British traditions of queuing, wearing flip-flops in cold weather and satire as well as gay marriage and the rule of law.
He told the Liberal Democrat spring conference in York: "I love Britain."
"I love that a country capable of extraordinary pomp and ceremony can still retain a spiky irreverence towards its establishment. A country where we line the streets waving our Union Jacks wildly to welcome the arrival of Prince George, and the next moment we’re chuckling at Private Eye's front page: 'Woman Has Baby’.
"I love that the shipping forecast is listened to by insomniacs of all ages, right across the country, miles from the sea. I love that we do respond to every problem no matter how big or small with the same thing: a cup of tea."
Globalisation and the rise of China has not brought the promised spread of democracy and liberal values and on the continent anti-semitic parties that regard foreigners as "filth" are winning support, he warned.
"This is our backyard. The forces of chauvinism, protectionism and xenophobia have been emboldened. And there is no doubt about it: the fight is now on for the future direction of our continent."
He stressed Britain was "lucky" to avoid such extremism but said an "ungenerous, backwards looking politics" is on the rise.
Mr Clegg did not identify Ukip or Mr Farage by name but aides said the speech was aimed squarely at them.
The two men will debate whether to withdraw from the European Union on TV next month.
"Ukip think they love Britain. There's nothing patriotic about putting jobs at risk," a senior Liberal Democrat source said.
Last week Nigel Farage hardened his party's anti-immigration stance, claiming he travelled on trains in south London on which no-one spoke English.
Mr Clegg's address also follows David Cameron's off-the-cuff defence of "big-hearted" Britain at the G20 summit in St Petersburg last year, after it was a dismissed by a Russian official as "just a small island".
The Liberal Democrats have fought to take credit for the Coalition's tax cuts, but on Sunday Iain Duncan Smith, the Welfare Secretary, disputed Danny Alexander's claim the Tories had to be "forced" into raising the income tax threshold.
"That's not my recollection. If there was a row, it's the kind of row you have around a cup of tea at the breakfast table," Mr Duncan Smith told the BBC.
Mr Clegg said he would not let the Liberal Democrat's role in Government be "air-brushed".
Document TELUK00020140309ea3900462
