{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2783"}
____
  
NEWS
Angela Merkel: I will disappoint Britain on EU reform; The German Chancellor is using her visit to London to lower British expectations of how far she is prepared to go to keep Britain the European Union.
By James Kirkup Political Editor   
494 words
27 February 2014
13:17
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Angela Merkel, the German chancellor,  has warned David Cameron and other Conservatives that she will not pave the way for "a fundamental reform" of the EU in response to British demands for change.
In a speech to both Houses of Parliament, Mrs Merkel warned that while she will work to help keep Britain in the EU, there are limits to how far Germany will go in changing EU rules.
Her warning of "disappointment" may come as a blow to Mr Cameron, but Mrs Merkel did hint at some backing for British attempts to change controversial EU freedom of movement rules.
Mr Cameron has promised to fundamentally recast Britain's EU membership deal, then put the new agreement to the British people in a referendum.
As the leader of Europe's most powerful nation, Mrs Merkel's support is vital for Mr Cameron's reform ambitions, and the Prime Minister is trying hard to win her backing.
Before Mrs Merkel's visit to London, Downing Street sources had suggested that Mrs Merkel was prepared to make major concessions to Britain to help Mr Cameron put a good deal to British voters.
But in her speech, Mrs Merkel cautioned against British hopes the she will give Mr Cameron complete support.
While she strongly argued for Britain to stay inside the EU, the chancellor made clear that she will seek a middle way between the British agenda and complete rejection of the call for change.
"Some expect my speech to pave the way for a fundamental reform of the European architecture which will satisfy all kinds of alleged or actual British wishes. I am afraid they are in for a disappointment," Mrs Merkel said.
"Others are expecting the exact opposite and they are hoping that I will deliver the clear and simple message here in London that the rest of Europe is not prepared to pay almost any price to keep Britain in the European Union. I am afraid these hopes will be dashed."
While that message falls short of some Downing Street predictions of Mrs Merkel's backing, the chancellor did suggest support for one of Mr Cameron's most ambitious EU aims.
The Prime Minister has called for an overhaul of freedom of movement rules that allow all EU citizens to travel and work freely anywhere in the union. Those rules have allowed hundreds of thousands of European nationals to work in the UK, pushing up net immigration beyond the levels Mr Cameron has promised.
Freedom of movement remains one of the greatest achievements of the EU and should be preserved, Mrs Merkel said. But she accepted that there are "mistakes" in the way the rules are being applied, which must he resolved.
Document TELUK00020140227ea2r0043c
