{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1675"}
____
  
Features
'MY BOSOM WOULD BE DOWN TO MY WAIST IF I DIDN'T WEAR A BRA'
Deborah Ross   
2,701 words
19 April 2014
The Times
T
1; National
16,17,19,21
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Life lessons, according to Joanna Lumley. (Warning: she doesn't do self-pity)
The actress Joanna Lumley and I have history, although she doesn't know it, and I'm wondering if I should say anything. I am wondering this as I arrive in West London at the studio where our photoshoot is due to take place. I am wondering this as she greets me with rapturous warmth - "So, so lovely to meet you, Deborah" - having taken the trouble to learn my name, which is by no means a foregone conclusion on these occasions. It is awkward. I feel uncomfortable. I decide I'd best get it out the way, so say, "Joanna, we have history, dating way back to 1976. You'd think it wouldn't hurt any more, but it still does."
Her beautiful face -such bones! -goes all sad and bewildered. Bravely, I press on. "On the back of the TV series The New Avengers, I had a Purdey haircut. It looked great when I came out of the hairdresser's. I looked the bee's knees. But my hair is frizzy as hell, and it reverted to type overnight. By the time I woke up in the morning I looked like a deranged dandelion clock. My mother cried. I was called Brillo Pad at school, even by the teachers. I was 13. I was traumatised."
I don't know what reparation I expect her to make. Offer to pay for all the therapy I've had since? Clutch me to her bosom, stroke my Brillo Pad hair until her fingers bleed (it is very scratchy) and murmur, "There, there." But she is wholly unsympathetic.
She says when she had the Purdey cut she had to have her hair chemically straightened until the hairdresser refused to do it any more and she was told, "You will go bald if you carry on." And there was one scene where she hurt her back and it still gives her trouble to this day. OK, I say. I can see Purdey has made you suffer, too, so I forgive you. She is relieved, obviously, but doesn't say, "Cheers, sweetie," which is most disappointing although, in time, I may well get over this, too.
Still, I am glad we are friends, because she is fun to be around and funny, and uses words such as "beastly" and "jolly" and "dear", as in "such a dear little house", and smokes and keeps her cigarettes in a posh case. She says she has to decant her fags because she can't bear the cigarette packets with their photographs of diseased lungs and warnings you will get old hands, "which is a bit rich, as my hands are already old, darling. Look!" We talk on. I tell her she was great in her latest role in Martin Scorsese's The Wolf of Wall Street, as she was.
She played Aunt Emma, a money launderer who gets to kiss Leonardo DiCaprio. I'd read the kiss took 27 takes so, out with it, Joanna, did you do it wrong on purpose 26 times? She laughs and says, "I may have slightly made that number up."
She adds that DiCaprio "was a honey to work with", as was Scorsese. "He's everything you'd expect him to be. Beautifully dressed, heavy glasses, ink-black eyebrows, hair beautifully done." And did he ever say, "Joanna, I loved your work in Sapphire & Steel?" "No, but he did say, 'I loved you in Joanna Lumley in the Land of the Northern Lights [the BBC documentary in which she went to Norway].' It's all he wanted to talk about."
I wish we could just chitchat for ever, but we can't. Lumley is a woman of purpose and we have met for a purpose. She is not going to let me distract her from this, even though I try my damnedest and suggest we decamp to the nearest pub. Lumley is the face of Shwop, the clothes recycling initiative.
Here's how it works: drop clothes you no longer want in a Shwop Box in any Marks & Spencer store, and M&S will dispatch them to Oxfam to be sold, recycled or distributed abroad. It's a fine idea, and has already raised nearly £5 million for Oxfam.
Lumley has brought in some clothes to Shwop today, including an old bra - "it's still gorgeous, and they adore bras in Senegal" - and a pair of tatty trousers that are a bit "diseased" but can be "shredded". "And I forced Stevie, my husband [Stephen Barlow, a composer], to dig some stuff out this morning, so there is this," she says. It's a rather loud Boden shirt. "Someone in eastern Europe or Africa would jump on that."
Has she ever given away clothes and regretted it? "Last year," she says, "I bit the bullet and sold all my Patsy [her character in Absolutely Fabulous] clothes, all my treasured Jean Muir dresses and coats, all my film and stage memorabilia, for charity, and I feel fine… Except for a wonderful pair of camouflage ankle boots with stiletto heels that Patsy wore to Abbey Road when she and Eddy inadvertently wiped the tape recording of the only unreleased Beatles song in existence. I loved those boots. I wish I hadn't got rid of those."
Lumley is as famous for her causes as the roles she has played. She is patron of too many charities to list and was entirely magnificent when she stood up for the Gurkhas. (Who will ever forget her buttonholing Phil Woolas, immigration minister at the time?) I wonder when she first noted social injustice. Lumley, the daughter of a British Army officer, was brought up in India and Malaya and I imagine she is going to say it was in one of those places. Instead, she says it was when she went to boarding school in England. "I was 8, and we were given these Barnardo's boxes, which were dear little houses, with dear little doors in them and a slit in the roof you could put your money in, and I remember saving up for Barnardo's."
Lumley's conversation can go from something quite frothy to something wholly serious in the blink of an eye. She'll be going through the clothes rails, choosing items to wear for the shoot, and choosing items not to wear, in her wonderfully polite way - "I can't wear that, darling, because people will then think it's the sort of thing I do wear" - and then suddenly it's: "Iran isn't at Geneva, and Syria just isn't settling itself."
Has she ever been horrid or unkind? She has to think for quite a while. "I'm sure I have and I wouldn't have meant to. I think I have been two-faced. Depending on the company you keep, you go, 'Yes, yes, I know. I thought so, too. She looks frightful.' I'm sure I've done that. It's the easiest one to fall into. It's partly because you want to ingratiate yourself with the people you're with and to take a popular view. I think things like that are hateful, and I try not to get into that now. It makes me a terrible prig. People say, 'What's the gossip?' and I haven't got any gossip."
Lumley is quick to anger, can turn fierce at the drop of a hat and is fiercely angry about the way newspapers and magazines dissect how women look, particularly after red-carpet events. "After a recent one, which I think was the Golden Globes, there was a paper that was 'Yes, yes, yes, you look marvellous,' and then 'Oh dear, you've got it wrong,' and it was a picture of Emma Thompson looking, I thought, wonderful, fabulous."
Lumley is 68 next month, which seems ludicrous to her. "I don't feel it," she says, "but then I look in a mirror and see I am actually an old lady." She uses Astral cream, which is "wonderful stuff", and "cheap and comes in a big blue tub". But she is now considering Botox. "I think everyone in the world is tempted to have work done, and I'm not against it. We all work on everything. I dye my hair, have done for ages. If I didn't, I'd be very, very grey and I don't want to be that yet. I don't use spray tan but all the young people do it and look gorgeous so I'm going to have one before I go to Iran [to make a documentary for ITV]. And my bosom would be down to my waist if I didn't wear a bra.
"Everything we do is to make ourselves better, and Botox? I don't see why not. I've got such an over-mobile face and I think I might like to be more like Bette Davis. If you look at her, nothing happens on her face. I wouldn't be surprised if all those old girls in the old days had Botox. It's, 'Rhett, I love you. Rhett, I have always loved you.' And nothing. They didn't do anything with their faces. All this thing about oh, it makes your face still. What could be better?" I don't know, I say. I think it's weird that we have feminism yet it's also acceptable for women to inject poisons into their heads. She says: "As the French say, faut souffrir pour être belle - one must suffer to be beautiful. Women used to put lead on their faces to whiten them, and got lead poisoning. And Chinese women binding their feet…" And Purdey cuts? "And Purdey cuts," she laughs.
I ask if she considers herself a feminist.
"What do you mean?" she says. "Equal pay for equal work? Then of course I'm a feminist. But there is something else. Angry women. I think I have to be angrier than I am to be a feminist. There is this fury at other women by some feminists, and I don't know what they are angry about, so I'm not sure." She then adds, rather sadly, "This revolution was bound to come, that women are the same as men, but I don't think women are the same as men."
How are we different? "I just feel that we think differently, achieve things by different methods. I think women like chitter-chattering together and I don't think men do. I think men like board meetings, and I am not sure women love them quite so much. I think women tend to use fewer utensils when cooking than men. I think women like buying new things rather too often while it is hard to get men to part with an old friendly garment. But I don't even think of myself as a woman, just a person. Not even a person: a pair of eyes on a periscope stick."
Lumley first worked as a model, in London in the Sixties. Did she ever suffer from what we used to call "wandering-hand syndrome" but is now treated as something far more serious? Was it serious all along, and we just didn't know it? "I don't know. It just became what men did." She says Sister Elizabeth at her convent school gave them a talk about this. "She had never known a man in the biblical sense, but was tremendously wise and when we were in the fifth or sixth form, she said, 'Don't lead men on because they get to a point when they really can't stop, and it's not fair, so don't do it and don't be silly. They are different from us in that way.' "I thought, 'What a wise thing.' In those days, there used to be men whose hands would linger on your waist. That always went on. As for being insulted, you learn graceful ways to get round it. This is not dissing the women who have had their lives wrecked, although why some took 50 years to say it, I don't know. It's difficult. Of course we want people who have been raped to be treated seriously at the police station, which I don't think they were [back then], but I think it could have gone quite far now. Being patted on the bottom, no. It's not assault."
I don't know if Lumley ever does self-pity. She was an unmarried mother, having had a son, James, in 1967 with the photographer Michael Claydon (she didn't reveal his name for many years), and she didn't marry Barlow until 1986. So she brought up James on her own, which must have been hard. The money was hard, she says, because there wasn't family money and models weren't paid what they are today, and there were periods when she was unemployed, "so it was a lot of Marmite on toast. And I remember Jamie was into Star Trek, and I couldn't afford to buy him a T-shirt, but I made a thing that looked like the V-shaped chevron and sewed it onto one of his T-shirts, with tiny, mouse-like stitches, and when he came home from school I said, 'Was it all right?' And he said, 'It's upside down.' Tragic. Just tragic."
Did she get any state support? "Because I was a model, I was called self-employed, so couldn't get the dole. Someone said I could get child benefit but then someone else told me, 'Posh people like you don't get it.'
I was shocked by that, and humiliated, and so ignorant of my rights I didn't get that either. It was slim pickings, but I have to say it wasn't sorrowful. Not going on holiday didn't trouble me a bit. I would buy clothes in charity shops for 70p. Now children are teased if they don't have the right trainers and that is so sad."
Lumley has done everything, pretty much.
She has made documentaries and acted in films and on stage and on television and if you didn't love her as smoking, pouting, snarling, champagne-quaffing Patsy in Absolutely Fabulous, then there is something seriously wrong with you. I ask if she found it difficult to identify with that part of Patsy that cares only for herself. "No," she says. "It's all acting.
Acting is only pretending to be someone else. Actors often portray people they don't approve of, or even like, but actually I love Patsy. I am not her, but she belongs to me."
Lumley has many projects on the go. There is the trip to Iran, and her BBC documentary Joanna Lumley Meets will.i.am aired in March. Plus, there was The Wolf of Wall Street, although she wasn't first choice for Emma, she wants me to know. "My take on the story is that Julie Andrews couldn't do it [she was recovering from ankle surgery] and Eileen Atkins was asked but couldn't do it, and then, maybe after 20 people, it came to me. But I don't care. Never mind when someone drops out or someone doesn't want to do it, just get the part. Yeah, lovely." Yeah, lovely. Joanna Lumley, that is. And all is forgiven, at last.
Shwopping is supported by M&S (marksandspencer.com/shwopping)
'Botox? I don't see why not. I look In a mIrror and see an old lady. I thInk I mIght lIke It'
'I was self-employed so I couldn't get the dole. I was told, "Posh people like you don't get child benefit"'
'Of course we want women who have been raped to be treated seriously, but a pat on the bottom is not assault'
Document T000000020140419ea4j0007l
