{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2853"}
____
  
The Guide
The Guide: theatre: The Beautiful Cosmos Of Ivor Cutler Inverness: King Charles III London: Birdland London: Union Edinburgh: Dancing At Lughnasa Keswick: A View From The Bridge Liverpool
lyn gardner mark cook   
756 words
29 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
34
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Small is beautiful in the work of Vanishing Point, a Scottish company that under director Matthew Lenton has developed a strong visual style. Small and sideways was the preferred method of engagement of Ivor Cutler, the Jewish, Scottish, London-based musician-poet- storyteller, beloved by John Peel, the Beatles and many others. Born in Govan in 1923, his Scottish upbringing was a major influence on a body of work that is as eccentric, odd, tender and playful as the man himself. If the show succeeds in capturing even half of Cutler's idiosyncrasies, it should be a fine, fragile thing indeed.
lyn gardner
Eden Court, Fri & 5 Apr; touring to 3 May
Writer Mike Bartlett and director Rupert Goold join forces for the first time since the National Theatre's climate change play, Earthquakes In London, in 2011. There are similarly big issues under discussion in the intriguing King Charles III, set at a time when the Queen has just abdicated. Bartlett's "future history play" imagines the problems Prince Charles might encounter after years in waiting for the throne, with a public that is increasingly questioning the need
for royalty in today's society. Bartlett, an Olivier award-winner for Cock at the Royal Court, also has another new play, An Intervention, starring Rachael Stirling, coming up at Watford Palace Theatre (16 Apr
to 3 May).
mark cook
Almeida Theatre, N1,
Thu to 31 May
Simon Stephens's most recent successes have been adaptations: Ibsen's A Doll's House, and Mark Haddon's The Curious Incident Of The Dog In The Night-Time, which won him an Olivier award. Birdland, at the Royal Court - where he has had several plays staged in the past - is a new work about celebrity and money. Andrew Scott, currently in the Irish film The Stag but best known as Moriarty in Sherlock, plays Paul, a rock star at the height of his fame who has to deal with the temptations that come his way. mc
Royal Court, SW1,
Thu to 31 May
Edinburgh international festival may have decided to back away from directly engaging with the great independence debate in its summer programme, but the rest of Scottish theatre is giving it plenty of airing. Tim Barrow's show goes back to the early-18th century to explore the 1707 Act Of Union and the historical figures - from Daniel Defoe to Queen Anne and the Scottish poet Allan Ramsay - who all played a part in the bringing together of Scotland and England. The union might come to an end later this year, but the play promises a bawdy drama to help explain the past
in order to understand
the future. lg
Royal Lyceum Theatre,
to 12 Apr
There are plenty of memory plays but few have the claim to greatness of Brian Friel's drama. His 1990 work draws on his own childhood reminiscences, even as it explores the treachery of memory itself. Set in remote Donegal in 1936, it focuses on the lives of the five unmarried Mundy sisters, whose only real contact with the outside world is through their wireless radio. Seen through the eyes of their young nephew, Michael, the play tells of the period around the pagan festival of Lughnasa which celebrates the harvest. The arrivals of Michael's father and the sisters' missionary brother, home from Africa in disgrace, mark a moment of change in these women's lives. The period will prove to be as momentous and tragic for them as the war brewing in Europe. Theatre By The Lake favourite Mary Papadima directs this classic. lg
Theatre By The Lake,
to 19 Apr
Much attention has been given to the re-opening of the Everyman, but it's business as usual at the Playhouse. Arthur Miller's play about the waterfront Italian-American community on the seaward side of the Brooklyn Bridge should have particular resonance in a city where the docks and their influx of immigrants have created a cultural richness. For Eddie Carbone, a longshoreman, the world is a place of order where honour and duty are paramount. But times are changing, and when his wife's Sicilian brothers arrive as illegal immigrants, tensions rise and Eddie has to make choices that will affect the entire family. lg
Liverpool Playhouse,
Sat to 19 Apr
Document GRDN000020140328ea3t0007u
