{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2147"}
﻿NEWS
Samantha Cameron's role in Nepalese nanny's passport; Samantha Cameron, the wife of the Prime Minister, was involved in the family’s foreign-born nanny securing British citizenship while she was working at 10 Downing Street
By Christopher Hope and James Kirkup   
628 words
7 March 2014
23:32
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Samantha Cameron, the wife of the Prime Minister, was involved in the family's foreign-born nanny securing British citizenship while she was working for the Prime Minister.
Mrs Cameron allowed her name to be entered on an application form for British citizenship for her long-term nanny Gina Lima four years ago.
Miss Lima’s citizenship was granted towards the end of 2010, months after the Camerons entered 10 Downing Street in May that year. Applications typically take six months to process.
The Prime Minister’s office disclosed late on Thursday that the Camerons’ nanny Gita Lima, who has worked for the family for years, is now a British citizen.
After initially declining to give further details, a Number 10 spokesman released a statement. She said: “Mr and Mrs Cameron’s nanny became a British citizen in late 2010.
“Mr and Mrs Cameron did not write a letter supporting their nanny’s application for British citizenship. The normal application process was followed throughout. As is usual, Mrs Cameron was named on her application as her employer."
There is no suggestion that the Camerons broke any rules over the application. But the limited response leaves open the possibility that Mr or Mrs Cameron could have been one of two referees on the application required by the Home Office.
The revelation may also be politically awkward for the Prime Minister given his party’s increasingly tough rhetoric on foreign workers and those who employ them.
James Brokenshire the immigration minister, this week appeared to criticise the “wealthy metropolitan elite" who use immigrants to provide “cheap labour".
Such people had gained from immigration while “ordinary hardworking people" have suffered, the minister said.
The speech was privately criticised by some Tory ministers, and publicly attacked by business leaders who have said immigration curbs are harming the UK economy.
Mr Cameron has not said he would bar all foreign labour, but he has promised to cut net immigration - currently running at more than 250,000 – to less than 100000.
He has also promised to curb the arrival in Britain of unskilled and poorly educated migrant workers.
Despite those pledges, the Camerons have now provided direct employment for at least two foreign domestic staff, including Miss Lima - who is not known to have arrived in the country with any significant educational or vocational qualifications.
Australian-born Sammi Strange was hired as a nanny in 2012 for a six week period when Miss Lima took extended break.
Miss Lima was first hired by the Camerons in the middle part of the last decade to help care for their disabled son Ivan, who died in 2009. She came from a charity called Kalayaan, which helps immigrants seeking to escape abusive employers.
Some Tory ministers are privately worried that Mr Brokenshire’s speech has only succeeded in drawing attention to the household arrangements of senior politicians.
One source said: “If voters thought we were the metropolitan elite before, this will just confirm it."
Nigel Farage MEP, the leader of the UK Independence Party, said on Friday night: “This is a perfect illustration of an uncomprehending, wealthy Metropolitan elite who now so dominate politics in the UK.
“Ordinary decent British people are paying the price through loss of jobs and a significant wage depreciation over the last few years."
Phil Wilson, the Labour MP, said: “There must now be complete transparency and openness from the Prime Minister over any contact between him, his office and the Home Office regarding his family’s nanny."
Document TELUK00020140308ea370018h
