{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3414"}
____
  
News
Three admit machinegun murder of imam's son in an Edinburgh suburb
Mike Wade   
673 words
16 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Scotland
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Three men admitted murdering an imam's son with a machinegun after a feud between members of a drugs gang reached a bloody climax in an Edinburgh suburb.
Mohamud Mohamud, 30, Cadil Huseen, 23, and Hussein Ali, 26, pleaded guilty yesterday to killing Mohammed Abdi, 25, who was shot dead in May last year, following a car chase.
Abdi's body was found at about 1am next to a VW Sharan that had crashed into a wrought-iron fence in a residential area close to the Royal Park at Holyrood. He had been shot in the chest, and, according to witnesses, had also been beaten with baseball bats and golf clubs.
The three men face life sentences. At the High Court in Glasgow, judge Lord Turnbull said: "This is a level of criminality seldom seen in our country and mercifully so."
Weeks earlier, a "significant quantity" of crack had been discovered by police in the flat in Leith that Abdi shared with his father, Omar Abdi, who formerly worked at Edinburgh Central Mosque. Both were Somalian immigrants.
Detective Chief Superintendent Gary Flannigan, of the Specialist Crime Division, said the murder took place against a backdrop of a dispute between rival factions of a London-based organised crime gang that was operating in Scotland.
Abdi and several friends were pursued through Edinburgh by men in two vehicles. One of the cars crashed in Abercorn Avenue and the victim died after a MAC-10 machinegun was fired from within the VW people carrier. Officers in a passing patrol car initially thought it was a crash.
However, it soon became obvious "that a number of men had been involved in a violent incident involving firearms," a police source said.
Mr Flannigan said the investigation which followed "was large-scale and complex". He added: "Its span crossed the UK — from Willowbrae to London — and abroad in terms of our search for those responsible and significant witnesses, and involved a number of other agencies including the National Crime Agency."
The final journey was pieced together using technology which allowed officers to track mobile phones and link them to individuals. The route of the two cars which the gang used was tracked in parallel to the mobile phone data using a network of CCTV cameras.
Forensic analysis of the interior of the VW Sharan identified the occupants of the car.
Local residents and passers-by also told officers of a confrontation, that they heard "firecracker" sounds which were the reports of the gun being discharged and that they saw a number of black males running away from the scene.
Mohammed Irfan, 34, a taxi driver from Edinburgh, said: "I never thought it would be happening here. I heard three loud bangs. It was like something you hear in the movies. I couldn't believe it would be shots."
A scientific expert told the court that at least five shots had been fired from the converted replica machinegun. Another bullet was fired from a converted revolver found in the VW Sharan, but the fatal shot came from the machinegun.
Jade Davren, who was a friend of both Huseen — known as Jamie — and Ali, told the court she had become suspicious that they were involved in drug dealing.
In a police interview she said she had heard that Huseen and his friends were making £15,000 a week from drug dealing.
Jordan Cockburn, 21, another friend of Huseen, told the court she saw what she thought was a lump of cheese on his kitchen table. She was asked: "What did Jamie tell you it was?" She replied: "Crack cocaine."
The co-accused Ahmed Ahmed, 28 , Liban Ahmed also known as Jama, 30, Said Fadal, 32, and Said Tarabi, 27, had their pleas of "not guilty" accepted by the advocate depute, Iain McSporran.
Lord Turnbull said that he would await background reports before determining how long the three would spend in jail before being eligible for parole.
Document T000000020140516ea5g000eq
