{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1130"}
____
  
NEWS
Palestinian asylum seeker to be deported for 'appalling crime history'
By Padraic Flanagan   
946 words
6 May 2014
14:32
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A Palestinian career criminal who used the Human Rights Act to remain in Britain to deal in heroin and crack and lived a lavish lifestyle is finally facing deportation
A convicted Palestinian drug dealer is finally being thrown out of Britain after using the Human Rights Act to remain in the UK for an eight-year crime spree.
Career criminal Mahmoud Jaber, 31, had been peddling heroin and crack cocaine to fund a lavish lifestyle, serving three jail terms and racking up a string of convictions during his stay in Britain, a judge was told.
Despite being informed he would be deported as long ago as 2006, Jaber – whose father lives in the UK – used article eight of the Human Rights Act to appeal successfully against his removal, arguing he had the right to family life.
Since his appeal, Jaber has been convicted of a series of drug trafficking offences, complaining that he was “emotionally scarred into taking drugs” because he was born in a Palestinian refugee camp in the West Bank.
After a number of legal battles and appeals, an immigration judge ruled that Jaber, of Accrington, Lancs, had an “appalling history” and ordered that he be returned to his home country
It is thought that Jaber’s case will have cost the taxpayer tens of thousands of pounds in legal fees.
The saga began when Jaber arrived in Britain in 1988 for a six-month stay only to come back permanently in February 1992 to join his father in Accrington.
The parent - who had arrived earlier in the UK in 1987 - had already lost a battle to claim asylum in 1990 but he was granted leave to remain due to "exceptional circumstances."
Jaber was allowed indefinite leave to remain himself in 1998, in line with his father, and attempted to get British citizenship but in 2003 was convicted of a series of offences including resisting police and possessing Class A drugs.
The following year he was back in court for drugs offences and in September of that year he was jailed for four years for dealing crack cocaine and heroin.
In April 2006 Jaber was told he would be deported but in May the following year he lodged an appeal under article eight and won the right to stay.
In December 2008 he was repeatedly brought back into court where he was convicted of possessing cannabis, cocaine and breaching court orders.
Then in October, 2010, at Burnley Crown Court, Jaber was convicted of intent to supply heroin and crack cocaine and manufacturing crack and was jailed for six years.
The court heard Jaber had turned an empty flat into a drugs factory and police recovered heroin and crack cocaine worth almost £25,000. Detectives said his drug dealing had been on "a significant scale".
Police said that Jaber kept £4,000 in cash at his home and officers found a receipt for a £6,000 Breitling watch. He was also driving a £60,000 BMW M3.
In court, Jaber claimed he had spent the first eight years of his life in a refugee camp on the Palestinian West Bank.
He said his experiences in the camp were "horrific" and he was so "scarred" by what he saw he experimented with cannabis when he was 13, five years after he arrived in the UK.
Jaber claimed his drug use increased to cocaine due to "family issues" and initially claimed all the drugs found at the flat were for his own use.
In 2011, Jaber was warned he faced deportation but in 2012 he again appealed, claiming that his removal would result in a "breach of his human rights."
Last year, while his appeal was going through the courts, he was convicted of money laundering and jailed for an extra 21 months after Preston Crown Court was told he used drugs money to buy an Audi Quattro S5 for £44,000.
Later that year he was ordered to pay back £37,000 as the proceeds of crime.
The appeal against deportation was heard at an immigration tribunal in Bradford, West Yorks, in October last year. The panel ordered he be thrown out, saying removal would "not be disproportionate."
It concluded that his offending was "simply too serious to outweigh his claims to remain in the United Kingdom because of his history".
The panel said his length of time in the UK was "outweighed by the public interest in keeping society safe from a perennial offender who they believed in all likelihood would be a serious threat to individuals."
Jaber then appealed to the Upper Immigration Tribunal in Manchester and again cited human rights laws to argue that he would be at "risk of harm" if he was returned to Palestine.
His lawyer Carla Rawlinson claimed Jaber's safety could be in jeopardy because his uncle had been killed by Israeli forces during militia insurgency in 1989.
She said Jaber would have to pass through an Israeli checkpoint and the checkpoints into Palestine are controlled by the Israeli occupying forces.
She said the length of time Jaber had been away from Palestine would cause him to be of interest to the Israeli authorities, who would want to know why he had been out of Palestine for 20 years.
Rejecting his appeal, Judge Richard Chalkley said the original panel had found that his offending was “simply too serious” to outweigh his claims to stay in the country.
“Those were findings which were open to the panel to make,” added the judge. "I am satisfied, given the appellant’s appalling history, that the appeal fails. “
Document TELUK00020140506ea560030g
