{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3300"}
____
  
NEWS
Splits at top of Labour as Ed Balls disowns vegetables poster
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
416 words
14 May 2014
22:28
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ed Balls says message was 'buried' in vegetables tax poster but indicates he was not to blame
Ed Balls has admitted one of the Labour Party’s own election posters was a mistake.
The shadow chancellor distanced himself from an advert attacking David Cameron and Nick Clegg over VAT rises to shopping bills. The poster featured food that was not subject to the tax.
There have been reports of tensions between Mr Balls and Douglas Alexander, the party's general election coordinator.
Aides denied reports the pair had to be “dragged apart” after they “almost came to blows” during a furious row over the party’s policy on Europe.
The poster released last week claimed David Cameron and Nick Clegg are “two peas in a pod” and had put £450 on every shopping bill thanks to an increase in VAT to 20 per cent.
It depicts the Prime Minister and Liberal Democrat leader as peas surrounded by images of everyday goods, including fruit and vegetables, soft drinks, ketchup and biscuits.
However, more than half of the items pictured carry no VAT at all because they are considered to be essential by the government. And in order to incur an extra tax bill of £450, someone would need to spend £20,000 on VAT-rated goods.
The Tories said the poster revealed “economic incompetence”.
Asked about the poster on LBC Radio, Mr Balls said: “When I saw it I think had the same reaction as you which is I think I might have chosen a different picture had I been drawing up that ad.”
Asked if he had seen it or whether it was solely “Douglas Alexander’s advert”, he replied: “Look, these campaigns are busy times and there’s always lots of things going on but you know…”
He added: “I thought the political message, deep and buried within it, was very powerful.”
The Labour leadership must make “more noise to say we’ll take tough decisions on the deficit,” Mr Balls said in an interview.
He said voters must still be reassured that Labour will “make the sums add up” and the party supports businesses.
It must also make “more noise” to show Labour is serious about tackling immigration, welfare abuse and reforming the EU, he said.
“I don’t think Labour will win the next election as an anti-business party,” Mr Balls told the Financial Times.
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e0058y
