{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"3543"}
____
  
News
Tories reigned to Euro poll drubbing by Ukip
IAIN MARTIN   
1,054 words
20 April 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; Scotland
8,9
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE TORIES are bracing themselves for a kicking from the UK Independence Party in the European elections next month, with the party's high command so resigned to its fate that senior figures have even given up pretending that it will be anything other than a nightmarish experience.
Ministers and MPs are well aware of how challenging the situation is, with many core Conservative voters ready to defect to Nigel Farage's party. "Lots of my people will vote Ukip," says a long-serving Tory MP. Another told me recently that he suspects that more than half of the members of his local constituency association, the activists who are the backbone of the party, are closet Ukip supporters who will register a protest against David Cameron in May.
But the discontent of activists cannot alone explain the extraordinary rise of Ukip in recent years. The Tory party membership these days is small, with as few as 100,000 members remaining. It is clear that Mr Farage has also managed to tap into the deep unhappiness of the wider electorate with mainstream parties.
One of the most revealing aspects of today's ICM poll for The Sunday Telegraph is that many of Ukip's own voters say discontent with the Tories, Labour and the Liberal Democrats explains the party's popularity. Of those Ukip voters polled, almost a third, 29 per cent, thought it was the main reason, while more than 24 per cent chose the party's tough line on immigration. Ukip's flagship policy of withdrawal from the European Union was cited by 41 per cent.
Clearly, Mr Farage's populist message appeals to voters, particularly older voters, who feel that a remote Westminster elite has betrayed them or been contemptuous of their concerns in recent years.
This means that, for now, the normal rules do not seem to apply to Ukip, with the party's supporters according it a special status.
When other parties become mired in claims of sleaze and financial chicanery it tends to do them harm in opinion polls and elections. That is not, yet, the case when it comes to Ukip.
Claims of scandal simply bounce off Nigel Farage. Despite him facing allegations last week that he abused the allowances he receives as a member of the European Parliament, Mr Farage's party is still riding high, with 27 per cent of those polled by ICM saying they will back Ukip in May. That puts the party ahead of the Conservatives, who are on 22 per cent, and just behind Labour on 30 per cent. The claims about Mr Farage's office costs were in the news while the latest ICM poll for The Sunday Telegraph was being conducted, but they seem to have had no impact on the party's popularity.
Whether voters leaning to Ukip suspect that the other parties and the media are smearing Mr Farage because they fear him, or whether they take it as a given that all parties have been known to fiddle their expenses, his status as an insurgent rebel fighting the system makes it very difficult for the Tories to get a clear line of attack on Ukip. It is not Farage on the loose: Page 22 clear that a more aggressive approach on the part of the Conservatives would make a difference. Mr Cameron's previous disastrous attempts to discredit Ukip only succeeded in inflaming his opponents. When in 2006 he referred to Ukip members as "fruitcakes, loons and closet racists" it probably gave the party a boost.
The Deputy Prime Minister, Nick Clegg, also discovered recently that challenging Mr Farage to a fight can backfire. Despite the Liberal Democrat leader's reputation as a formidable debater on television, he was crushed by Mr Farage when the pair clashed in two televised encounters. In today's ICM poll the Lib Dems are at 8 per cent.
In contrast, in recent months the Tories have tried a policy of what George Brown, a Labour foreign secretary in the Sixties, used to refer to as "complete ignoral", in the vain hope that avoiding mentioning Mr Farage will mitigate the damage he will do to the Tories in May.
Unfortunately for Mr Cameron, the Ukip leader's voracious appetite for publicity, and his knack of exploiting Tory travails such as the botched resignation of the former culture secretary Maria Miller, mean that he is more visible and self-confident than ever.
The hope in the Tory high command is that this is a passing phase and that, while the next month will be intensely difficult, the impact may not be long-lasting. If the Tory party can avoid losing its head in the days and weeks after the European elections, strategists hope that voters will then return to the Conservatives because of the recovering economy and the prospect of Ed Miliband moving into Downing Street.
The question is whether this is an enduring split in the centre-Right vote that will continue beyond the European elections or a temporary protest vote that fades fast as the general election looms. This weekend, the Tory leadership will be praying that it is the latter.
Matthew d'Ancona: Page 22 CONSERVATIVE 55% LABOUR 3% Q2. HOW WILL CONSERVATIVE VOTERS AT THE 2010 GENERAL ELECTION VOTE IN NEXT MONTH'S EUROPEAN ELECTIONS? LIB DEM 2% UKIP 37% OTHER 3% Q3. WHY HAS UKIP GROWN IN POPULARITY? It is strong on immigration 26% It wants Britain to leave the EU 24% Nigel Farage is a convincing leader 5% It has a credible economic plan 2% People are dissatisfied with major parties 42% Q4. WOULD YOU BE MORE / LESS LIKELY TO VOTE CONSERVATIVE IF TORY LEADER WAS BORIS JOHNSON 43% more likely / 57% less likely THERESA MAY 18% more likely / 82% less likely GEORGE OSBORNE 15% more likely / 85% less likely MICHAEL GOVE 9% more likely / 91% less likely VOTE ICM Research interviewed a random sample of 2,000 adults online on April 15-17. The results have been weighted to the profile of all adults. ICM is a member of the British Polling Council and abides by its rules. Figures have been rounded to the nearest 1 per cent and may not add up to 100.
Document STEL000020140420ea4k000eu
