{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"2226"}
____
  
News
Shattered by their son's murder and the struggle for justice
William Langley   
1,392 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
19
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
PROFILE DOREEN AND NEVILLE LAWRENCE
Despite police efforts to discredit them, the parents have long comported themselves with great dignity, says William Langley
Twenty-one years after their son's murder, Neville and Baroness Doreen Lawrence remain united in their search for justice, and by the dignity with which they somehow manage to carry themselves, whatever their latest setback.
When they speak, their tone is strikingly similar - cautious, reproachful, pained - and their faces show the shared weariness of the long fight. In one sense, Stephen's death holds them together, but in another it has driven them apart. A young life destroyed by racist thugs in 1993 is only one element of the Lawrence tragedy, which now lives on as a kind of national admonishment. The close family Stephen grew up with is no more.
The Lawrences, who had come to Britain from Jamaica in the Sixties, were content in their obscurity. Their lives told the dull side of the immigration story: work, church, children, a belief in their new country and a house in south-east London to suggest that they were doing the right thing. One night in April 1993, Neville's and Doreen's eldest son, aged 18, was stabbed to death at a bus stop by a gang of white youths, and no one seemed to care.
The Lawrences' faith in their new country had, admittedly, taken a few knocks down the years, but enough of it survived for them to believe that their son's death would matter to someone other than themselves. Instead, they met indifference, suspicion, even hostility. Last week's remarkable developments are a testimony to what these two "ordinary" people have achieved - and without resort to mob politics or connivance with the outside interests that look for such causes to exploit.
Their approach from the start has been one of patience, dignity and reason. Last week, all that the Lawrences have long said about Stephen's death became that much clearer. An investigation by Mark Ellison QC found that the Metropolitan Police, rather than investigate the case, had tried to discredit the family, and then cover up its multiple failures to bring the killers to justice.
Theresa May, the Home Secretary, responded by announcing a public inquiry into the activities of the nowdisbanded Special Demonstration Squad, which used undercover officers to infiltrate groups or individuals about whom the police had suspicions.
In typically understated fashion, Baroness Lawrence told the House of Lords: "We weren't asking for anything special. Just what we should have had, like any other citizens of this country." In matching tone, Mr Lawrence told the BBC's Newsnight: "To hear this being said on TV so the wider world could hear... I felt vindicated. If people had listened to us earlier, perhaps things would have been different."
The Lawrences, divorced since 1999, lead very different lives. Ennobled last year, the Baroness, 60, maintains a relatively high profile as an activist and arbiter on community relations, and has appeared everywhere from the Tate gallery (as the subject of a Turner Prize-winning painting) to the Olympic Games opening ceremony and Desert Island Discs. In public, she comes across as imperturbable, even detached from the fiercely emotional issues that surround her. There is an unmistakeable Britishness about her that speaks both to her generation and the manner in which she was brought up.
She has no desire to make a fuss, let alone to weep and shake her fists in public. Yet she has that stubborn streak, that very British scepticism about authority, which won't let her roll over and be dictated to.
She remains resolutely unforgiving - of the youths who killed her son, and of the police who have failed her. "People who talk about me as liking attention," she once said. "They should come and walk in my shoes. Does anyone honestly think I wanted this? I would give anything to have a normal life where people don't look at me in the street."
A long time ago, they had a normal life. Mr Lawrence had come to Britain in one of the early waves of Caribbean immigration, agog, as he remembers it, with the sense of possibility, and in awe of the assumed greatness of the mother country. Life was nowhere near as easy as he had hoped, but he struggled by on his skills as a handyman and decorator, and at 27, tall, handsome and just-aboutsolvent, he met Doreen.
A pretty, petite 17-year-old, she had arrived in Britain as a child, and after leaving school found a job as a clerk at the National Westminster Bank. They both loved soul music and Jamaican food, but Doreen's parents were concerned about the age difference, and their wedding in 1972 was held in an atmosphere of ill-concealed disapproval.
Yet they were happy together, happier still when Stephen was born two years later. In her memoirs, Doreen describes Neville as a wonderful father; kindly, funny but firm when necessary. Two more children, Stuart and Georgina, followed, and the Lawrences slogged their way towards the kind of life that had attracted them to Britain in the first place.
They contradicted the flashy, swaggering African-Caribbean stereotype that the police seem to have expected. The children adhered to high standards of behaviour and achievement. Meals were a family occasion, TV was rationed, study was encouraged, Sunday services at the local Methodist church were an obligation.
Today, Mr Lawrence lives in Jamaica, a short distance from Stephen's grave. The only public memorial to the teenager in Britain is a pavement plaque in Eltham, south-east London, close to where he died. It has been repeatedly defaced with eggs, excrement and racist graffiti, and the family decided that Stephen would rest more peacefully in their ancestral homeland.
The distance - physical and otherwise - between the Lawrences now is so great that neither can really say if it was Stephen's death that ended their marriage. Baroness Lawrence has hinted that it was headed for trouble anyway, but Neville tends to differ.
"Our world began falling apart from the moment the hospital staff told us our son had died," he has said. "For some reason that I have tried to understand, and can't, we couldn't reach out to each other. We stayed together for another six years, but from that day we never physically touched each other again."
Today, when they appear together, it is almost always with a lawyer placed between them. They rarely speak to each other, and, while both remain committed to the long search for a settlement, Mr Lawrence - the more introverted of the two - has little taste for legal and political jousting. He says he pities rather than hates Stephen's killers, blaming their upbringings in a world of alienation, ignorance and criminality.
The realisation that the police saw Stephen as "just another murdered black kid", whose death was barely worth investigating, reunited the Lawrences behind his cause, but it didn't bring them back together. Their campaign began quietly, with the lobbying of local councillors and MPs and, in 1994, the launch of a private prosecution against five local men. Their campaign's profile was raised by visits from Nelson Mandela in 1993 and 1998.
Away from the courts and the cameras, the Lawrences were becoming strangers to each other. She accused him of being "remote", while he argued that he needed to grieve in his own way. In her memoirs, Baroness Lawrence complains that he drifted away from the family, leaving her to face the inquest and continue the fight alone. Neville responds that he couldn't stay in England, having been warned by his doctors that he would suffer a breakdown if he did. Stuart, 37, is a London teacher, Georgina, 32, works in design.
So we move towards what could be the closing chapter of a case that has affected and affronted Britain in ways that could never have been imagined back in 1993, when an ordinary teenager left an ordinary home on what should have been an ordinary day.
Except that for the Lawrence family, nothing is ever ordinary.
"The Lawrences' approach from the start has been one of patience and reason
Document STEL000020140309ea390007d
