{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3837"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel versus the North: a week on tour with Ukip
By Michael Deacon Parliamentary Sketchwriter   
1,627 words
26 April 2014
08:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage hits the campaign trail to persuade the north of England that Ukip, not Labour, is the party of the working class – while protesters try to sabotage his tour
If I had to pick one moment that summed up Ukip’s tour of northern England, it would be this. It was Wednesday night in Gateshead, and, sporting the leer of satisfaction that must haunt David Cameron’s dreams, Nigel Farage had just sauntered on stage at Ukip’s largest ever public meeting, to the idolatrous acclaim of more than 1,000 supporters. Finally the applause died down. He opened his mouth to speak.
It was at this point that two young men in the audience stood up, and, to the tune of the Conga, began chanting, 窶廡--- off back to Toad Hall! F--- off back to Toad Hall! Na, na, na, na 窶  hey! Na, na, na, na 窶  hey! F--- off back to Toad Hall窶ｦ窶
As politely as he could manage, Mr Farage declined their invitation, and the two men – still merrily chanting – were thrown out. Whereupon, presumably, they were congratulated by the 100-odd anti-Ukip protesters – or, to quote Mr Farage, “herberts” – gathered outside the venue. (Banners: “Migrants Welcome, Bigots Aren’t”; “U-Prick”; and a caricature of Mr Farage, accompanied by a speech bubble that read, “I represent the interests of the ruling class”.)
Well, it was never going to be easy. In an effort to dispel the impression that Ukip is merely a party of south-east England, supported by Tories who find the Tories insufficiently Tory, Mr Farage spent this week campaigning in the north. He walked the streets, made speeches, gave endless interviews. Labour, he kept declaring, had “betrayed” the northern working class – and, at the European elections next month, the northern working class could get its own back by voting Ukip. “This Labour party, they have turned their backs on you,” he told Gateshead. “You are no longer represented by them.”
The question was: could Gateshead be represented by a Thatcherite public schoolboy from Kent?
The tour started on Tuesday in Sheffield, where Mr Farage unveiled Ukip窶冱 strikingly blunt new billboards (“26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?”). Then it was off to a hotel conference room for the first of the party’s nightly public meetings. On the way in, attendees were invited to enter a prize draw. On offer: a holiday.
To Brussels.
The protesters outside (placards: “Ukip Go Home”) were comfortably outnumbered by the 600 admirers in the audience. I glanced around the room. Roughly 50:50, men and women; mostly but certainly not all middle-aged and above. The only non-white face I spotted was on stage, and belonged to Amjad Bashir, Ukip’s spokesman for small business. (The next day, on the campaign trail, a journalist asked Mr Farage whether Ukip was racist. Mr Farage chuckled tolerantly. “I mean, frankly,” he said, shaking his head, “you’ve only got to look at… where’s Amjad?” Mr Bashir was at that moment in the nearby florist’s, dutifully paying for the six red roses Mr Farage had just bought to mark St George’s Day.)
The Sheffield speech went down a storm. Even Mr Farage’s most disgusted critic would have to concede that he’s an exceptional performer on stage, embarrassingly superior to the leaders of the three main parties. So convincing an orator is he that people actually nod agreement when he rages against “the political class” for having “all gone to the same handful of schools”. No one so much as raises a hand to remind Mr Farage that he himself attended Dulwich College, a member of the elite “Eton Group” of England’s poshest independent schools, and that his fellow alumni include Peter Lilley (Con, Hitchin & Harpenden), Philip Hollobone (Con, Kettering), Chris Mole (Lab, Ipswich) and John Spellar (Lab, Warley).
Ukip rallies are always far livelier than those of other parties: they seethe with a kind of angry energy, a furious optimism. “I didn’t know there were so many fruitcakes in Sheffield!” honked Mr Farage. The room guffawed. The night finished with a Q&A session. One man was thrown out, after refusing to stop shouting out hostile questions about the party’s immigration policy.
The next day, Mr Farage was due to visit the town of Yarm, Stockton-on-Tees. Awaiting his arrival, I spent an entertaining 10 minutes outside the bank watching a local man subject three unhappy-looking Ukip officials to interrogations of near-Paxmanlike aggression. I wish I could convey in print his gasp of appalled glee when a Ukip candidate proved unable to tell him how many EU migrants work in Britain. “Day by day it goes up,” offered the Ukip candidate, falteringly. “You can’t say it goes up if you don’t know the numbers!” hooted Paxman.
Sadly, Paxman had gone by the time Mr Farage pulled up in his battle bus (sign on window: “Join the People’s Army Tour”). The Ukip leader spent 40 minutes strolling round town amid a swarm of journalists. Perhaps the swarm put locals off; at any rate, in all that time I saw him speak to just two of them. One was a man in a vest with a shaven head and murky tattoos. “Never voted in me life before, but I’m voting for you,” he informed Mr Farage. A beaming Mr Farage asked why. “This is not our country no more,” replied the man, darkly.
I had slightly better luck than the Ukip leader, and spoke to another couple of supporters. “I don’t know anybody in Middlesbrough who’s not going to vote for him,” declared one man stoutly. (On the other hand, a Newcastle-born taxi driver told me Ukip had no chance, because “Labour could start World War Three and everyone here would still vote for them”. Except, that is, for the taxi driver himself, who was a lifelong Tory. A Geordie Tory! This was not, he confided, a fact that he advertised willy-nilly.)
Next day’s stop: Knutsford, a well-heeled Cheshire town best-known as the inspiration for Cranford. It didn’t look as though it could be easily classified among the “Labour heartlands” Mr Farage had so noisily set his sights on. The local MP is one G Osborne. Still, explained the Ukip leader, it was important “to remind ourselves that there are some Tories who are thinking about voting Ukip as well”.
Mr Farage alighted from his battle bus, stopped for a chat with a supporter out walking a spectacularly bouffanted poodle, then strode straight into the nearest pub.
When he finally emerged, one pint and a dozen interviews later, he found the people of Knutsford almost universally adoring. “We’re ardent supporters,” a middle-aged couple informed him sternly. After another half-hour of adulation and handshakes, he was chauffeured away. Mere minutes, coincidentally, before news broke that Andre Lampitt, a Ukip candidate, had been suspended by the party for allegedly sending racist tweets . Earlier in the afternoon, I suddenly recalled, Mr Farage had told me that “revolutionary socialists” were trying to “whip stories that we’re somehow a racist party”.
Goodness. These revolutionary socialists work quickly.
That night’s Ukip rally was held in Manchester. Although Mr Lampitt’s name was all over the news, it received no mention at the rally. Mr Farage did, though, announce that Ukip could be proud of having turned immigration into “a mature and respectable debate”. I googled Mr Lampitt’s tweets. “Inner peace will come when Aids does what it should and reduce African density.” Well, I suppose that one was more about population growth than immigration.
Louise Bours, a Ukip councillor, reassured the audience that “the only time that people call you racist is when they’ve got nothing else to say. They’ve lost the argument. They have to insult us. It’s like playground bullying.”
I hope Mr Lampitt doesn’t feel he’s been bullied.
It had been a long week, for me as much as for Mr Farage. I’d been trailing him all across the north for days, and I fear my constant presence may have grown rather wearing. On Thursday afternoon he slipped out of the back of a pub for a cigarette and what looked like a tense conversation with an assistant. “He’s waiting for something to happen,” I heard her mutter to him. I realised who they were talking about, just before they realised that the subject of their exchange was eavesdropping on it.
Instantly Mr Farage exploded into blokeish bonhomie. “You’re turning into a bloody stalker, ha ha!” he chortled, Farageishly. He didn’t object to being stalked, did he? “Nooo!” he chortled again, treating his unwanted Boswell to a matey thump on the back.
Anyway: Ukip in the north. From what I saw, they can certainly win plenty of votes there – from Labour, from the Tories, from people who’ve never voted. On the other hand, the northerners who don’t like them really don’t like them; the anti-Ukip animus is felt more intensely the farther north you go. And there must be at least some of these haters who aren’t revolutionary socialists.
In Gateshead, the “Toad Hall” distraction behind him, Mr Farage told his audience that Ukip “will beat the Labour party in their heartlands” and that “the days of mockery of Ukip are over”. The first prediction may come true, in future years if not next month. The second may be optimistic.
Document TELUK00020140426ea4q000e5
