{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"908"}
____
  
News
Southern voters give Tories a lift
TIM ROSS   
2,541 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
3; National
4
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A prospective councillor for Ukip has been suspended for offensive comments which Nigel Farage said were "entirely inconsistent" with being a member of the party.
Harry Perry, left, posted comments on Twitter describing David Cameron as a "gay-loving nutcase", calling Muslims "devil's kids" and homosexuality "an abomination before God".
Mr Farage, right, admitted there were "some idiots" in the party and a Ukip spokesman confirmed Mr Perry, who was due to stand for the party in the Offerton ward in Stockport, had been suspended.
Mr Farage, who was on the campaign trail in Dover, said: "I've never heard of the bloke until last night. What is happening here is the establishment are singling out a handful of unpleasant comments made by Ukip people."
A NORTH-SOUTH divide has opened up between Labour and the Conservatives with a year to go until the general election, a poll for The Sunday Telegraph has found.
The Tories have edged in front of Labour in the South, while Ed Miliband's party has extended its advantage in the north of England, according to the latest ICM survey of 2,000 people.
With 12 months left until polling day, Labour's overall lead has fallen to just one point, with the party now on 32 per cent to the Conservatives' 31 per cent.
It is the narrowest lead recorded for Ed Miliband in ICM's Wisdom Index survey since he became Labour leader in 2010.
The poll also showed a fall in support for the Liberal Democrats, on 15 per cent, and another boost for Nigel Farage's UK Independence Party, who gained a point to 13 per cent, since the last Wisdom Index was published in February.
In the research, conducted on Wednesday and Thursday, pollsters asked more than 2,000 respondents to predict the share of the vote each party would receive, rather than the conventional question of who they would vote for.
The method is designed to provide a more accurate picture of public opinion, as it avoids the "emotional baggage" associated with individuals confessing to not intending to vote or supporting an unpopular party.
Recent attention has concentrated on the European Parliamentary elections on May 22, in which Ukip is expected to beat the Conservatives into third place.
But with 12 months until the general election on May 7, 2015, all the parties will be focused on the battle to form the next government in Westminster.
David Cameron is given a boost today by taking a onepoint lead in the South over Labour. In February's Wisdom Index, Labour had a one-point lead over the Tories in the South East and a three-point lead across the South West and Wales.
Voters in the North predicted that the Tories would win just 29 per cent of the vote, with Labour on 35per cent. Their counterparts in southern England, however, forecast a 32per cent share of the vote for the Conservatives, a point ahead of Labour.
The result will be a further cause for concern in the shadow cabinet. John Denham, a former cabinet minister and one of Mr Miliband's closest allies, admitted last week that Labour had made "a complete hash" of its response to Ukip and was failing to win over the South. One shadow cabinet minister admitted that Labour could not win next year's election without "doing better" in southern areas, while the Tories would not need to convert the North for victory. Today's poll suggests that the Conservatives have retained their advantage over Labour among the over-65 age group, who are among the most likely to turn out to vote.
Martin Boon, the head of ICM Research, said the result represented the joint narrowest lead for Labour ever recorded in the Wisdom Index.
"Both the main parties are polling much lower than they would hope for," he said.
"This different polling approach provides further evidence that, at last, the Tories are making inroads into the Labour vote."
However, the shift is due to a loss of support for Labour as the Conservatives remain stuck on 31per cent, he said.
Mr Miliband and Mr Farage will set out their rival offers on the BBC's The Andrew Marr Show today.
Some Conservative MPs fear that Labour has been keeping quiet recently to allow Ukip to dominate the political agenda, to the cost of the Tories. "I think Labour are just holding back," one Conservative MP said. "Labour's silence is partly because they are thinking, 'as long as Ukip are in the headlines, that damages the Tories'."
Polling in the marginal seats suggests that strong backing for Mr Farage would split the Right-wing vote, taking enough support away from the Tories to allow Labour into power in next year's election.
Tories are also concerned that their party is less prepared for the "ground war" over the next 12 months than Labour.
Mr Miliband's officials now say their activists have knocked on 1.5million doors in the party's 106 target seat areas since January this year.
Labour has installed candidates in 104 of its 106 target seats, while full-time, paid community organisers are also now at work in 102.
All that is required for Labour to be the largest party next year - a platform for a potential coalition with Nick Clegg - is a national swing of just 1.75per cent.
For the Tories, the picture appears less clear. Analysis by this newspaper suggests that they have so far failed to choose candidates in almost a third of their top target seats.
While Mr Miliband has 98 per cent of his parliamentary candidates already in place, the Conservatives have vacancies in up to 30 per cent of their most winnable marginal seats.
Mr Cameron has authorised what is known as the "40/40 strategy" for winning next year's election.
Under the plan, Tory resources will be concentrated on the 40 constituencies with sitting MPs on small majorities - the so-called "defensive" seats - and the 40 "attack" seats, which are held by Labour and Lib Dem MPs and which the party regards as the most winnable next year.
No official list has been publicly released by the Conservatives of their top 40 target seats. However, Telegraph analysis of the 40 constituencies where the Tories need the smallest swing in support to win, showed candidates have been chosen in only 28 out of these 40 seats so far.
Of the 75 most marginal seats with the smallest Labour or Lib Dem majorities, almost half - 34 - still have not chosen a Conservative contender. Andrew Bridgen, the Conservative MP for North West Leicestershire, said: "How can you attack if you haven't even got a candidate in place? There is no focal point. You can't put leaflets out. This needs to be done otherwise how can you make an impact on the ground in less than 12 months?" Janet Daley: Page 24 Matthew d'Ancona: Page 24 IN NEWS REVIEW Iain Martin on why a vote for Ukip could be a vote for Miliband: Page 23 FRASER NELSON Who will be Prime Minister - and why? Right now, Ed Miliband is looking more likely. Not because he's a genius, but because the odds are stacked so heavily in Labour's favour. It's very close, and this could change. But the election is his to lose.
What will be their majority? I'd guess less than 30.
Who will be the star of the campaign? A voter, perhaps an old lady in a shopping mall who clearly, and succinctly, explains to Miliband why his policies would be a calamity for Britain.
What will be the big issues? The economy, debt, cost of living. And inequality is fast coming up inside.
Any surprises? Always. Election campaigns are defined by what goes wrong.
How will Ukip do? The $3m question. I don't have the foggiest, and don't know anyone who claims to have the foggiest.
Will Boris be in Parliament? Without a doubt. It's a staging post. He's a US citizen, so the Senate will be his next stop.
JANET DALEY Who will be Prime Minister - and why? David Cameron, because he looks, and sounds, like a Prime Minister, even if what he says isn't what you want to hear - unlike Ed Miliband who can't even do a plausible impersonation of a Leader of the Opposition and is encumbered with Ed Balls.
What will be their majority? Between 4 and 10 seats.
Who will be the star of the campaign? Probably Cameron himself if he pulls out some hidden resources and a convincing sense of mission. This could be the secret campaign theme: Cameron as you've never seen him before. To compete for stardom with Boris, he has to play "The Serious One" versus "The Entertaining One".
What will be the big issues? Economic recovery, tax - especially for the middle class - and immigration.
Any surprises? By definition, this is impossible to predict.
How will Ukip do? Certainly better than the Lib Dems as a proportion of the national vote, but still no seats.
DAN HODGES Who will be Prime Minister - and why? David Cameron. He's failed to complete his modernisation of the Tory brand, but he's got most of the big decisions - especially on the economy - right. And he is not Ed Miliband.
What will be their majority? Tories. By 20 to 30 seats. Labour's disastrous 35 per cent strategy means it's virtually impossible for them to win now.
Who will be the star of the campaign? Some housewife from Tyne and Wear who will harangue one of the party leaders over the price of Brussels sprouts.
What will be the big issues? There will be three main issues. The economy. The economy. And the economy.
Any surprises? Quite a few people will be surprised at the Tories winning. Many of them Tory MPs.
How will Ukip do? Very badly - 5 to 6 per cent and no seats. I've pledged to streak naked down Whitehall if Nigel Farage breaks 6 per cent, which is the final nail in Ukip's coffin.
MARY RIDDELL Who will be Prime Minister - and why? Ed Miliband. Because he'll have put together an offer that convinces richer people that he'll improve society and poorer people that they will be the beneficiaries.
What will be their majority? The days of landslides are over, but I forecast a workable overall majority, with 347 Labour seats.
Who will be the star of the campaign? Hopefully, inspiring people from outside the mould. Rob Halfon, the Tory MP for Harlow, who champions blue-collar workers, or Sophy Gardner, Labour's candidate in Gloucester, a past RAF wing commander who served in Iraq and Afghanistan.
What will be the big issues? The economy, living standards, housing, the NHS, immigration - and Europe as a sub-strand.
Any surprises? Nick Clegg looks vulnerable in Sheffield.
How will Ukip do? Much less well than Nigel Farage might think. I'd say they'll get less than 10 per cent of the vote - though Farage may get a seat.
MATTHEW D'ANCONA Who will be Prime Minister - and why? David Cameron, because his record is sufficiently strong, Ukip will have peaked and Ed Miliband, though much more impressive than I thought in 2010, is insufficiently prime ministerial in bearing.
What will be their majority? Small and possibly non-existent - don't rule out a coalition.
Who will be the star of the campaign? Boris, if he stands as an MP (as he should).
What will be the big issues? The economy, of course, but also the character of the recovery. Is it truly national or statistical and of little relevance to most people? Labour will try to tempt Cameron to go too far on immigration.
Any surprises? Osborne will be deployed more than in 2010 as the face of resilience. There will be a row about the "race card" and at least one big drugs story. Tory splits over Europe will appear.
How will Ukip do? Badly in their attempt to win seats. But they could hand plenty of marginals to Labour.
SUE CAMERON Who will be Prime Minister - and why? Ed Miliband will be PM in a LibLab coalition. The Tories stand to be the largest party, but they will be cheated of an overall majority because unreformed constituency boundaries give Labour an inbuilt advantage. Even smallscale Ukip support will lose the Tories seats in some marginals. Left-leaning Lib Dem grass roots who hate being in coalition with the Tories may defect to Labour and won't countenance another Tory/Lib Dem coalition. The voters will be nervous about a Miliband premiership, because of questions about his competence on the economy and because of his image. He's beginning to sound not just nerdy, but unctuous.
What will be their majority? No overall majority for one party.
Who will be the star of the campaign? Boris, Nigel Farage and Tessa Jowell. Dame Tessa will be limbering up for the London mayoral elections. With her mixture of charm and steel, Labour would be mad not to give her a starring role. Boris is always a star and Nasty Nige could yet hold the ring, even if Ukip fails to win seats itself.
CHARLES MOORE Who will be Prime Minister - and why? David Cameron, because, unlike in 2010, he has something to say. Labour does not.
What will be their majority? If overall, very small. It will probably require a coalition.
Who will be the star of the campaign? Nigel Farage, I suppose, because he is naughty and new.
What will be the big issues? Is the return of prosperity real for most people? Will we have a referendum on the European Union? Any surprises? The very nature of surprises means by answering this it wouldn't be surprising.
How will Ukip do? I think they will do less well than in the European elections, but they will make an impression across the country both for Labour and the Conservatives.
Will Boris be in Parliament? If he says no, you can assume that he will.
JEREMY WARNER Who will be Prime Minister - and why? David Cameron, because an improving economy will come to his rescue and voters don't trust Ed Miliband to run the country.
What will be their majority? Marginal at best. There would have to be a monumental turnaround in the polls for the Tories to win a big majority.
Who will be the star of the campaign? Unlikely though it may seem, George Osborne, who may be a somewhat cold figure, but has earned considerable respect for his handling of the economy.
What will be the big issues? The economy, inequality/living standards, immigration. Europe only an issue in so far as it affects the immigration debate. Otherwise it is irrelevant.
Any surprises? Biggest upset would be caused by a "yes" vote in the Scottish referendum. Cameron would feel obliged to resign, significant economic uncertainties would be created and it would raise big questions about the length of the next parliament.
Document STEL000020140504ea5400099
