{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"647"}
____
  
Features
THE WEEK IN WESTMINSTER
386 words
10 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
26
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MONDAY, MARCH 10
Commons: Home Office questions. Care Bill [HL], Report stage. Short debate on the redevelopment of St Helier Hospital.
Westminster Hall: E–petition relating to stopping female genital mutilation in the UK. Lords: Questions. Immigration Bill, – Committee of the whole House (Day 3). Short debate on the current situation in Gibraltar.
TUESDAY, MARCH 11
Commons: Treasury questions. Ten Minute Rule Motion: Cooperative and Social Enterprise (Development). Care Bill [HL], Report stage (Day 2) and Third Reading. dhort debate on world water day.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: Treatment and prevention of cancer; Transport infrastructure in Wellington, Somerset; Effect of changes to the Energy Company Obligation; Regional variation in central government funding to local government; Ministry of Defence's relationship with International Military Sales Ltd.
Lords: Questions. Co–operative and Community Benefit Societies Bill [HL], Third reading. Offender Rehabilitation Bill [HL], Consideration of Commons amendments. Antisocial Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill, Consideration of Commons amendments. Short debate on promoting the involvement of women internationally in politics, public life, the economy and society.
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 12
Commons: Cabinet Office questions. At noon, questions to the Prime Minister. Ten Minute Rule Motion: Private Rented Sector. Intellectual Property Bill [HL], Report stage and Third Reading. Northern Ireland (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, Consideration of Lords amendments. Short debate on rail franchise agreements. Westminster Hall: Debates on: Rolling stock provision in the North of England; Diagnosis and treatment of atrial fibrillation; Planning policy and wind turbines in the South West; Three parent children and Mitochondrial transfer; Neath–Port Talbot Magistrates' Court. Lords: Questions. Pensions Bill, Third reading. Statement on Vocational Qualifications Reform Plan. Immigration Bill, Committee of the whole House (Day 4). Short debate on plans for the future of Bletchley Park.
THURSDAY, MARCH 13
Commons: Culture, Media and Sport questions. Women and Equalities questions. Statement on the future business of the House. Select committee statement on the publication of the sixth report from the Communities and Local Government Committee: Local government procurement. Backbench business debate on the badger cull. Short debate on diversity on public boards. Westminster Hall: Commonwealth Day. Lords: Questions. Debate on the role of primary and secondary education in improving social mobility. Debate on the science and technology committee's report on regenerative medicine.
FRIDAY, MARCH 14
Commons: Not sitting. Lords: Not sitting.
Document DT00000020140310ea3a0000o
