{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"564"}
____
  
News
Hate the EU? Bored with being British? Find all government oppressive? Here’s the answer!
By Harry de Quetteville   
444 words
7 April 2014
15:02
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nope, I’m not talking about retiring to a backwoods cabin with a shotgun and lots of tinned food. I’m talking about declaring your own state. Think of it, your own nation. Your own rules. Impossible, you say! Not so.
True, some claims to rule are a little esoteric. A touch tenuous. Philippe Boiry, for example, claimed the throne of the South American "kingdom" of Araucania and Patagonia by descent from a 19th century French adventurer. Not surprisingly he didn’t get his hands on large swathes of South America.
But His Tremendousness Giorgio Carbone, from the village of Seborga, fared better. He insisted that the village was never the property of the House of Savoy and therefore not part of the Kingdom of Italy after 1861. As such, he said, Seborga has been a sovereign state since 954. Others agreed! Burkina Faso, for example, was one of 20 states which His Tremendousness convinced to recognise Seborga as a state.
Seborga has a flag and a motto Sub Umbra Sede (Sit in the shade). And if you declare your own state, you get to have all of those lovely trappings of power. Not keen on immigration? Never fear, you have your own passport control. An enemy of the euro? Not to worry, mint your own coinage. Harassed by homophobia? Why not declare, as did Dale Anderson in 2004, a Gay and Lesbian Kingdom of the Coral Sea Islands. (He became Emperor Dale as a result!)
Narked by government interference in your business? Follow the lead of Prince Leonard and Princess Shirley of Hutt and simply secede. It worked for them. And it can work for you.
To show you how, on this week’s Deadline podcast we talk to Prince Royal James of Sealand, second in line (after his father, Prince Michael) to the throne of Sealand – a naval structure “about half the size of a football pitch” seven miles off the coast of Ipswich.
The rulers of Sealand have resisted all attempts to oust them – including coups, kidnaps, and intimidation from The Royal Navy (of Great Britain, that is). They even repelled an invasion attempt from Germany, abseiling onto Sealand from a helicopter to defang a plot that Prince Royal James of Sealand described as “treason”.
And if you are tempted to dismiss it and other self-declared states as a gimmick, don’t. I suggested as much and got pretty short shrift from Prince Royal James. Rightly so. He carries out his royal duties with pride. You could too. Listen below.
Document TELUK00020140407ea47003jt
