{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3325"}
____
  
NEWS
Nick Griffin: Holocaust 'is a moral club'
By Claire Carter   
499 words
14 May 2014
10:28
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Holocaust is a "moral club" used to prevent people from discussing immigration, Nick Griffin has claimed.
The Holocaust is a "moral club" used to prevent people from discussing immigration, Nick Griffin has claimed.
The leader of the British National Party claimed the Holocaust has been "exploited" by "gentile liberals" to block criticism of immigration.
Mr Griffin was convicted of incitement to racial hatred and given a two-year suspended prison sentence in 1997. He wrote material for far-Right magazines that described the murder of six million Jews by the Nazis as a "hoax".
In furious exchanges, Mr Griffin accused Radio 4 presenter Justin Webb of a "wicked" attempt to tar his name. He denied being a Holocaust denier.
Mr Webb countered that Mr Griffin, who described the late Nelson Mandela as a "murdering old terrorist", of being "deeply filled with hate."
Mr Griffin, who was recently declared bankrupt, said: “I’ve never denied the Holocaust."
“I’ve expressed in very strong terms dismay and disgust at the way gentile liberals and lefties, such as yourself, exploit things which happened many decades ago to use as a moral club to prevent a proper sensible discussion about immigration now, which is what you are doing again.
He added: “What you are trying to do is set the British public as Pavlovian dogs so when they hear Nick Griffin they think the Holocaust. It’s a wicked disgrace.”
He admitted he did say to a police officer that he regarded the Holocaust as “utter nonsense” in 1998.
Mr Webb accused Mr Griffin of being badly out of step with the British public.
He said: ”We are not as unpleasant as you are, as deeply filled with hate as you seem to be.”
A BNP Youth promotional video, recently uploaded to YouTube, criticises homosexuals, Islam and bankers – as well as the mother of Stephen Lawrence.
Several young people on the three minute clip ask as series of questions – which include: “Who is responsible for allowing Islam to have an impact on our society?” and: “Who is responsible for portraying racist attacks as only being against non-whites?”
They say an “unholy alliance” of bankers, militant homosexuals, capitalists and cultural Marxists is to blame.
They also accuse the media of ignoring the racist attacks on white people whilst “pandering to the likes of Baroness Lawrence.”
The British National Party has seen its support in the polls dwindle since 2009. Mr Griffin, an MEP, faces losing his seat in the European Parliament. Its councillors has fallen from 57 to just two today.
Mr Griffin said he disagreed with the immigration policies of UKIP and asked why Nick Clegg is never asked about a previous arson conviction.
A spokesman for the Deputy Prime Minister later said the allegations were wrong, and “there was no police involvement” in an incident which took place when he was a teenager and involved rare cacti being damaged.
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e0015r
