{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3477"}
____
  
News
Black middle-class 'will turn to Tories'
Jill Sherman   
459 words
22 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
13
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Conservatives could get a boost from upwardly mobile black and Asian voters as they move to the suburbs and abandon their traditional support for Labour, a think-tank has suggested.
An essay by Trevor Phillips, the former head of the equalities watchdog, and Richard Webber, a geography professor at University College London, argues that ethnic minority voters are more likely to turn to the Conservatives as they become more middle-class.
The article, to be published in a Demos report on Friday, says that second or third-generation immigrants could lose their "reflex" support for Labour, and that those moving to traditionally white middle-class areas are less likely to vote for Ed Miliband.
"There is a great deal of evidence to suggest that any emerging volatility among the UK's five million ethnic electors may turn out to be at least as significant as the three million who tell pollsters they might support Ukip in the forthcoming election," the authors say. "The expectation would be that succeeding generations of minority voters may drift away from their parents' reflex support for Labour — or at the very least might not inherit the first-generation immigrants' hostility to the Conservatives."
The other factor that could boost the Tory share of the vote would be "a secular out-movement" of ethnic minority families from the inner cities where they first settled. "The process is accelerating in London in particular due to the combination of spiralling inner-city housing costs and changes to the benefit system," says the article.
An analysis of polling data suggests that ethnic minority voters are significantly more likely to vote Labour in non-white neighbourhoods than those that are predominantly white.
In non-white areas, 60 per cent of ethnic minorities vote Labour, compared with 48.1 per cent of voters in white neighbourhoods. Large numbers of Indian voters are particularly likely to stop voting Labour as they move to predominantly white areas, it is suggested. Mr Phillips argues that Tory-held seats such as Hendon and Wolverhampton South West, both Labour targets, would be less vulnerable because of the presence of "upwardly mobile, Indian heritage, Tory-voting electors".
Tory support among ethnic minority voters is currently about 16 per cent, which could prevent David Cameron from gaining a majority next year.
The study, based on a YouGov survey of 2,400 minority voters in the UK, shows that Labour outpolls the Tories by about 50 to 24 among ethnic minorities. In areas where minorities represent more than 30 per cent of the electorate they are more likely to vote Labour in the "cluster effect". When they move to more mixed areas, about a fifth desert Labour.
Document T000000020140422ea4m0001n
