{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3705"}
____
  
News
SNP voters closer to Ukip than party bosses would like
Tom Knowles; Lindsay McIntosh   
600 words
22 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Scotland
9
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Most Scots support Ukip policies on stricter immigration controls, international aid cuts and a benefits crackdown, according to a new poll published on the eve of the EU election. The survey shows that seven out of ten Scots, including 69 per cent of SNP voters, back stricter controls on immigration. Just over half support cutting the international aid budget and six out of ten people say benefits should only be available to those who have lived in the UK for at least five years.
The survey undermines the SNP's argument that there are distinctly Scottish values which make voters north of the border behave differently from those in England. It also explains why Alex Salmond has been arguing that the European Parliament seat held by the Liberal Democrats is a straight fight between his party and Ukip.
Last night, the first minister called for Scots to back Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh, to defeat David Coburn, the Ukip candidate. Mr Salmond said: "I would urge people of tolerance to look at the nasty, intolerant agenda of Ukip and use their vote tomorrow to firmly reject that brand of politics."
The poll was conducted by Survation for Dundee University's Five Million Questions project, which aims to increase public and academic engagement in the referendum debate. More than 1,000 Scots aged over 16 were questioned from May 9-12 and were not told that the policies were being put forward by Ukip. Conservative voters were the most likely to support Ukip's policies but there was also significant support from SNP voters. Labour and Lib Dem voters are less likely to favour Ukip policies.
Michael Marra, the director of Five Million Questions, said: "The sentiments of Scotland are not that radically divergent from the rest of the UK. This idea that we have diverged completely from the rest of the UK is a critical point in the referendum debate, but this suggests the difference comes in the party system and voter affiliation, rather than the actual sentiment.
"If you're talking about a situation like the referendum, clearly these distinctions are very important."
However, Mr Farage's drive to pull the UK out of the European Union was met with less support in Scotland, with only 24.7 per cent agreeing. The proposal was supported by 40.7 per cent of Conservatives, 31.5 per cent of the SNP, 18.3 per cent of Labour voters and 11.8 per cent of Lib Dems.
James Kelly, Scottish Labour's election co-ordinator, said: "Clearly, the SNP and Ukip share the politics of division and grievance and we need to understand why voters are attracted to those messages.
"History tells us that when there is an economic downturn, support for nationalism rises. Despite the SNP's attempts to appear as the opposition to the Ukip, this poll shows that Alex Salmond and Nigel Farage are two sides of the same coin."
A Scottish Conservative spokesman said: "The SNP constantly tries to fabricate divisions between attitudes in Scotland and England and it's clear from this study — as well as many which have gone before — that those divisions simply do not exist."
George Lyon, the Scottish Lib-Dem lead Euro candidate, said: "It is no surprise that Liberal Democrats voters were least convinced by Ukip's smallminded view of the world. If you reject Ukip's nasty strand of nationalism, if you want Scotland in Britain and in Europe then back the Liberal Democrats." Leading article, page 28
Document T000000020140522ea5m000fm
