{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"3526"}
____
  
Features
LET THE ROYALS RULE OZ - SO LONG AS I CAN BE LADY MUCK
BY KATHY LETTE   
886 words
20 April 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
33
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
KYLIE? Dame Edna? Skippy? Who would make the best Australian Head of State? It's a question Aussies have long been pondering as poll after poll revealed a steady decline in support for the Monarchy.
Australia is one of the most multicultural countries on Earth - a human minestrone. Its Asian, Arabic, European and Pacific immigrants have no allegiance to a castle-encrusted, corgi-caressing Royal Family, 11,000 miles away. Sydney is also sequin-central, rivalling San Francisco as the world's gay capital . . . which is why if you mention 'the Queen' to most Aussie kids, they presume you're talking about Elton John.
But rampant republicanism was stopped in its tracks last week because of a visit from the younger Royals. Kate and Wills are like a stealth weapon, flying right under the republican radar. Wills, with Diana's designer genes and that 100-watt smile, has perfected the role of Knight in Shining Armani. And then there's his choice of bride.
In Australia, 'breeding' is something we do with sheep. But in England a girl can find herself looking up so many noses - even people shorter than you. Upper-class foreplay is normally a case of 'I'll let you play with my hyphen, if I can play with yours'. But William has chosen to marry a commoner - which egalitarian Australians respect.
THEN there's the ultimate weapon in the Royal PR machine - baby George. Why did he have to be so darn cute? So powerful is the bonsai Royal's effect that locals are calling him the Republicanator.
Earthy Aussies are sceptical about everything - they have chronic sceptic-emia. But who could resist that chubby-thighed hunk of cheeky gorgeousness?
And so for the time being, republicanism is as wilted as a 1980s perm in a sauna. Tony Abbott, the conservative Monarchist PM, has even reintroduced damehoods and knighthoods, which were abolished by Australia's Labor Party in the 1970s. (While publically scathing about Abbott's lickspittle toadyism, I do secretly fancy being dubbed 'Lady Lette'... Then I can buy that island off Scotland called Muck. Lady Muck. Now there's a title I'd kill for.) But if the Royals really want to assimilate, my top etiquette tip is that Australia clearly has everything in common with England, except the language. Antipodeans are not loquacious.In fact, most blokes think that YES or NO are perfectly adequate responses to any question.
But in formal situations, the male of the species tends to employ a robust bantering style. Wills should greet Abbott using the following lingo.
'How's it hangin', Chook?' 'Low and lazy, Dingo.' 'Gettin' any, horn bag?' 'Jeez, I'm flat out runnin' tryin' to get away from it.'
Having glimpsed Prince William peering over the Blue Mountains precipice, we know the Royals are at home in the wild.
But they must also be prepared for the wild to be at home in them. Australian spiders are the size of a small English cattle dog and our cockroaches so big and brazen, they practically cruise around in 4x4s with sub-machine guns, terrorising locals.
BUT it would cause a diplomatic incident if the Royal couple whinge. We Aussies are tough and laid- back. When trouble strikes, we tend to erupt into a great nonchalance.
In other words, if you break a leg abseiling down that Blue Mountains gorge, Wills, don't come running to me.
And most important tip of all, the Royals should avoid making any quips about Aussie record collections being criminal rather than classical.
I think it's important that I pass on to the Palace the advice my grandma gave me when I told her I was moving to England.
'Oh Kath, you can't possibly live in London.
'That's where all those terrible convicts come from.'
***
OSCAR Pistorius now joins a long list of male celebrities who have cried in public. I always saw manly tears as a sign of strength, rather than a weakness . . . until I heard Pistorius blubbing about how much he loved Reeva. For ever and ever. Well, at least 'Till Homicide Do Us Part', that is. While it's true that blokes in touch with their feelings are sensitive, it too often pans out that the only feelings they're sensitive to are their own.
***
WHEN you wish upon a Michelin star, dreams can come true, right? Ah, no. The sad truth is that many a true word is spoken ingest. For me, preparing the Easter Sunday family lunch extravaganza is more nerve-racking than a samurai initiation.
Put it this way, I use my smoke alarm as a timer. I will cut my finger, sob into a tea towel, comfort eat a cocoa plantation of Lindt, throw a cook book through the window . . . then dial my finger to the bone ordering take-outs. Emmeline Pankhurst did not tie herself to the railings so I'd be tethered by a tea towel to the Aga. If women stop dicing and slicing, perhaps blokes will learn to be at home on the range? Boys, the way to a woman's heart is through her stomach. That is not aiming too high.
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140420ea4k0000o
