{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1494"}
____
  
NEWS
Britons 'would need passport to visit an independent Scotland'; Theresa May, the Home Secretary, says border controls would be created between England and Scotland under Alex Salmond's independence blueprint
By Ben Riley-Smith Scottish Political Reporter   
491 words
14 March 2014
17:47
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Border posts would be erected between England and an independent Scotland if Alex Salmond pursues his proposed immigration policy, the Home Secretary said yesterday in the Government's strongest statement on the subject to date.
Separation would create a "literal and figurative border" which would force families and businessman to show their passports to cross, Theresa May warned.
Mr Salmond's pledge to adopt a "looser" immigration policy means Westminster would have to take measures to stop Scotland becoming a "convenient landing point" into the UK, Mrs May said at the Scottish Conservative Party conference.
While the UK Government has previously hinted that border posts would be needed after independence, ministers have shied away from making absolute statements.
But yesterday Mrs May made it clear that if the First Minister implemented his stated immigration policy then control posts would appear on the border.
"Buried deep in Alex Salmond’s White Paper is the admission that – just like the last Labour Government – a separate Scotland would pursue a looser immigration policy," she said.
"That would undermine the work we have done since 2010 – and the continuing UK could not allow Scotland to become a convenient landing point for migration into the United Kingdom."
"So that would mean border controls between a separate Scotland and the United Kingdom. Passport checks to visit friends and relatives. A literal and figurative barrier between our nations."
She added that if Scotland fails to negotiate an opt-out of the Schengen Area – which allows for open travel within the EU – border checks could have take place at Berwick or Gretna Green.
The First Minister has previously insisted any talk of border controls after independence is "scaremongering".
Mrs May also said after independence Scotland would lose a whole host of securities it currently enjoys from being part of the UK.
A separate Scotland would automatically lose access to MI5, MI6 and GCHQ as well as "the UK's wider intelligence capabilities" – suggesting the country may not get access to Britain's secret intelligence, as promised by the SNP.
She said the cooperation between British and Scottish police forces seen during the 2011 London riots and the 2012 Olympic Games could be hampered by independence.
Mrs May also warned that organised criminals would likely benefit if Scotland broke away from the UK.
"Criminals do not respect borders, but rather work to exploit them. Never before has crime been so international," Mrs May said.
"Organised criminal networks – and the internet – mean that people on the other side of the world can orchestrate crimes without even setting foot in this country.
"So we shouldn’t make life any easier for them by erecting another international border in the middle of our United Kingdom."
Document TELUK00020140314ea3e005he
