{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1434"}
____
  
News
More children turned away from first choice secondary school
Graeme Paton; James Edgar   
384 words
4 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
2
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE number of children missing out on their first choice secondary school has increased this year amid growing competition for places, The Daily Telegraph has learnt.
Councils across England reported that fewer 11–year–olds had gained places at their preferred state secondaries following an increase in the application rate.
In some parts of London, at least four in 10 children will be sent to their second, third or even sixth choice schools in September.
Other cities reported a similar trend. In Birmingham, 30 per cent of pupils missed out on their first choice school, up from 26 per cent a year earlier, and in the nearby borough of Sandwell the figure was just over 25 per cent, compared with 23 per cent in 2013. In Bristol, 23 per cent of pupils were rejected from their preferred school, compared with 18 per cent a year ago. It was the highest rejection rate in four years. Manchester council said 24 per cent of pupils failed to get into their first choice school, up from 19 per cent last year.
However, in areas such as Cornwall, Cumbria, Herefordshire, Leicestershire, Norfolk and North Lincolnshire, almost all pupils secured their first choice.
The Daily Telegraph obtained data from 72 councils, almost half of the total in England. Of those, 48 said that fewer pupils had won a place at their first choice school than last year. Children's chances of getting into their preferred school differed depending on their postcode, with those in inner–city areas facing the greatest competition.
Many local authorities warned that the increase in the rejection rate was driven by a rise in the number of 10 and 11–yearolds in the state education system.
It is believed that rising birth rates in the last decade, combined with an increase in immigrants in some areas, is having an effect on secondary school admissions.
Nationally, it is believed that more than one in seven children will have missed out on theirfirst choice school, which will lead to a flood of appeals from parents.
Graham Jones, an education consultant who helps families fight admissions appeals, said: "We have had a steady stream of calls today and expect more over the coming days."
Document DT00000020140304ea340007h
