{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2429"}
____
  
Features
Immigration vow is joke
488 words
14 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
41
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
£50 LETTER
WHAT hypocrisy from Yvette Cooper, saying she will count every immigrant in and out if Labour come to power.
I hope she has learned to count a lot better since they were last in power when Labour let thousands in unaccounted for.
BASIL MIDDLETON
By email
YET again we have a Labour politician with a short memory. Yvette Cooper gets all pompous and insists Labour will count immigrants in and out if they get back into power.
She claims the Coalition has lost control.
Yet she forgets that it was Labour who opened the doors in the first place. If Labour had been more responsible, we would not have the problems we have got now.
THE Beeb get Brucie's on Strictly Why don't shortlist and public vote?
DEAN SMILEY
Aberdeen
YOU have to laugh at Labour's attempt to gain the moral high ground on immigration.
Like reader my choice would Beke. Get this Strictly could a trace.
CAROL
By They are the ones that caused the problem in the first place.
PAUL SMITH Edinburgh WHO does Yvette Cooper think she is kidding? Our politicians are too scared of upsetting the European bullies to tackle our immigration problems.
Anyway, our border control agency is so flawed I would be surprised we had anyone who could possibly count into the thousands.
BRIAN LEA
By email
GIBBONS email party says it, at least we are getting recognition of the fact that we have a problem in this country. The influx of immigrants is getting out of control, and if we don't act now then it will soon be too late.
Already there aren't enough jobs to go round for people, and the country seems to be bursting at the seams.
It is time for all parties to finally stand together and tell Brussels that we are closing our borders immediately.
NEIL MORRIS
Glasgow
IF a Conservative had come out with the statement made by Yvette Cooper, Labour would have slaughtered them and called them racist.
It is funny how, just like the Blair years, Labour will ditch their principles and jump on any bandwagon in their desperation for power.
ANGELA HUNTER
Falkirk
NICK CLEGG claimed to "love diversity".
If this is the case, please buy my house in the middle of diversity, where there are at least 25 different languages spoken at the local primary school and where it's the norm to dump sofas and old mattresses in the middle of the street.
Words are cheap, Mr Clegg, and so is my house because I'm that desperate to get out of there!
HELEN KELLY
By email
NICOLA Sturgeon, pictured, and Alistair Darling are appealing to both sides to calm down, then accuse their rivals of insulting opponents. Then, to top it all, Lord Robertson warning independence could plunge us into war.
Scaremongering or what?
ALICK RICHARDSON Falkirk
Document THESUN0020140414ea4e000fm
