{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1206"}
____
  
News
WHOOPS
ANDREW NICOLL   
526 words
22 March 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
2
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
LABOUR IN PERTH
Party devo probe tax plans revealed
But new 10p rate is left out of sums
LABOUR'S tax plans were plunged into chaos yesterday after it emerged they didn't include a new 10p rate in their calculations.
Leader Johann Lamont revealed on Monday the results of a devolution commission calling for Holyrood to control all three income tax bands.
But there was no mention of the 10p rate that appeared in a policy document launched at Labour's Scottish conference yesterday.
And one expert who worked on the year-long study admitted: "I knew nothing about this." The announcement also appeared to baffle party officials yesterday — despite Shadow Chancellor Ed Balls, left, unveiling plans to bring back the 10p rate more than a year ago.
The starter rate of tax, abolished by Gordon Brown in 2008, used to apply to those earning between £4,335 and £5,835.
But in his Budget on Wednesday, Chancellor George Osborne said all earnings up to £10,500 will be tax-free from next April.
Labour officials were unable to say how many Scots would be affected by the new tax band or how it would impact the share of taxes under Scottish control.
A spokesman for the party said: "The devolution commission was to deal with the tax rates as they are — what would happen now."
But Finance Secretary John Swinney, far left, said: "Labour's plans have imploded.
"Their sums don't add up, and no amount of backpedalling and back-of-anenvelope calculations can hide that.
"What this embarrassing fiasco proves is that Labour's plans are no more than a shabby compromise, cobbled together between warring factions in London and Scotland."
andrew.nicoll@the-sun.co.uk
The Sun Says — Page Six
ED BLAST FOR BINGO
ED MILIBAND yesterday pointed the finger at the Tories' 'beer and bingo' Budget advert — and claimed it showed how "out of touch" they were.
The Labour leader branded the ad boasting about George Osborne's tax cuts "a condescending, patronising, misconceived piece of nonsense".
The Conservatives claimed in the online puff that the cuts were "to help hard-working people do more of the things they like".
But Mr Miliband — who greeted Scottish leader Johann Lamont with a kiss before his speech — said: "When it comes to the hard-working people of Britain, the Tories say 'they' but we say 'us'."
SFA cup horrors 'silence'
LABOUR heavyweight Jim Murphy yesterday urged SFA chiefs to break their silence over Qatar's alleged mistreatment of 2022 World Cup workers.
Murphy used his keynote speech to demand footie bosses hit out over claims immigrants were suffering human rights abuses in the Persian Gulf state.
The call comes ten days before the East Renfrewshire MP travels to Qatar to meet some of the Nepalese workers.
He told the conference: "The treatment of these workers is the ugly secret of the beautiful game.
"It's time for the SFA to break its silence.
"The 2022 World Cup must not be built on the backs of the forced labour and lost lives of thousands of working people."
Document THESUN0020140322ea3m000pe
