{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"947"}
____
  
News
PM happy with rising house prices
James Kirkup; Peter Dominiczak   
522 words
20 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
2
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
HOUSE prices could go on rising for four more years without causing concern, David Cameron suggested yesterday.
Speaking after the Bank of England raised the prospect of intervention to cool the property market, the Prime Minister urged people to be "careful" over talk of a housing bubble.
Surveys suggest that house prices in Britain are rising by more than 10 per cent a year, and by more than 40 per cent a year in parts of London.
Some economists fear buyers could be taking on unsustainable levels of debt.
Mark Carney, the Bank governor, said on Sunday the housing market posed the "biggest risk" to the economic recovery. He suggested he could intervene to stop banks lending large mortgages.
But in a BBC interview yesterday, Mr Cameron appeared to downplay concerns about the property market. He insisted that allowing for inflation, houses were still cheaper than seven years ago.
"We have to be careful when we look at the figures," he said. "We are still seeing house prices in real terms that are 15 per cent off the peak they reached in 2007.
"The most recent forecast I saw was that house prices in real terms would not achieve their previous level until 2017/2018."
Mr Cameron also defended the Government's Help to Buy scheme, which gives guarantees for people taking out mortgages of up to £600,000.
Liberal Democrat ministers including Vince Cable, the Business Secretary, have suggested the scheme is helping to inflate the housing market.
However, Mr Cameron said the scheme was delivering positive results. "Help to Buy was not a return to irresponsible lending practices," he said. "I think [Help to Buy] has made a difference."
Mr Cameron was speaking on an election campaign tour in Essex, where the Conservatives are facing a challenge from the UK Independence Party for the support of working-class voters.
The Prime Minister used the visit to accuse Nigel Farage of trying to "frighten" voters about immigration. Mr Farage said last week people felt uncomfortable about living next to Romanian migrants.
Mr Cameron said: "Farage has said pretty appalling things and he has not had to very publicly eat his words. Some of the messages they have been making are about trying to frighten people."
Remove only the lies from internet, says Cameron
People should not be allowed to erase information about themselves from the internet if it is factually correct, David Cameron has said.
The Prime Minister was reacting to a European court ruling last week that there should be a "right to be forgotten" on the internet. It compels Google and other search engines to remove the links to information, rather than the information itself.
Since it was introduced, more than 1,000 people have asked Google to remove links to unfavourable reports. They included a former MP seeking re-election, a man convicted of possessing child abuse images and 20 convicted criminals.
The Prime Minister's official said yesterday that Mr Cameron felt that a distinction had to be drawn between truth and falsehoods on the internet.
Document DT00000020140520ea5k0007s
