{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2077"}
____
  
NEWS
Killer deported three years after claiming human rights to stay in Britain
By David Barrett Home Affairs Correspondent   
1,188 words
18 May 2014
09:45
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A killer who threw a man into the Thams has finally been deported, three years after judges blocked his deportation on human rights grounds.
A foreign criminal who killed an innocent man by throwing him into the Thames has finally been deported from Britain in a victory for the Government and The Telegraph’s End the Human Rights Farce campaign.
Rocky Gurung has been returned to Nepal three years after this newspaper first disclosed how immigration judges had blocked his deportation on human rights grounds.
The Home Office disclosed that Gurung, 25, was quietly deported in February this year after a long-running legal fight which is believed to have cost the taxpayer tens of thousands of pounds.
Last night, Dominic Raab, the Tory MP who has campaigned for reform of human rights laws, thanked The Sunday Telegraph for bringing the case to light and paid tribute to the Home Office for “doggedly pursuing” Gurung’s deportation.
The victim of the attack, Bishal Gurung, was one of Mr Raab’s constituents.
“I am grateful to The Telegraph for bringing the original proceedings to my attention, and for putting their shoulder behind the campaign for reform,” said Mr Raab.
Bishal Gurung, who was not related to his killer, was a waiter whose father, Cpl Khem Barsad Gurung, served with the Gurkhas for 16 years. He was thrown into the Thames by Rocky Gurung one night during April 2008 in what the trial judge described as an “unprovoked and senseless episode”.
Rocky Gurung was jailed for three years for manslaughter. However, after finishing his prison sentence he launched two appeals against deportation and persuaded judges that it would breach his “right to private and family life” if he was sent back to Nepal – even though he was single with no children and lived with his parents.
Home Office lawyers fought to deport Rocky Gurung, arguing that there was no substance in his claim under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, because he had no dependants. They urged judges to deport the killer, who had only been in the country for three years when he committed the crime.
But Mr Justice Blake, who at the time was the country’s most senior immigration judge, ruled it would be “disproportionate” to split him from his parents.
At the time, the victim’s sister Karuna, who was studying in north London, expressed her shock at the decision and disclosed that until contacted by this newspaper the family had not been informed that the killer had won the right to stay in Britain.
She said at the time: “If the killers were deported then at least his family would know a little of the pain we have endured.”
However, it has now emerged that the Home Office appealed against Mr Justice Blake’s decision. Although the precise details are still unclear, it is understood that the Government’s appeal was heard by the Court of Appeal and – despite a further appeal by Gurung – was ultimately successful.
Andrew Jackson, the director of the Home Office’s Criminal Casework Directorate, confirmed in a letter to Dominic Raab that Gurung, who had been on immigration bail, had been detained on February 16 this year and deported five days later.
Last night, Karuna Gurung, who has now moved to the United States to start a new life, said: “I had received an email from Dominic Raab, the MP for Esher and Walton, who informed me about Rocky Gurung.
“Me and my mom are extremely pleased to get the news and thankful to Dominic for his contribution.”
Bishal’s uncle, Suresh Gurung, also a former Gurkha, said: “I am very pleased that one of Bishal’s killers has been deported.” The 46-year-old uncle from Farnborough, who served 17 years with the 1st and 2nd Battalions, The Royal Gurkha Rifles, had earlier described how the death had been “awful” for the family and had left Bishal’s mother Sarada, who lost her husband when her children were small, deeply distraught.
Mr Raab praised the decision to deport Rocky Gurung. “I am relieved, both for my constituent’s family and the wider public, that this man has finally been removed,” he said.
“Credit goes to the Home Office for doggedly pursuing his deportation. But, it is absurd how many human rights obstacles were laid in front of this common sense outcome.
“We need to make sure the Government’s current reforms make it easier to deport this kind of violent thug, and clear away the legal excuses that gum up the system.”
The original attack took place in April 2008. At the time, Bishal Gurung was working at a Nepalese restaurant in Esher – Mr Raab’s Surrey constituency – and had travelled into London to celebrate Nepalese new year.
After leaving a party on a boat on the Thames in the early hours he was chased along the Embankment by 10 to 15 men including Rocky Gurung.
The Old Bailey trial heard the gang had falsely accused 23-year-old Bishal of hitting another man, Kemik Thakali, with a bottle.
One witness told the court that Bishal was “on his hands and knees” being kicked and beaten by seven or eight men and was then thrown into the Thames by Rocky Gurung and Thakali, from Morden, south-west London. Rocky Gurung and Thakali were both jailed for three years for manslaughter.
Rocky Gurung only came to Britain in 2005 but had won indefinite leave to remain because his father had also served with the Gurkhas.
When he lost his initial appeal against deportation, he appealed again to the Upper Chamber of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.
His lawyers argued that his right to a family life under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights would be breached if he was deported, because all his immediate family live in Britain. The judges agreed that deporting him would be “disproportionate”.
Mr Justice Blake said in his ruling: “We conclude that the family life that the appellant enjoyed with his family in this country from 2005 was not suddenly cut off when he reached the age of 18 and his personal circumstances had not otherwise materially changed.”
Gurung’s successful appeal has been repeatedly cited by lawyers representing foreign criminals in other appeals against deportation, and has become a key part of case law when applications are being heard from offenders who wish to make a human rights claim based on a relationship with their extended family.
Sir Andrew Green, the chairman of the pressure group MigrationWatch, said: “This is very good news indeed. It is an important success for The Sunday Telegraph’s campaign. The Home Office and Dominic Raab are also to be congratulated for their persistence.
“At last we are beginning to get some balance between the interests of society and the family rights of particular criminals.
“Unfortunately, it may be that this case stands as a precedent. If so, that needs to be put right.”
Document TELUK00020140518ea5i0018h
