{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1143"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
On this they agree: don't vote for the Tories
Rachel Sylvester   
1,188 words
6 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
27
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Unless they persuade Britain's ethnic minorities to support them at the polls, the Conservatives face annihilation
Eeny, meeny, miny, mo, Catch a spider by the toe. There's no N-word in the version of the playground rhyme that children use now. Jeremy Clarkson may not have been racist in his mutterings for Top Gear but he was certainly out of date. Some senior Conservatives fear their party is just as out of touch with the modern, ethnically diverse world.
A report published today by Policy Exchange, the centre-right thinktank, should make sobering reading for David Cameron. This Portrait of Modern Britain concludes that ethnic minorities will make up between 20 and 30 per cent of the UK population by 2051. While the number of white people has remained roughly the same over the past decade, the number of blacks and Asians has doubled.
Eight million people — 14 per cent of the population — now belong to an ethnic minority. Although these groups make up only 5 per cent of those over 60, they represent 25 per cent of children under five. In the UK's largest cities ethnic minorities already represent 40 per cent of the population and in London, nonwhites outnumber whites at every age up to 20. Britain is changing fast and it is a trend that is only going to accelerate.
Despite all Ukip's sound and fury about immigration, for most people this is something to be celebrated rather than feared. Where I live in Hackney we benefit hugely from the mish-mash of Turkish corner shops, Indian takeaways, Vietnamese dumpling stores, French delis and micro-breweries making hipster beers.
This seems to be a general feeling among those who actually experience the melting pot. According to Policy Exchange, 90 per cent of both white and minority residents feel that their local area is a place where people from different backgrounds get on well together. Interestingly, ethnic minorities are three times more likely than whites to feel that "being British" forms some part of their identity. These communities are, for the most part, keen to integrate and aspire to succeed — all minority groups have higher proportions of students staying on in formal education at 16 and 18 than the white population.
For the Conservatives, though, the changing face of Britain poses a threat not only to their electoral success but to their very existence. The think-tank makes the point that ethnic minority communities — often treated, patronisingly, as a single political entity — are in fact several distinct groups with different priorities and expectations. Although 40 per cent of black people live in social housing, for example, 65 per cent of Indians and Pakistanis live in owned accommodation. There are also discrepancies in education, with 75 per cent of Indian pupils achieving five A-C grades at GCSE compared with 50 per cent of black Caribbean students and 62 per cent of Bangladeshis.
What unites all these groups, however, is a deep and enduring suspicion of the Tories. At the last general election, almost 70 per cent of ethnic minority voters backed Labour. Although 37 per cent of the white population voted Conservative, only 16 per cent of black or Asian people did. There is some evidence that opposition is softening among Indians — who are now four times more likely to identify with the Tories than black Africans — but still only 24 per cent of Indian voters ticked the Conservative box in 2010. Put bluntly, the single biggest predictor for not voting Tory is not being white.
This is the case, regardless of class, wealth or policy views. Although wealthier white voters are more likely to support the Conservatives, there is no similar gap between different socio-economic groups for non-white voters. Black and Asian voters, asked to place themselves on a spectrum for two issues — tax and spend, and liberal or authoritarian — all put themselves closer to the Tory position, but still described themselves as Labour.
With hazy memories of Enoch Powell's "rivers of blood" speech and Norman Tebbit's "cricket test" handed down the generations, ethnic minorities dislike the Conservatives because they are the Conservatives not because they disagree with particular policies. They are unlikely to give the party any credit for the recovery — according to Policy Exchange polling, these voters feel better off, and believe the economy is turning around — but all groups except Indians think that Labour would be better at running the country's finances.
"These are distinct communities but the common trait is they all hate Tories," according to one senior figure. "They don't think the Conservatives care about or understand them."
With just a year to go before the next general election, Mr Cameron faces a dilemma. In nearly half of the 80 Tory target seats, the black and Asian vote is larger than the Labour or Lib Dem majority that the Conservatives need to overturn. There is a huge electoral prize to be won if ethnic minority voters can be persuaded to trust the Tory party, but it will be hard to deal with decades of antagonism in just 12 months. Lynton Crosby, the Tories' director of strategy, wants a relentless focus on the economy and issues such as immigration and welfare between now and polling day. For him, an ethnic minority outreach strategy would be a distraction. He cares only about victory in 2015. George Osborne is similarly focused on the immediate electoral test.
Other senior Conservatives, including Michael Gove, the education secretary, and Sajid Javid, the culture secretary, are more worried about the long-term survival of their party. For them there is more at stake than the result of next year's general election. If almost a third of the electorate will soon be made up of people who are instinctively hostile to the Tories, the Conservatives face annihilation, not just defeat.
The modernisers, including Mr Gove, have been speaking to Jason Kenney, the Canadian minister for citizenship, immigration and multiculturalism, who transformed the Conservative party's fortunes in his country by building bridges with ethnic minorities. Described as "the smiling Buddha", he argues that "new Canadians" are "the personification of Margaret Thatcher's aspirational class". Between 2004 and 2011 he increased his party's standing among these voters from 21 to 31 per cent. Next month he is coming to London to advise the Tories on how they can do the same. Mr Cameron should make the time to meet him and revive his campaign to eliminate the ethnicity effect in British politics.
The Conservative leader has a responsibility to think about the long-term future of his party, as well as its short-term fate at the general election — on which his own survival depends.
Voters feel better off but won't give Tories credit for the recovery
A problem for Cameron 16% 68% 14% 2% How ethnic minorities vote Labour Lib Dems Other Conservatives Indian 24% 13% 18% 6% 9% Pakistani Bangladeshi Black African Black Caribbean Conservative votes Source: Policy Exchange
Document T000000020140506ea560009y
