{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"655"}
____
  
News
Anger as Clegg sneers at crusade to quit the EU
Martyn Brown   
582 words
10 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
4
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
NICK Clegg was branded "absurd" last night after accusing those who want to quit the EU of being "backwards-looking".
In a swipe at his rivals the Liberal Democrat leader said the debate over Europe had resulted in an "ungenerous" form of politics sweeping across Britain fuelling "bile and anger".
He also claimed that "pulling up the drawbridge" and leaving Europe would wreck Britain's economy.
Prime Minister David Cameron has set out plans to renegotiate the UK's links with Brussels and hold an in/out referendum by the end of 2017.
Tory MP Peter Bone called on Mr Clegg to back the referendum.
"It doesn't matter what Nick Clegg says, it's what the British people say is the most important thing. I suspect deep down he knows that there are more people who will vote to leave the EU," Mr Bone said.
He added that it was "absurd" to think quitting the EU would wreck the economic recovery. "Britain would be billions of pounds better off out."
In Mr Clegg's address to the party conference in York, he claimed: "The politics of blame has found an acceptable face: it wears a big smile and looks like someone you could have a pint with down the pub."
It was a clear reference to Ukip leader Nigel Farage whose populist touch has been identified as one of the reasons behind his party's rise in support - a surge that has seen the Lib Dems pushed into fourth place in the opinion polls. The pair will face off in two debates ahead of May's European elections, a vote that Mr Farage has said his party can win.
Mr Clegg sought to position the Lib Dems as the "only party of in" and rally his troops ahead of the campaign, telling them to "forget the lazy assumption that, in the court of public opinion, the eurosceptics will automatically win".
He pledged: "I am going to defend the tolerant and modern Britain we love, and I am going to start by showing people what's at stake in the upcoming European elections: do you want Britain in Europe or out? "That's the real question in May. One party wants out. Another is flirting with exit. The other lot don't have the courage of their convictions on this - they're saying nothing at all."
In a bizarre speech Mr Clegg, who yesterday insisted he will be Lib Dem leader until 2020, also told voters why he loves modern Britain. He named flip-flops, cups of tea, Prince George, the BBC, football, the shipping forecast, the NHS and queueing. A Ukip spokesman said last night: "The truth is that there are three parties of in and just one party that wants to take Britain out of the EU."
He added: "More and more people realise you cannot control immigration if you don't control your borders. Britain needs to leave the EU to control its borders."
OPINION: PAGE 12
q Is Clegg right to claim Britain is better off in EU? YEs: 0901 792 5300 NO: 0901 792 5301 Yes text DXMONYEs to 86611 No text DXMONNO to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight.
Document THEEXP0020140310ea3a00041
