{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3566"}
____
  
Features
RADIO
GILLIAN REYNOLDS   
1,845 words
22 February 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
50,51
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
GILLIAN REYNOLDS PICK OF THE WEEK
SATURDAY
When Garry Met Tony Radio 4, 10.30am
You'll know Garry Richardson's voice as a sports presenter on Radios 4 and 5 Live but here's where he discloses an unfulfilled ambition. For years he's wanted to sing, Sinatra–style, with a big band. Two years ago, he challenged Radio 4's Saturday Live to find him one. Tony Douglas, a former bandmaster now running the amateur big band at London's Morley College, was listening and invited Garry to join them for a bit of training. So he did, while also getting a few tips from singer Kurt Ellings, big–band fan Michael Parkinson and singer Buddy Greco before making his debut at London's Spice of Life Jazz club. Whatever next? Eight bar musical intros to his Sunday morning Sportsweek?
Saturday Drama: Classic Chandler – The Lady in the Lake (Radio 4, 2.30pm) repeats the smooth performance of Toby Stephens as Raymond Chandler's private–eye–witha–conscience Philip Marlowe.
There's original radio drama on Radio 4 Extra at 4.00pm, Andrew Rissik's brilliant 1998 trilogy Troy. Julian Glover heads an allstar cast as King Priam, Michael Sheen as Paris, Geraldine Somerville as Helen and Paul Scofield as Hermes.
The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show (6 Music, 6.00pm) has a session and masterclass from George Clinton.
Gerry Mulligan fans should stay up for Geoffrey Smith's Jazz (Radio 3, midnight), where those peerless sounds haven't aged a day.
SUNDAY
Classic Serial: Pride and Prejudice
Radio 4, 3.00pm
The Classic Serial suspends its Barchester season for a new, three–part adaptation of Jane Austen's best–known novel. Pippa Nixon plays Elizabeth Bennet, eldest of five daughters, apple of her father's eye (he's played by David Troughton, now Tony in The Archers), with Samantha Spiro as her chatterbox mother and Jamie Parker as Mr Darcy.
Sunday Feature: Eileen Gray: The Missing Heart of Design (Radio 3, 6.45pm) considers a real–life heroine, the Irish–born architect and designer Eileen Gray (1878–1976), who contested Le Corbusier's dictum that a house is "a machine for living" with the assertion that it's "a place for the soul to roam". Actress and writer Fiona Shaw looks at Gray's work, assesses its place in modernist design and, with novelist Colm Tóibín, asks why Ireland seems to forget some of its greatest creative talents?
Private Passions (Radio 3, noon) has Conservative MP Kwasi Kwarteng as Michael Berkeley's guest. The son of Ghanain immigrants who came to the UK in the Sixties, Kwarteng was elected to represent Spelthorne, Surrey, in 2010. He picks Wagner, Gilbert and Sullivan, Chopin, Schubert, Haydn, Smokey Robinson and John Gielgud reading Shelley's Ozymandias. But he also longs for a piano on which to play Scott Joplin.
Gerald Scarfe is the guest on Desert Island Discs Revisited (R4 Extra, 10.00am) talking to Sue Lawley (back in 1989) about his isolated childhood, why his cartoons seem aggressive and why he took to animation.
The Mysterious Death of Jane Austen
Radio 4, 10. 45am
Lindsay Ashford's novel (adapted for radio by Eileen Horne and Andrew Davies), on why Jane Austen died aged 41. Was it really from natural causes? Twenty–six years after Austen's death Anne Sharp (Ruth Gemmell), former governess to the Austens and Jane's close friend, decides to tell her story. It's one of family intrigues, secrets and forbidden loves. Maybe even murder. Elaine Cassidy plays Jane.
Out of the Ordinary (Radio 4, 11.00am) is an eye–opener. Jolyon Jenkins, tireless seeker of odd threads in the national tapestry, introduces us to the London Seduction Society. Men don't have to be good–looking to succeed, it seems, they just need to know how women think. Jenkins goes out on the prowl with some of the society's members, observes as four unconfident, inexperienced men are coached by experts on pick–ups.
The Complete Ripley: The Talented Mr Ripley (Radio 4 Extra, 1.00pm) brings us Patricia Highsmith's ultimate deceiver in the first of five hour–long dramas. Ian Hart stars as Tom Ripley, identity thief, ruthless, hedonistic, conscience–free; a haunting anti–hero. First heard on Radio 4 in 2009, this is the work of producer Claire Grove, posthumously awarded the Outstanding Achievement Award at this year's BBC Audio Drama Awards.
World War One at Home (all BBC local and regional stations, 8.15am) brings stories from real life as lived away from the front, co–produced with the Imperial War Museum.
TUESDAY
Miranda Hart's Joke Shop Radio 4 Extra, 11.30pm
When Danny Cohen, the BBC's director of television, announced a couple of weeks ago that every single panel show will now include a compulsory woman he immediately ignited a bonfire of debate on whether there are enough funny women to go round. Nick Ferrari on LBC (now a national radio station, albeit a digital one) said he didn't find Miranda Hart funny. "She's tall and falls over," he said. "That doesn't make me laugh." I know he's a reader so I advise him to listen to this repeat of the 2008 Radio 2 series that turned into the hit TV comedy Miranda and won awards in armfuls. It may, of course, confirm his view that Ms Hart's talents are not in the Joan Rivers, Joyce Grenfell, Beatrice Lillie or even Victoria Wood class. But at least he'll have done a bit more homework.
Lauren Laverne (6 Music, 10.00am) welcomes singer–songwriter Rufus Wainwright (son of Kate McGarrigle and Loudon Wainwright III) as her studio guest. He has a new album, Vibrate, out and a lot to talk about too: a dip into opera, Shakespeare's sonnets, his work for films, his colourful life, his family. That'll be handy as he's also the guest of Radio 2's Jo Whiley (8.00pm).
Free Thinking (Radio 3, 10.00pm) takes a new stage musical, Dirty Rotten Scoundrels (adapted from the 1988 film), as a peg for Samira Ahmed to discuss the appeal of scoundrels in fiction.
WEDNESDAY
The Long March Radio 4, 11.00am
Edward Stourton on the founding event of modern China, the Long March of October 1934 when Mao Zedong and 86,000 men and women of his Red Army began an epic journey in Jiangxi province, battling their way across 8,000 miles of rivers and plains to escape Chiang Kai–Shek's Nationalists. It took a year and only a few thousand made it all the way. Mao called it a "manifesto" of what it would take to build a new China. In this three–part series Stourton shows how, in a way, that march has never ended, why it has been endlessly retold in speeches, books and films to meet China's changes. And he meets a 98–year–old veteran who survived it all.
Access All Areas: Best and Worst (Radio 1 and 1 Xtra, 9.00pm) takes the best (and worst) moments from this month's "takeover" of Radio 1 by listeners. This is what happened when the BBC said, "Come in and do what you like" – music, rants and all. Bet Radio 3 wouldn't try this.
Comedy Club: On the Town with The League of Gentlemen (Radio 4 Extra, 11.00pm) goes back to before Mark Gatiss, Reece Shearsmith, et al, were famous when, back in 1997, BBC radio comedy took a chance on a group that was the talk of the club circuit and gave them their own series. It gave me, I must admit, the creeps to such an extent that it took me ages to warm to Gatiss as an accomplished writer and actor. But that took him time (and harder work than mine) too.
THURSDAY
Afternoon Drama: Pixie Juice Radio 4, 2.15pm
Indira Varma plays Anya in Ed Harris's comedy about insight, magic and its limits. She's struggling to run her father's tattoo parlour while coping with his failing eyesight. One night a tiny creature with magical powers drops in. Now, as all fans of fairy tales know, this could be the upturn in her fortunes she longed for yet; on the other hand, it's likely to come with conditions. But she doesn't really believe that kind of thing. Or does she?
Tonight's Radio 3 Live in Concert (7.30pm) comes from the City Halls in Glasgow, with the BBC Symphony Orchestra conducted by Andrew Manze. The programme opens with Aaron Copland's incidental music for Irwin Shaw's play, A Quiet City. The play is largely forgotten but Copland's atmospheric score lives on.
In the interval Scottish writer Louise Welsh performs her new work, written in response to this music, exploring the city at night when, even amid today's glittering high rises, things change.
On Radio 4, back in 2002, Vicky Pollard, Matt Lucas's "yeah but, no but" school girl, and Sebastian Love, David Walliams's infatuated aide to a particularly smooth prime minister, were both born. Hear them and many another vivid creation on the first of four re–runs of Little Britain (Radio 4 Extra, 11.30pm). It goes to show that when the announcer says "the home of radio comedy" at the end of some unfunny Radio 4 halfhour (6.30pm), it's not always just an empty promise.
FRIDAY
International One–Day Cricket: West Indies v England
Radio 4 LW and Radio 5 Live Sports Extra, 1.15pm
Live ball–by–ball commentary from the first one–day international. Now, considering the recent wretched state of West Indies cricket and the dire form of England on the Australia tour, not to mention the great Kevin Pietersen sacking furore (which occupied 5 Live's morning phone–in for an enraged hour three weeks ago), this match should prove specially interesting.
Otherwise, today's big events are all musical. 6 Music begins its first Music Festival and will occupy, every sequence beforehand, from Sean Keaveny at 5.00am, throughout the day. It actually opens at the Victoria Warehouse in Manchester at 7.00pm. Live performers include Damon Albarn, Midlake, Kelis, The Horrors, Drenge and Jimi Goodwin. There are two stages, plus a Talking Heads room (for spoken–word performances), a picture gallery, plus stuff from the archive of the BBC's (now disbanded) Radiophonic Workshop. Just think: if the BBC had given up on 6 Music before it eventually found its feet or after its impulse to chop it altogether three years ago…
Meanwhile, Radio 1 wraps up its "Takeover" month with the Access All Areas Closing Party at 7.00pm. Pete Tong, Annie Nightingale, Rob da Bank, et al, will delight clubbers for four hours.
As the Oscars loom Friday Night Is Music Night (Radio 2, 8.00pm) has Film 2014's Danny Leigh compering a bill of Oscar–winning themes.
Document DT00000020140222ea2m0009v
