{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"255"}
____
  
NEWS
Britain will not stop EU migrants coming here to work, says Cameron
By James Kirkup and Steven Swinford   
754 words
12 May 2014
07:46
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Prime Minister says EU rules allowing people to move freely between countries are “important” and will remain in place, despite controversy over the immigration they allow
Britain will not “put up the barriers” to stop migrants from other European Union countries coming here to work, David Cameron has said.
The Prime Minister said that EU rules allowing people to move freely between countries are “important” and will remain in place, despite controversy over the immigration they allow.
Mr Cameron said that he rejected calls from the UK Independence Party to pull out of the EU and abandon European rules that allow citizens of member states to work in other EU countries without restriction.
Those rules have allowed more than one million EU nationals to come to Britain in recent years, with more than 150,000 arriving last year.
Official figures this week are expected to show that at least another 30,000 Bulgarians and Romanians have come to Britain since restrictions on their entry lapsed in January.
Mr Cameron has promised to renegotiate Britain’s EU membership deal and put the results to the people in a referendum. That promise is “cast iron”, he said.
Britain is seeking tougher rules to restrict welfare payments to EU migrants as part of that renegotiation process, Mr Cameron said. However, he said their freedom to work in the UK will not be changed.
The Prime Minister said: “We need to make sure that the freedom to move to work is about that – it’s to go and get a job, not to claim.”
EU free movement rights should be used mainly to allow people to move to work, Mr Cameron suggested, pointing out that British people also take advantage of the rules.
“I think free movement within the European Union is important, but it needs to be returned to the original concept, which was the freedom to be able to go and work in another country,” he told the BBC.
“Now many British citizens go and work in other European countries. Other European citizens come to work here. Freedom to apply for a job to go and work in another country, that is one thing, but I think what we’ve seen recently is something else.”
Ukip has made opposition to EU migration a central part of its campaign for the European elections this month. Polls suggest the party could win the elections, with the Conservatives in third place.
The Ukip approach would be harmful to Britain, Mr Cameron said.
“Ukip are saying put up the barriers, we can’t succeed and compete in the modern world, let’s give up on Europe." Mr Cameron said that very different levels of income between EU countries has led to “massive moves” of workers to Britain, including the arrival of many Polish people after 2004.
People from any future EU members should face limits on their movements until their home countries reach a certain economic standard, Mr Cameron said.
”You could have transitional controls that say, for instance, that you don’t have the freedom to move and get a job in another country until, say, your income per capita is at a certain level. That would be a way of avoiding some of the difficulties in the past.”
Mr Cameron insisted he was so serious about his commitment to an EU referendum that he would rather cease to be prime minister at the general election next year than lead a government that does not deliver a vote.
Holding a referendum would be one of the Conservatives’ non-negotiable demands for entering any second coalition or power-sharing deal with a smaller party after the next election, he said.
”I’ve said very clearly that whatever the outcome of the next general election – and of course I want an overall majority and I’m hoping and believing I can win an overall majority – but people should be in no doubt that I will not become Prime Minster unless I can guarantee that we can hold that referendum.”
Plans for an In/Out referendum have raised the prospect of a Conservative split over Europe. But Mr Cameron insisted he leads a party that is united in support of his policy.
“The Conservatives in Government are all committed to this plan of a renegotiation and a referendum and we are all convinced that it is possible to achieve these changes,” he said.
Document TELUK00020140511ea5b005eh
