{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3637"}
____
  
News
New 'supercity' must be built to house migrants
Ben Endley   
377 words
24 February 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1s1; Lancs
28
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
A CITY twice the size of Leeds would be needed to house the new generation of immigrants arriving in Britain over the next decade.
Government papers forecast that 1.4million migrants will arrive in Britain between 2011 and 2021, requiring 629,000 new homes. There are 320,000 homes in Leeds.
Home Secretary Theresa May and Planning Minister Nick Boles have both voiced fears over the unchecked flood of new migrants, which could send property prices rocketing.
Pressure Alp Mehmet, the vice-chairman of MigrationWatch, said: "It is entirely logical that mass migration will have an impact on house prices.
"If you get demand going up while supply remains stationary, house prices will rise. The higher the prices, the more first-time buyers are going to find it difficult to get their own place.
"I think the political classes haven't factored in the impact on housing. If you look at London and the South-east the pressure is even greater because so much migration takes place."
The figures, held in the House of Commons library, are likely to heap further pressure on Prime Minister David Cameron to keep his pledge to reduce net migration levels to "tens of thousands" before the next election. A total of 1.8 million immigrants have arrived in Britain since 2004.
The research was requested by Tory MP James Clappison, a member of the home affairs select committee.
He said: "Labour pursued an open door immigration policy and gave no thought to the consequences.
"The worry must be that a future Labour government will do that again."
Carlos Vargas-Silva, senior researcher at Oxford University's Migration Observatory, believes massive numbers of migrants will also send rents soaring.
He said: "Most migrants when they arrive in the country rent, and that is where the main impact is.
"The increase in rents may displace British nationals. They may end up going into social housing because the price of rent is too high.
"Indirectly this could have an effect on house prices because it encourages people to buy-to-let. Over the long term, if migrants stay they are more likely to buy houses and potentially put pressure on the housing market."
Document THEEXP0020140224ea2o0001l
