{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2622"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Osborne must show he is truly on the side of those who suffer
MARY RIDDELL   
1,292 words
19 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
24
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Chancellor will struggle to silence Labour's charge that his measures are unfair
All politics is personal. That truism is rarely more self–evident than on Budget Day. When the Chancellor sits down at lunchtime, his speech delivered, voters will not be mulling over his depiction of the economic architecture. They will be asking: what does it mean for me?
Ed Miliband will seek to address that question in three words: it isn't fair. By appealing directly to those he has identified as "the millions caught in the crosshairs of a cost of living crisis", he hopes to reassure the losers in an uneven recovery that he alone has understood their pain and found a remedy.
Untested as that claim might be, wiser Tories are worried by their high command's ability to repel even the most ardent of their loyalists. Conservative voters, already smarting at being told that they have fuelled an immigration crisis by employing Polish plumbers, are unlikely to have been cheered by George Osborne informing them that they viewed entry to the higher tax band as a mark of "success and aspiration". Many Tories fear that the Chancellor, by declining to raise the threshold for the 40p rate, has rejected what an insider calls "the one iconic policy" that could win him the election.
Aware that a treatise on fiscal consolidation would gain him few accolades for human bonding, Mr Osborne has chosen today to shuffle on to the costof–living terrain patrolled by Mr Miliband and Ed Balls. While the Lib Dems will claim the credit for the two most voterfriendly measures – a rise in the personal allowance and more money for childcare – both policies show the Chancellor's awareness that people crave more recognition of their difficulties. Hence his attempt to craft his fourth Budget speech as a love letter to the struggling classes.
Nothing could more delight the two Eds than the shift to their home turf. In Mr Balls's view, Mr Osborne has reluctantly changed tack at the behest of David Cameron, who believes the Tories must not look out of step with an anti–inequality consensus that puts Labour on the same side as the Pope, Barack Obama and a phalanx of senior British churchmen. The Anglican Church, once categorised as the Conservative Party at prayer, now more resembles the Labour Party at war.
The social injustice attacked by the bishops is not simply, in Mr Miliband's analysis, a matter of lament for do–gooders. His assertion, backed up by the IMF, is that unequal societies also have slower and more fragile economic growth. That analysis is likely to resonate with voters who sense that they are part of what the American economist Lawrence Summers calls a "Downton Abbey economy", in which the chasm between rich and poor gets ever starker. Witness Oxfam's revelation that the five richest families in Britain are worth more than the poorest 12.6 million put together.
This is, however, only one facet of Mr Miliband's idea that inequality is "the new centre ground of politics". Far from stewing over the politics of envy, he hopes to show that Labour can demonstrate a human touch absent not only from Mr Osborne's Budget speech, but also from politics in general.
The Opposition leader's belief that he could bond with voters in a way that has eluded the Prime Minister and his Chancellor took root last summer, when he read a book entitled The Science of Evil by Simon Baron–Cohen, a professor of psychopathology at Cambridge University. Professor Baron–Cohen (a cousin of the comedian Sacha Baron Cohen, who plays Ali G) argues that "evil", an unscientific term, is better defined as an absence of empathy.
While some groups, psychopaths included, have "zero degrees of empathy" – leaving them oblivious to other people's feelings – non–dangerous sub–sects are also affected. Baron–Cohen puts the political class especially low down on the bell curve of compassion, arguing that politicians almost never mention the "universal solvent" of empathy, with the result that wars and social breakdown go unresolved.
Mr Miliband invited Baron–Cohen for a meeting to discuss the case for politicians to show more warmth and inspiration. While it would be too strong to label him Mr Miliband's "compassion guru", the professor had a profound effect on the tone and content of the Labour leader's 2013 conference speech, in which he tackled David Cameron on his lack of leadership and character. "He may be strong at standing up to the weak, but he is weak at standing up to the strong," he said then.
Yesterday, in their second two–hour conclave to put the finishing touches to Labour's Budget response, the two Eds sat at Mr Miliband's table and embellished their charge of a Tory disconnect with the voters. Mr Osborne's decision to heed the good advice of the Policy Exchange think tank and others, and make a major move on housing, may steal some of their thunder. Even so, Mr Balls is said to expect the Chancellor to send the wrong message.
Talk of massive new development and a garden city at Ebbsfleet (which would by now resemble Manhattan if every previous such announcement had come to pass) may draw little enthusiasm from voters who are worried about more personal matters, such as where their children will live and whether they will find the right sort of retirement home if they choose to downsize. "George has to be more emotional as well as practical," warns one Tory strategist.
While Mr Miliband has become ever more confident of victory, his pitch to be the tribune of the people is not yet wholly convincing. Voters' assessment of him is so sub–euphoric ("weak" is the kindest description in a recent survey) as to suggest that the stubborn view – however unfair – of much of the electorate is that Mr Miliband possesses the charisma of a lettuce.
Nor is it safe to hope, as Mr Balls does, that Labour will follow in Obama's footsteps and win the election despite being held to blame for the country's financial woes. It is possible that voters who rallied behind Mr Miliband's clever gambit of an energy price freeze will warm to the Chancellor's own retail offer of a better than expected childcare deal and other possible sweeteners, such as help with fuel duty or cheaper beer and bingo.
What voters do not want is any preaching from the Chancellor about how they are basking in economic recovery. It may be, as research from the Social Market Foundation think tank shows, that the higher end of the "squeezed middle" have continued to improve their lot. That may not stop even the better–off joining Labour's coalition of the damned, composed of all those consumed by worry, if not on their own behalf, then for their children, grandchildren and ageing parents.
When Mr Miliband gets to his feet today, he will hope to plant one thought in voters' minds. Would they be better off, in this unequal Britain, with Empathetic Ed, who understands their pain, or Snake Oil Dave, who neither inspires trust nor commands it? George Osborne's challenge is to emulate the People's Budget of 1909 and show, as David Lloyd George did then, that he is truly on the side of those who suffer. If he cannot do so, then Mr Miliband will have won what may be the decisive battle on the road to 2015.
Comment on Mary Riddell's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140319ea3j0001q
