{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"734"}
____
  
World
Daubs by Dubya - Bush remembers old rivals in paint
DAVID USBORNE US EDITOR   
754 words
5 April 2014
The Independent
IND
2ND
28,29
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
World
When George Bush left the White House for the last time in 2009, he vowed to stay out of the way of his successor, Barack Obama. But who knew he would take retirement so far? Did he set up a foundation to solve world poverty or end regional conflicts? No. As we have known for a while, he took up painting.
Yet nostalgia for the old days of running the world's sole superpower apparently exerted itself on the former President even as he took up the brush and palate. Instead of limiting himself to Texas landscapes and chocolate-box renditions of his dogs, Mr Bush, 67, has also been painting former and current world leaders. And he has been busy.
Yesterday, at his presidential library near his home in Dallas, an entire exhibition was unveiled, featuring a parade of former jousting partners under the title: "The Art of Leadership: A President's Personal Diplomacy." Staring down at visitors to the library are 24 familiar faces, ranging from his father, George H W Bush, to Vladimir Putin, Tony Blair and the Dalai Lama.
Hopefully, there will be no ill-feeling from any who might find Mr Bush's work less than flattering. The artist feels they need only be pleasantly surprised. "I think they're going to [say] 'Wow. George Bush is a painter'," he said in an interview about his new works on NBC TV with his daughter, Jenna Bush Hager. "I mean, I'm sure when they heard that I was painting, they're going to say: 'Wow. I look forward to seeing a stick figure he painted of me'."
Mr Bush added: "I hope they take it in the spirit in which these were painted in. That was the spirit of friendship. I admire them as leaders and was willing to give it a shot in terms of getting people to see how I felt about them."
Tony Blair
Reviled by critics as "Bush's poodle", the former PM maintains that he did not pray with the President. In this portrait, he has a hint of the Devil's eyes from a Tory ad campaign.
George W Bush Jr.
This self-portrait shows Mr Bush as statesmanlike, resolute and wise - just as he'd like us to remember him (just don't mention the pretzels).
George HW Bush Snr
"That's my husband?" Dubya's mother, Barbara, asked of this portrait. A few moments later, she added loyally: "I like it very much."
Manmohan Singh
The Indian PM once assured Mr Bush: "The people of India love you". A day later, Mr Bush responded by describing him as "wise".
Vladimir Putin
Bush said of his Russian counterpart: "I looked the man in the eye. I found him to be very straightforward and trustworthy." Would you?
Silvio Berlusconi
Mr Bush regarded the former Italian Prime Minister as one of his "best buddies" in Europe while he held the presidency.
Hamid Karzai
The Afghan President came to power after the US-led invasion but the relationship was often prickly, especially over drone strikes.
The Dalai Lama
He admitted that Mr Bush's policies "may not be very, very successful" but added: "As a human being, [he is a] very nice person. I love him."
Angela Merkel
Bush's picture of the German Chancellor demonstrates his diplomacy by knocking years off her age. But why did he make her look a bit French?
Stephen Harper
Canada's PM is known as a hard-right conservative and has been described as just like Dubya, minus the warmth and intellect.
Nicolas Sarkozy
France's ex-President (no cheese-eating surrender monkey he) admired Bush, and was duly nicknamed 'Sarko the American'.
Ziang Jemin
Bush and the Chinese leader met on just a handful of occasions. Dubya came into power in 2001; Ziang Jemin stepped down in 2002.
Nouri al-Maliki
Together they got rid of Saddam Hussein after US forces tracked him down. The Iraqi premier then signed the death warrant.
Paul Kagame
The Rwandan President has been condemned for what critics describe as despotism. Mr Bush paints him more peeved than murderous.
Felipe Calderón
The Mexican leader was compared to Mr Bush for his ability to make gaffes - but was critical of US immigration policies.
Ehud Olmert
In 2009, the Israeli Prime Minister was heard to boast that he could click his fingers and Mr Bush would do his bidding.
Document IND0000020140405ea450000a
