{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1643"}
____
  
David Cameron must make his mark in the EU debate
By Telegraph View   
503 words
28 March 2014
20:32
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Reform of the EU is necessary, so the Prime Minister should lead the debate on Britain's membership and not leave it to Nigel Farage and Nick Clegg
This week’s debate between Nigel Farage and Nick Clegg reflected the radical wings of the discussion about our relationship with Europe. Mr Farage refuses to negotiate better terms with what he regards as a Leviathan. He wants out. Mr Clegg attempted to play the voice of reason but, in fact, opposes a referendum. The absence of David Cameron or Ed Miliband from both this debate and next week’s on the BBC means that a great swathe of public opinion is missing, too.
Of course, we are grateful that the conversation is finally happening. Indeed, voters have waited too long. The European Union is in desperate need of reform, and the British people should have a say in how they are governed. Many people feel passionate about this subject and their views deserve to be heard. What we need now is clarity from the Government about what precisely is going to happen next – a clearer sense of what the negotiation process will entail.
Yesterday, George Osborne and Wolfgang Schauble, finance minister of Germany, laid out in a newspaper article some of the themes of their reform agenda: “We must complete the EU’s single market, especially in services, open up to international markets and conclude reforms to the euro area.” These ideas are laudable but surely it is practical issues such as immigration that top people’s lists of concerns. After all, mass migration from Europe not only increases competition for jobs but also has a huge impact upon public services. Will the renegotiation process allay these fears? There was some hope given in Angela Merkel’s recent remarks that she understood that freedom of movement should not translate into welfare tourism. But even the German chancellor, leader of one of the countries most enthusiastic about change, warned that reform would not be “a piece of cake”.
The process will undoubtedly be tough, and the Prime Minister has to carry his country through it with honesty and strong leadership. And leadership means persuasion, not condescension. Mr Cameron’s latest statement that Britons would rather wait for a vote on Europe than have one immediately was unfortunate: it is his job to convince us of the need to wait, not to presume to know what we think. This slip aside, he remains the party leader with the most sensible, pragmatic position on Europe. That is to try to make the EU work more in Britain’s interests and then, having succeeded or failed, let the people decide if they want to remain a member of its club. The country needs Mr Cameron to make this case as transparently and effectively as possible, otherwise the debate might become defined by the far more radical positions staked out by Mr Farage and Mr Clegg.
Document TELUK00020140328ea3s005po
