{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3476"}
____
  
Features
Policy on compensation lawful
916 words
22 April 2014
The Times
T
1; National
49
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Law Report
Court of Appeal
Published April 22, 2014
Regina (Ali) v Secretary of State for Justice
Regina (Dennis) v Same
Regina (Tunbridge) v Same
Before Lord Justice Maurice Kay, Lord Justice Patten and Lady Justice Sharpe Judgment February 27, 2014
The Secretary of State for Justice's policy of declining to reopen a refusal to award compensation for miscarriage of justice to an individual whose conviction had subsequently been quashed on the basis of new evidence, unless the request to reconsider was made within three months of the original decision, was lawful.
The Court of Appeal so stated, inter alia, when dismissing the appeals of Ismail Ali, Kevin Dennis and Justin Tunbridge against a decision of the Queen's Bench Divisional Court (Lord Justice Beatson and Mr Justice Irwin) ([2013] 1 WLR 3536) dismissing their claims for judicial review of decisions of the Secretary of State for Justice: (i) refusing, in the case of Mr Dennis and Mr Tunbridge, to reconsider applications for compensation under section 133 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and/or consider fresh applications; (ii) concluding that in any event Mr Tunbridge would not have qualified; and (iii) concluding that Mr Ali did not qualify.
The claimants had each been convicted of criminal offences, served sentences of imprisonment, in whole or in part, and then had their convictions reversed by the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division.
Mr Tim Owen, QC and Ms Ruth Brander for the claimants; Mr James Strachan, QC and Ms Sarah Hannett for the secretary of state
LORD JUSTICE MAURICE KAY,
giving the judgment of the court to which Lady Justice Sharp had made a substantial contribution, said that the meaning and effect of section 133 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (as amended by section 61(5) of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008) and, in particular, what was meant by the phrase "miscarriage of justice" had been considered in a number of cases at appellate level, most recently by the Supreme Court in R (Adams) v Secretary of State for Justice (The Times May 12, 2011; [2012] 1 AC 49).
The Divisional Court in the present cases, at paragraph 41, had held that the test to be applied in order to determine whether a case fell within the Supreme Court's category 2 case (fresh evidence such that, had it been available at the trial, no reasonable jury could have convicted the defendant) so as to entitle a claimant to compensation under section 133 was whether the claimant had established beyond reasonable doubt, that no reasonable jury, or magistrates, properly directed as to the law could convict on the basis of the evidence now to be considered.
That formulation of the test for category 2 cases departed from the test established in Adams, at paragraph 55.
The court had no doubt that the Divisional Court had intended its formulation to be more readily useful and more sensitive to the trial processes but its formulation was not one for which any of the parties before it had contended and, with respect, the court considered the Divisional Court had been wrong to propound it.
Adams had been intended to identify the correct test and provide guidance to those who had to consider the application of section 133, including the secretary of state, and any lower court which had to decide whether the refusal of compensation in a particular case was unlawful. There had indeed been explicit acknowledgement by the Supreme Court that it was important that there should be clarity as to the correct test.
In making his determination the secretary of state was required to make a decision by applying the statutory test in accordance with the guidance in Adams to the facts of the particular case, which could include events which post dated the quashing of the conviction in the event that further facts of relevance to the application of the statutory test arose. He could come to his own view, having regard to the terms of the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division's judgment quashing the conviction, provided the decision did not conflict with that judgment. The decision was then amenable to judicial review on conventional grounds of challenge, not merely because the court would have reached a different view. Save in exceptional circumstances, it should not be necessary for the court to engage in a detailed review of the facts.
Following the decision in Adams, the secretary of state had adopted a policy of declining to reopen decisions on compensation taken previously, unless the request to revisit was made within three months of the original decision (that was, within the judicial review time limit under rule 54.5 of the Civil Procedure Rules) or an actual or threatened application for permission to seek judicial review had been delayed by agreement to await the decision of the Supreme Court in Adams.
The Divisional Court had been right to reject the challenge to that policy and to conclude that the secretary of state had acted lawfully in his approach to reconsideration. In the circumstances, the court was far from persuaded that the Divisional Court had been wrong to reject the contention that there was anything unreasonable, irrational or unlawful in the "time limit" to be applied to applications for reconsideration post Adams. The Divisional Court had come to the right conclusion, albeit by reference to the wrong test.
Solicitors: Matthew Gold & Co Ltd; Hodge Jones &Allan; Treasury Solicitor.
Document T000000020140422ea4m0006p
