{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"724"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Flowers and poems as shocked Yarl's Wood detainees mourn dead woman: Christine Case suffered heart attack in her cell: Woman was due to be flown back to Jamaica
Diane Taylor   
1,092 words
4 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
12
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The white daffodils in the grounds of Yarl's Wood immigration removal centre in Bedfordshire are in full bloom. On Sunday, one week after the death of 40-year-old Christine Case at the centre, female detainees plan to cut them and take them to a memorial service for their friend. The women are preparing songs, poems and other tributes to mark Case's sudden death, which has left them all shocked.
Just after 7.30am last Sunday, Case's roommate raised the alarm. Something was clearly wrong with her as she staggered across the room. Staff from Serco, the private contractor that runs the centre, attended.
Case collapsed into the arms of her roommate. A spokesman for East of England ambulance service said a call was received from the centre at 8.17am to help a woman experiencing cardiac arrest. An ambulance reached the centre 10 minutes later. The ambulance spokesman confirmed that a defibrillator was on the scene and that Case was pronounced dead approximately one hour later.
A postmortem found that Case, a Jamaican national who had been in Yarl's Wood for 10 days, died of a massive pulmonary thromboembolism with secondary causes named as obesity and a large fibroid uterus. An inquest at Ampthill coroner's court in Bedfordshire was opened and adjourned on Wednesday. A full hearing is scheduled for September. Case arrived in the UK on a visitor's visa 14 years ago and is understood to have overstayed. She was due to be removed from the UK on 27 March, but made a fresh application for leave to remain in the UK which was understood to be under consideration by the Home Office at the time of her death.
The family is waiting for a full explanation of how and why Case died and why there was an eight-hour delay before they were informed.
Case's brother, Wesley, said: "Christine died early on Sunday morning but we weren't informed about her death until 4pm. When I got the news my whole body went numb and I couldn't stop shaking. I haven't been able to sleep since. I can't believe that I spoke to Christine on Friday night and was planning to go and visit her on the day she died. Now we are waiting for answers about why and how our sister died. I'm upset that it took them so long to inform us about Christine's death."
Case's sister Dianne said: "Christine was such a lovely, bubbly person. She would do anything to help anyone. We talked about what we would do when she was released from Yarl's Wood. The first thing we were going to do was go to church together. It was very hard to go and collect her belongings from the detention centre - her purse, her keys and her bus pass - knowing that she won't be using them any more. Christine's mum, Monica Turner, lives in Jamaica. We have asked the Home Office if she will be granted a visa to come over for the funeral but we don't know yet if she will be allowed to bury her daughter. "
A spokesman for Serco said that Case had received a comprehensive health check from a nurse and a doctor the day she arrived.
The spokesman said that the time delay was because Case had not provided next-of-kin details when she arrived at Yarl's Wood and the matter had to be passed to the Home Office to deal with. He said he had been alerted to the incident as soon as the centre made the 999 call and that Serco had been keen to inform Case's family of her death as soon as possible.
Four of the detainees of the centre have spoken of the final minutes of Case's life. They say they heard her crying in pain and watched the Serco staff and then the on-site medical staff arrive in her room.
"I heard her crying and screaming in pain from some time after 7.30 until I went for my breakfast at around 10 past eight," said one woman. "After that Christine went silent and I didn't hear anything more from her. You could tell from the way she was screaming that she was in a lot of pain before she died."
Another detainee said she had done Case's hair for her the day before she died. "She complained that she couldn't breathe properly and that she had a pain in her heart," she said.
On the day that Case died, the women in Yarl's Wood staged a sit-down protest in the corridor and refused to attend roll call or to eat lunch or dinner.
"We have all been crying and wondering if we will be the next one to die here," said one woman. "It's not dignified to die in detention, to be returned to your parents in a coffin. The UK has the rule of law that some other countries don't have and that is why some people run here to be safe. But when we come here the laws work against us. Christine's death has affected us all so much. It has taken away our last hope."
The death of Case was raised in parliament on Monday. The shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, raised concerns about the death. The immigration minister, James Brokenshire, said: "I reassure the house of the seriousness that we attach to the incident. We expect all issues to be properly investigated and pursued."
The family's lawyer, Irene Nembhard of Birnberg Peirce & Partners, said: "There is always a great concern when someone dies in custody. The family want to know that everything was done for Christine in Yarl's Wood that would have been done for her had this happened in the community."
The director of Yarl's Wood, John Tolland, said: "This tragic event has affected us all deeply. Ms Case had been in the centre for 10 days. The wellbeing of those in our care at Yarl's Wood is always our top priority, and the quality of the healthcare we provide has been endorsed by recent reports by both HM chief inspector of prisons and the Care Quality Commission."
Document GRDN000020140404ea440002t
