{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"395"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Newark is in the mood for protest and Ukip will do
Robert Booth   
717 words
1 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
18
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Beneath the stall canopies in their pretty market square, Newark residents considered rebellion yesterday following the resignation of Patrick Mercer, their Conservative MP of 13 years.
Farage may not be standing for parliament, but his party was shaping up as a tempting alternative for many who felt cheated by the locally dominant Tories and, in a few cases, by Labour.
The top three concerns among the stalls selling tweed jackets and local cheeses were migrant labour, membership of the EU and concern at a lack of inward investment for industry.
Many hoped a vote for Ukip would punish the parties in power, despite doubts about whether Farage really wants power or is just a charismatic provocateur.
"I am going to vote for Ukip and so is my wife," said David Stewart, a stallholder in his 60s selling worsted coats. "I have voted Tory in the past, but I don't trust Cameron any more. Immigration needs sorting out. It's ridiculous what they are doing, giving families pounds 600, pounds 700 a week when other people are having to go out and work for it."
"I normally vote Labour," said Arthur Williams, 75, a retired miner. "But I'll think about Ukip. The people round here are losing their jobs from people coming in from other countries. I have a son and two granddaughters coming up to school-leaving age and the more people come into the country the less opportunities they are going to get."
Newark is an ageing town, in principle full of Tory voters. Mercer won in 2010 with a 16,000-vote majority over Labour in second place, while Ukip's Rev Maj Tom Irvine polled 1,954 votes, just 3.8%.
But Ukip's allure has been transformed since then. The 2011 census showed over a quarter of residents of Newark and its outlying Sherwood area are over 60 and 17.1% of the population is retired. They are more married, less divorced and more Christian than the English average and are 97% white.
Some residents said they were impressed by the clarity of Farage's position on issues and applauded his "charm".
In the cutting room at the Salon 34 hairdresser, the owner, Janette Clarke, said Farage articulates "a lot of things that people in here feel". "I don't think we can finish with the EU but we don't want to be managed by them," she said. "I'm British, not European."
"I'm not even British," added a woman having a trim. "I'm English."
But there are reservations. "Farage is a very charismatic man and that concerns me because we've had them before," said Clarke. "What worries me is that he is extremist and goes too far the other way [on Europe and immigration]."
There is clear tension caused by the reliance on eastern European labour by two of the town's major employers - the Laurens cream cake factory and Knowhow, a support business for Currys and PC World. Igor Berezhansky, a 26-year-old Latvian who earns the minimum wage of pounds 6.32 an hour at Knowhow said he felt "antagonism" about where he was from.
His analysis of Ukip's claim that Europeans are stealing British jobs was blunt.
"It is bullshit," he said. "We are doing all of these cheap jobs and nobody else is going to work in the factories. If we are sent back then somebody English will have to work there and that means they will have to increase the salaries."
The good news for the Tories is that their substantial resources will be less stretched than Ukip's, which only recently set up a Newark branch.
"I have always voted Conservative, but I'm thinking about Ukip," said Brian Hough, 78. "Cameron has made a balls-up of the job. He has talked about a referendum on Europe but it will never come. The sooner we are out of the EU the better. I have my doubts about Ukip but it would be a wakeup call for the government."
Leader comment, page 40 ≥
Latvian Igor Berezhansky, one of Newark's large east European workforce, says nobody else will work for so little
Document GRDN000020140430ea510009d
