{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1871"}
____
  
NEWS
Sketch: James Brokenshire's mission to clean up immigration; The immigration minister has called for employers to favour British workers ahead of foreigners. But his problems could be closer to home.
By Tom Rowley   
627 words
6 March 2014
21:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
James Brokenshire, we were told as we settled into our seats in a Westminster lecture room yesterday, would “speak for quite a long time". With less horrifying pronouncements have pogroms begun. Bottoms shuffled, and eyes longingly assessed the four-storey drop from the sash windows.
For poor Mr Brokenshire is not exactly known for his soaring rhetoric. He sported standard issue minister garb – plain grey suit, crisp white shirt and baby blue tie – and his first speech as immigration minister was every bit as clichéd.
“I absolutely want Britain to be open for business," he earnestly declared. I do disapprove of those irresponsible MPs who argue otherwise, don’t you? His immigration policy, it transpired, was designed to attract “the brightest and the best".
He spent much of the hour endlessly repeating these platitudes; Mr Brokenshire, we discovered, would never be merely categorical when he could be unequivocal, too.
To be fair, he has had rather more pressing issues to deal with in his first month in the job than crafting original soundbites: recruiting his domestic staff. Mr Brokenshire, you see, is the new broom at the Home Office, brought in to sweep up the mess left by his predecessor’s cleaner.
As you may recall, Mark Harper was forced to spend more time with his Domestos last month after it emerged that his cleaner wasn’t actually entitled to be in Britain. Oops.
A similar scandal previously engulfed Baroness Scotland, then the Attorney General, who had to apologise for employing an illegal immigrant as her housekeeper. Only in politics does the phrase “One day, cock of the walk. Next, a feather duster" presage the instrument of one’s demise.
Mr Brokenshire, however, will be taking no such chances. “You know Nikolai?" he is probably asking Mrs Brokenshire right now. “The charming chap who hums the Internationale while pouring the tea? Are you sure he’s from Grimsby?"
Yesterday, he implored the rest of us to consider how hard-working Britons suffer when we give our jobs to foreigners. So, no doubt, his own job interviews will henceforth make that nice Lord Sugar look tame. It will be easier to be hired as an aide to Kim Jong-un than to become a domestic in the Brokenshire household. (Less job security in the former, granted.)
Not even reciting Scoop backwards while playing Snap on the roof of a Robin Reliant will vouch for your Britishness.
“Typical Chinese trick," he would surely declare. “I bet she can’t pronounce 'Waugh’."
Despite these valiant personal efforts, the awkward fact remains that the migration figures continue to creep upwards. He instantly knew who to blame: the Wealthy Metropolitan Elite. The phrase is, I suppose, intended as a slight, contrasting these highfalutin Islington types with hardworking northerners – or, at least, with those Berkshire families who still consider the gardener from Buckinghamshire “foreign help".
But I, for one, would like to join the ranks of the WMEs. It sounds a cushy number. I’d like to ask the minister: How do I enrol, and is Clapham too far south?
Perhaps, if we WMEs declare a breakaway state, Mr Brokenshire could finally get the immigration figures down in his Republic of Hard-working Britons.
But I have another proposal. Keith Vaz’s brief stint putting off Bulgarians at the border was much too entertaining to be effective. Instead, why not invite prospective migrants to another of Mr Brokenshire’s briefings? Trust me: the immigration statistics would soon be spotless. If not his living room.
Michael Deacon is away.
Document TELUK00020140307ea3600090
