{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3829"}
____
  
Features
Blood, threats and darkest fears
688 words
26 April 2014
The Times
T
1; National
16
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
fiction
Marcel Berlins is hooked by a new crop of unsolved murders
After I'm Gone by Laura Lippman Faber and Faber, 331pp £12.99 * £11.69 ebook £12.99
A Dark Song of Blood by Ben Pastor Bitter Lemon Press, 383pp £8.99 * £8.54; ebook £8.99
The Accident by Chris Pavone Faber and Faber, 385pp £12.99 * £11.69 ebook £12.99
Death Can't Take a Joke by Anya Lipska The Friday ProJect, 316pp £7.99 * £7.59; ebook £4.99
Mr Campion's Farewell completed by Mike Ripley Severn House, 278pp £19.99 * £17.99
In Laura Lippman's excellent After I'm Gone, Felix Brewer is a husband, father and adulterer. He's also a gambler and dodgy businessman who disappears from his marriage in 1976. His unexpected and unexplained leaving profoundly affects, in different ways, the lives of five women: his wife Bambi, their three daughters and his lover Julie. When she too vanishes a decade later, it's generally thought she's gone to join him; years later her body is discovered, but no one is fingered. Even more years later, retired Baltimore cop Sandy Sanchez riffles through unsolved crimes, follows up vague leads and reopens old wounds. Lippman's insights into the psychology of family interactions are superbly convincing, and the gentle pace of the novel's first half leads to many twists and a clever, disturbing resolution.
A German officer in the Wehrmacht during the dying months of the Nazi occupation of Rome is not an obvious choice as a hero of crime fiction, but in Ben Pastor's A Dark Song of Blood, Major Martin Bora dispels all doubts. Handsome, unlucky in love, war-wounded, cultured and often insubordinate, Bora is ordered to solve three murders, including that of a cardinal. Occasionally supported by the uneasy Italian Inspector Sandro Guidi, Bora, dreaming of a war-free future, moves morosely among Italian society and the soon to be defeated German occupiers. Pastor writes with feeling and perception, and creates a wonderfully moody atmosphere. She deserves greater attention.
Chris Pavone's thriller debut, The Expats, promised well. His second, The Accident, fulfils that expectation. The story takes place in one day, in the early hours of which Isabel Reid, a fading New York liter-ary agent, receives the manuscript of a book by "Anonymous". It's a devastating exposé of a powerful media tycoon. Realising its potential, both financial and for her reputation, she limits knowledge of the book to a few people she trusts. But word gets around, one of her confidantes is murdered, and she spends the rest of the day and night fleeing from various interests trying to recover the book, if necessary by killing her. It's a breathless read.
Set in east London's Polish community, Anya Lipska's second novel, Death Can't Take a Joke, has a clever plot, interesting characters and believable knowledge of the edgy lives led by immigrants halfpining for their old country. Janusz Kiszka is a slightly shady fixer and unofficial private detective, Natalie Kershaw a young DC just transferred to the murder squad and about to move in with her boyfriend. Murders and unexplained deaths merge, so that the two almost-friends find themselves co-operating to solve crimes with a Polish tinge.
Sherlock Holmes, Philip Marlowe and Lord Peter Wimsey have had them, with varying success. Hercule Poirot is getting one later this year. I refer to great fictional detectives revived by top crime writers of today. Now Margery Allingham's creation, Albert Campion, has acquired a good one — Mike Ripley, whose "Angel" series remains a high point in comic crime fiction.
Mr Campion's Farewell is listed as "completed" by him, but Ripley had only a few notes, left by Allingham's widower, to work from. The plot — set in a pretty English village harbouring assorted deaths and an array of dreadful secrets centering on the number nine — is suitably Allinghamian, and Ripley excels at presenting Campion, whose toff drawl and effete mannerisms hide an astute crime-solving brain.
Document T000000020140426ea4q000em
