{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"3515"}
____
  
Observer Review Features Pages
The New Review: COVER STORY: Talk of the town: Last month's live debate between Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage was a coup for LBC, the London talk-radio station that has just gone national. It sees itself as an antidote to an elitist BBC, with its presenters free to be as opinionated as they like. A vigorous, emotional conversation ensues. Is this why so many of us are tuning in?
RACHEL COOKE   
4,295 words
20 April 2014
The Observer
OB
8
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
Nick Ferrari, the presenter of the LBC breakfast show, makes for a somewhat alarming prospect first thing in the morning, his hail-fellow-well-met manners and his pugilistic confidence coming at you like a triple espresso with too much sugar in it, whether you happen to be listening at home or in the station itself, as I am today. At home, however, you can only imagine what the king of the talk radio jungle must look like when he's in full flight. I'd pictured a red face and an air of deep must-do-my-best concentration, but observing him now from the other side of the glass that separates him from his producers, I'm struck by his studied macho nonchalance: hands behind his head, elbows flapping, belly out and proud. If he had a pint and a fag on the go, you'd hardly be surprised. It makes for an oddly old-fashioned sight given that, in radio circles, 53-year-old Ferrari is currently the man of the moment.
Ferrari is on a high, still coming down from the first of the debates between Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage, the leader of Ukip, which LBC staged on 26 March and he moderated. Opinions vary as to who exactly won this somewhat hammy altercation; it may be, the commentators insist, that Clegg is playing a long game and Farage's bloodying of his nose will work in the deputy prime minister's favour at some point in the future. But on one thing most are agreed: this was a win both for LBC, whose patriotic red, white and blue branding could be seen all over the 10 o'clock television news programmes, and for Ferrari, who acquitted himself brilliantly given that he has so much less television experience than David Dimbleby, the chair of the second debate. Today, moreover, Ferrari has been nominated for a whole clutch of Radio Academy (formerly Sony) awards. Call Nick Clegg, the half-hour phone-in he hosts with the deputy prime minister each Thursday, is on the shortlist for best speech programme and best news and current affairs programme, while he is on the shortlist in his own right for speech radio personality of the year and for presenting the breakfast show of the year. No wonder he's inclined to tell anyone who will listen that "apart from being a dad, this is the greatest bloody job in the world".
I've been at LBC for less than half an hour, but already I'm getting the hang of how the station works. It is 8.40am, which means there are 20 minutes to go until Boris Johnson arrives (the mayor of London joins Ferrari for Ask Boris, a half-hour phone-in, once a month). In the meantime, Ferrari is discussing a news story about a Christian preacher who was arrested and kept in a cell for 19 hours by police in Manchester following a complaint made against him by two gay men (he has since received compensation). This is going well. Ferrari has "a full switchboard", which means he will be required neither to fill the airtime himself, nor change tack and embark on another topic altogether. A full switchboard is the holy grail at LBC. Metaphorically speaking, it is the job of its presenters to throw an issue hard against the wall, in the manner of a custard pie. Splat! If it sticks - if the listeners like the subject and run with it - all is well. If, however, it slides tragically to the ground - if the phones stay silent - then, nothing doing. Time to move on. Useful last resorts in this eventuality include potholes, parking and the veil.
As the hour approaches, Chuka Umunna, the shadow business secretary, comes on to decry the privatisation of the Royal Mail. Ferrari looks sceptical, disdain pushing his forehead into a frown, but uses the moment to throw out a quiz question: Vince Cable is now the longest serving business secretary since. . . who? (Answer: Patricia Hewitt.) This takes him to the news, which is to be delayed slightly in order to accommodate Johnson, who is only now arriving. "He's here!" says the producer. "He's walking through the lobby!" When the mayor reaches the studio, Ferrari rises from his seat, and salutes him. I mean literally salutes him, as if he were a subaltern and Johnson his commanding officer. Crikey. This is chummy. It's also a touch daring, for the clock is ticking, and there are now just seconds to go before the red light comes back on. Johnson needs to get his bum into his seat and his headphones on his bonce. Will he do it? Of course he will. Flying by the seat of his considerable pants is all part of the act. "This is Boris Johnson," he says, the usual laugh in his voice. "This is your chance to put any question you like to me, and I will do my best to answer it with the help of my trusty helpmeet, Mr Nick Ferrari." Having never tuned in to Ask Boris, I'm amazed to see that he deals with the (full) switchboard himself. "We're going to go straight away to the first call," he booms. "It's Gary in Dartford."
You couldn't spoof what follows. Gary begins by talking about the debate, saying that it was so one-sided if it had been a football match, it would surely have been called off at half time. "Are you referring to the epic contest that was refereed by my distinguished confrere here, Mr Nick Ferrari?" asks Johnson. Gary says that he is, and that he thought the "refereeing was fantastic, actually" - to which Johnson replies: "He [Ferrari] is preening himself." And so it goes on. Johnson fields calls on whether he is about to try to become an MP again, on pollution, on the state of the Metropolitan police and on the number of power points available to those with electric cars (to this, he talks bafflingly of a putative electric car-sharing scheme that will involve "beautiful little milk crates"). The climax is theatrical, and comes in the form of a call from Sandra, a member of a group that would like to build a memorial to the 1943 Bethnal Green tube disaster, in which 173 people died in the crush as they tried to take shelter during the blitz. She first called Johnson last month, asking for a donation. Now she's back, and the mayor is able to tell her the happy news that Transport for London has miraculously found pounds 10,000 for her campaign - thus proving, as Ferrari puts it, that he is a "man of his word".
Ferrari's colleagues talk of his relationship with Johnson as a "bromance". But this doesn't quite capture it. They sound to me more like the pair of privately-educated schoolboys they once were, the less posh of the two (Ferrari, who went to Eltham College) trying his best to put on a good show in front of the other (Johnson, as all the world knows, went to Eton). I find this irritating. But what do I know? Ferrari is the host of London's No 1 commercial breakfast show. At LBC, meanwhile, all the talk is of growth. In the capital, the station has a greater market share than its nearest rival, BBC 5 Live (5.6% to 4.3%). In the past five years, LBC has grown its reach by 67% to 5 Live's 7%, and its audience spends longer each week listening to it (10.9 hours compared with 6.7 for 5 Live). These listeners are also - this may surprise you - well-heeled and educated: 61% of the LBC audience is ABC1. No wonder, then, that its bosses are in the business of expansion: on 11 February, LBC, previously a London-only FM station, went national on the DAB network. Its audience (1.3m across Britain at present) is now set to grow exponentially. The challenge will be keeping its London listeners happy without cheesing off those who live elsewhere, though no one at LBC seems to be remotely fazed by this. "I believe speech radio will grow and grow," says James Rea, LBC's managing editor. He attributes its current success to its listeners, who shape its output to an extraordinary degree; to its presenters, who are encouraged to have opinions and "let the wall down" on their own lives; and to its lean structure, which allows it to be vastly more flexible than the BBC, so bureaucratic and so top-heavy. "There's a short chain of command and no agonised editorial meeting about what to drop and how to react," says Rea. "We're ready, we're right here, and we're right now."
After Johnson disappears, bicycle helmet in hand, Ferrari does "reaction" to the phone-in: yes, a phone-in about a phone-in. If anything, his mood is now even more buoyant, his amazing front teeth - so big and white and shiny - flashing happily in the gloom of the studio every couple of minutes. Meanwhile, the mid-morning presenter, James O'Brien, has shuffled in. Like Ferrari, who began his career as a tabloid journalist, O'Brien is an ex-newspaper man (the former show-business editor of the Daily Express) and he, too, has a strangely archaic way of talking, one that belies his age (he is only 42). He will, for instance, ask a male caller what his "good lady wife" feels about this or that issue. But his presentational manner is singular. He sounds - to me, at least - lugubrious, pained, a touch obsessive. He treats his chosen topics like the bones of a Sunday roast, picking off the meat with a thoroughness that can be exhausting. I bumped into him earlier, in the newsroom outside ("WHEN IS JULIAN ASSANGE COMING OUT?" read a pained note scrawled on the office whiteboard), and he'd complained to me that it was a slow day, the major story in the papers being about how many vegetables we should all eat. On the other hand, he also admitted to liking mornings like this: "You drink lots of coffee, read all the papers, see what happens when the red light comes on. . ."
In the end, O'Brien kicks off with betting shops: why, he wants to know, are the poor more likely to spend their money at the bookies? I can't tell whether the air of mystification in his voice is a put-on, but either way, his preamble, punctuated as it is with various red rags - "The poor are different from you and me," he says, at one point - does the trick. The switchboard lights up, and he's off. Some of the calls are moving, one man sounding close to breaking down as he describes his wife's debts, the result of what began as a fondness for internet bingo, and it isn't long before O'Brien is telling his audience sombrely that he is "struggling to hang on to his libertarian credo" so far as betting machines go (callers have identified these as a particular problem). But he sounds pleased, too. LBC presenters make a great show of relishing the idea that the audience has helped them to change their mind. It's a way of underlining to sneery types who assume LBC is just for angry cabbies how articulate their listeners are, and how very knowledgeable.
After the three-hour show is over, O'Brien and I talk. How was it for him? "I'm pleased," he says. "It couldn't have gone much better. We got deep understanding from callers: testimony rather than opinion." He looks knackered, though. Is it tiring, being on the receiving end of so much anger, frustration and sadness? It would make me depressed. "Well, if you ask the right question, you shouldn't get bludgeons coming on," he says. "But even when I do, I'm interested in why they're angry." Has working at LBC - he has been with the station for 10 years - made him more positive or more negative when it comes to the public? "I'm loth to answer that. For every call that saps my will to live, I'll get another one that restores it. The invitation to punch out has been made worryingly irresistible to ordinary, decent people: [think of] the effort that is put in daily to make people blame immigrants or the unemployed for their personal ills. When things get better [economically speaking], it will be easier for them to resist. But what puzzles and fascinates me is why people punch down rather than up."
O'Brien loves the fact that LBC is editorialised like a newspaper; not for him the neutrality of the BBC. "I can talk about what I think and what I know and what I've been through. I can talk about being adopted, having fertility treatment, being in trouble when I was younger." This has a knock-on effect on his audience. "People trust you. One listener decided to call off the 'honour killing' of his daughter, live, on air. Another time, we were talking about allegations of historical sex abuse, asking why people wait so long to come forward. This very tough-sounding fellow rang in and started howling in primal pain. It's not that complicated. It's just company. Everybody likes company, and, if you haven't got the BBC in your blood, you won't have been brainwashed into thinking that impartial company is better than un-impartial company. Imagine you were at a party or a pub and everybody was trying to qualify everything all the time. Actually, impartial company is just weird."
Once upon a time, LBC stood for London Broadcasting Company. Since 2007, however, it has stood for Leading Britain's Conversation - quite a natty bit of rebranding on the part of its marketeers. London's first legal, independent commercial radio station, it launched in 1973 with a roster of presenters and reporters many of whom went on to become well known: Janet Street-Porter, Jon Snow, Jeremy Beadle, Peter Allen (now of 5 Live). Over the years, it has had a series of owners - it almost disappeared in 1993, when the Radio Authority failed to renew its licence - but is now in the hands of Global Radio and broadcasts from the offices in Leicester Square that also house the company's other stations: Capital, Classic FM, XFM, Heart, Gold and Smooth. It's a convivial place to work - the building has what must surely be Britain's best staff canteen in the form of a roof terrace with views out over the Houses of Parliament, Trafalgar Square, the London Eye and the Shard - though there seems to be an awful lot of hot-desking going on, its staff, most of whom look very young, wandering about with their laptops under their arms.
The current incarnation of LBC has a clear bias to the right, for all that James O'Brien insists to me that he is a liberal. It's true that Ken Livingstone co-hosts a Saturday morning show, but among its other high-profile presenters are David Mellor, the former Conservative politician (also Saturday morning); Andrew Pierce, the Daily Mail columnist; and Iain Dale, a publisher who before landing his job at LBC tried and failed to be selected to fight a Conservative parliamentary seat. Women are thin on the ground. Kay Burley, the Sky newsreader, has recently begun co-presenting a Sunday breakfast show. But the only five-day-a-week woman - she does the afternoon show - is Julia Hartley-Brewer, who came to LBC three years ago after leaving the Sunday Express, where she was the political editor.
Is this butch, right-of-centre tone the secret of its current success? The staff insist not, and baulk at comparisons to the US, land of Fox and the shock jock. "I think we need to be clear," says James Rea. "The appetite [in the UK] is not for shock jocks." Hartley-Brewer thinks it has more to do with the end of deference more generally. "The stranglehold of Radio 4 is beginning to break, especially with younger listeners," she says, an enormous smile on her face. "The insulting idea that we know better than you: that's over, and listeners are driving that. They won't allow the entire conversation to be controlled by self-appointed so-called experts. They won't go along with the idea that a teacher doesn't know as much as the education secretary." Isn't it wearing, though, dealing with this particular form of democracy? Many newspaper writers feel ground down by all the interactivity involved in 21st-century journalism. "I've heard this a lot, generally from Radio 4 listeners. There's this snobbery: oh, you can't ask ordinary people what they think because they're all stupid. But you know what? They're not. I do sometimes finish shows absolutely exhausted. But I'm just pleased to have a job that's fun every day. I could be in a factory taking giblets out of a chicken." She gives me a look. "You see, I don't hold my listeners in contempt." Well, I don't hold my readers in contempt. "Yes, you do!" she shouts.
Talk to the presenters, and they'll all tell you the same. First, that they're amazed by how many first-time callers they speak to (LBC makes a point of identifying first-time callers). Second, that they're often on the receiving end of information the caller has never revealed to anyone else. Don't they find this weird? "It is weird," says Hartley-Brewer. "They don't know me, but they think they do. I'd love to know why [they do it]. But it's an art, not a science. Radio is something you do on your own: in the car, in the bedroom late at night. It's one on one, it's personal. They trust you, it's a safe place to talk." The presenters I meet are a preternaturally smiley bunch - they've drunk the LBC Kool-Aid - but their emotions, rather like those of their listeners, are close to the surface. Hartley-Brewer tells me about a phone-in in which she revealed she has suffered four miscarriages: "It took everything I had to keep it together for that hour. The entire office was in tears." Iain Dale gets choked up twice: first, as he describes the call he took from a witness to the murder of Lee Rigby in Woolwich last year, and then as he tells me about a man who rang from the M25 threatening to kill himself. "I've got no training in this," he says. "I was aware not only that I could lose my job, but that he could kill himself and people would blame me." Once he's mastered the wobble in the voice, he adds: "Any presenter who doesn't care should go and do something else!"
All this is very far from the cynicism I was expecting. I had foreseen exploitation of the audience not identification with it. And herein, I think, lies the real reason LBC's ratings are rising. It may well be true that some people are tired of the BBC. It may also be the case that certain sections of the public are delighted to have found a repository for their frustration with the 21st century: a refuge from received opinion, from political correctness, from the cant and dishonesty of public life (LBC and Ukip are both benefiting on this score). Doesn't everyone like a good moan sometimes? But perhaps it's really down to these presenters, fervent as evangelists. They run a kind of radio confession box, and this involves a certain kind of devotion, one they seem to have in spades. "I wish I could have done this 10 years ago," says Dale, as I get up to go. "I'm doing the job I was put on this earth to do." His face is suffused with something quite beyond mere job satisfaction.
Two days later, I return to LBC to watch Ferrari at work with Nick Clegg, the man he has to thank for giving his profile such an extraordinary boost. His relationship with the deputy prime minister is less obviously matey than the one he has with Boris Johnson, and I find the show more enjoyable. Clegg is also, it must be said, charming. It seems that the impetus for the show came as much from Clegg as from LBC - the deputy prime minister knew mayor Bloomberg had done a similar programme in New York - and he is clearly determined to prove that his decision to get involved was the right one.
After the programme is over, Ferrari and I repair to the LBC boardroom. He tells me that he's in a rush; I will have only 10 minutes or so of his time. But in the end, of course, he can't resist the temptation to talk. "I get to tell everyone what I think about the world," he tells me, when I ask why he enjoys his job. "Some people do this on the bus, and they get taken to hospital and put in a secure unit. But I do it, and they put me in a studio and pay me a lot of money." What about other people's opinions? Does he really like hearing those at seven o'clock in the morning? "Yes, I genuinely do like the public." The debate between Clegg and Farage has encouraged him on this score. "By and large, if you went into a pub [before] and said: 'I want to talk about Europe,' you'd have been killed in the stampede to get out. But we've shown that, if you do it in an appealing way, people will engage. It's like the Sun, with the added bonus that people ring in. Politicians know this. When I meet them, the first thing they ask is: what are people calling about?" Ferrari, too, relishes the personal stories people tell him. "We were discussing the Holocaust, and whether we should remember it. A heavily accented woman rang in and said, 'I was at Auschwitz as a 14-year-old.' My God, I said, what was that like for you? 'It was terrible,' she said. I asked her how she explained that to her family, and she said she'd never told anyone before. 'I just think I can trust you,' she said."
How does Ferrari see the future? "This is the best chance speech radio has ever had in this country." Can the station really be as successful across Britain as it is in London? He believes it can, and without losing its heartland in the process. "Harvey Nichols opened in Leeds, but that didn't make the London store any less great, did it? LBC has a clear identity. It knows where it's going. It's well funded. This is an extraordinary moment in its 40-year life, and if you can't enjoy it now, it's best you clear off. [I think he's referring to his fellow presenters rather than to me.] The stranglehold of the BBC is being broken. We're here for you, whether it's a great day, or a dark day."
Captions:
CONVERSATION STARTERS LBC's big names
JULIA HARTLEY- BREWER
Before presenting LBC's weekday afternoon show, Hartley-Brewer was an assistant editor and columnist for the Sunday Express. Memorable on-air moments have included a heated row with the late union boss Bob Crow about the tube strikes and her revelation that she had suffered four miscarriages.
IAIN DALE
When he's not presenting LBC's drive-time show, former financial journalist and political lobbyist Dale is a political commentator and blogger, contributing editor for GQ and publisher of Total Politics magazine. He was also the creator of An Evening With Ann Widdecombe, which toured provincial theatres.
NICK FERRARI
LBC's outspoken morning talkshow host started his career in the tabloid press, with a stint as showbusiness reporter at the Sun. He toyed with the idea of running as Conservative candidate for London mayor, but is now pally with Boris, Johnson, with whom he co-hosts the Ask Boris phone-in.
JAMES O'BRIEN
O'Brien started his career in newspaper journalism, becoming the youngest showbusiness editor in Fleet Street when he worked at the Daily Express
As well as the big political issues, his mid-morning show tackles such niggling questions as: what's the point of the small pocket on your jeans?
'Flying by the seat of his considerable pants': London mayor Boris Johnson live on air.
'Pugilistic confidence': LBC's Nick Ferrari, far left, hosting the debate last month on membership of the EU between Ukip leader Nigel Farage, centre, and Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister. Photograph by Ian West/Getty
PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHERINE ROSE
Document OB00000020140421ea4k0003j
