{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3206"}
____
  
Editorial
THE Word OF Hod
1,024 words
10 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
6
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
70s STAR LABOURER SUPERHOD ON TODAY'S BRICKIES RAKING IN £100K
A GROWING number of brickies are pocketing £100,000 a year in a new building boom due to a shortage of skilled workers.
In the mid-Seventies, the UK's most famous labourer was Max Quarterman, aka Superhod. Hard graft by the plasterer's mate saw his earnings outstrip the £20,000 salary of then PM Harold Wilson. Here, 72-year-old Max gives his verdict on today's builders.
MY motto is: "If I can do it, anyone can."
If you are dedicated to your job, no matter what it is, you will succeed.
I admire the brickies making £100,000 — but I don't envy a single one of them.
You have to be exceptional to earn that much in this trade and those people must be working their socks off.
But it's good to see because we don't have the grafters we used to. That sense of work ethic isn't there any more.
I left school at 14 years old and started work on my 15th birthday.
I couldn't wait to get on the payroll because I dreamed of owning a house and filling it with beautiful things.
At first I couldn't even lift the smallest of hods but I practised in secret and improved each day. I learned my trade on the job and a lot of the work is common sense.
But there should be more apprenticeships in construction, more young people taught to work with their hands.
When I was grafting in the Seventies, Irish immigrants came over and filled the gap in construction labour. They were terrific workers and eventually mixed in with the Brits really well. The eastern Europeans these days work hard and you can't knock them for that. But some progress needs to be made on integrating them into British society.
I have nothing but respect for people who have a dream and pull out all the stops to achieve it.
When I was 13, I would skive off school and wander round Farnham Park golf club near Slough. I used to ogle those big mansions and wonder who on earth could afford to live there. I never had anything growing up and the other kids on the council estate didn't seem to mind it.
But I wanted opulence and a wonderful home.
I was never academic at school, but when it came to working, I just did my best and focused on pay day. I knew the faster I did the job, the more money I would get.
It wasn't rocket science — I made a larger hod and at one point I was carrying more than 16st on my back all day long. If it rained, the others would down tools and go to the pub but I carried on. I didn't stop for fag breaks and I worked ten times faster than everyone else.
I was always a family man too. I wasn't in the pub in the evenings — I was spending time with my wife and children. That way I was always geared up for work the next day.
You must know your limits, though, and not go over them — because if you hurt yourself, you can't earn. But I stuck with it and saved, and if I wanted something extra special, I did overtime.
When I was 33, I told a mate I had my heart set on a new Rolls-Royce and he collapsed with laughter.
That was the spur I needed.
I worked and worked and two years later, on my 35th birthday, I bought it.
Now, the country has been shot to pieces by benefits cheats who can work but are too lazy to lift a finger.
If you want something, you have to earn it.
But it won't fall into your lap from the sky — you have to start at the bottom of the ladder and work your way up.
When the hod got too heavy, I decided to go into property development.
The bank was holding the deeds to my house and if it had gone wrong, we would have lost everything.
But my wife Eileen backed me all the way.
Now I have built half of Slough. And I am living in one of those mansions I used to gawk at as a child.
It's not been an easy journey — it took hard graft and time.
But if you have a dream, go for it.
Anyone who works hard enough is going to succeed.
DO YOU THINK YOU ARE BRITAIN'S BEST BRICKIE?
Then enter our Brickies' Got Talent competition. We are on the hunt for the best bloke - or bird - on the UK's building sites.
Email your name and number, and a short explanation of why you think you're the best brickie in Britain, to features@the-sun.co.uk
HOW HE MADE MILLIONS THROUGH SHEER HOD WORK
1941: Born in Slough, the youngest of eight siblings.
1955: Aged 14, Max leaves school.
1956: Starts work in a metal factory on his 15th birthday. Soon after he moves into construction.
1959: Meets wife Eileen.
1961: Max and Eileen get married but live at their respective parents' houses until they can afford a mortgage.
1970s: Superhod becomes the poster boy for the "can do" culture, earning more than the Prime Minister. At his peak, he is pulling in £1,500 a week.
1974: A friend laughs in his face when he says he wants to purchase a new Rolls-Royce.
1976: He buys the Rolls.
1987: Max takes a risk and goes into property development.
EARLY 1990s: Recession hits the UK, killing the market for mansions, so Superhod moves into developing starter homes which "sold like hot cakes".
2014: With three grown-up kids and eight grandchildren, Max is retired and lives in a mansion in Slough. He is estimated to be worth around £8million.
AUGUST 2014: Max and Eileen will celebrate their 53rd wedding anniversary.
I have built half of Slough
Document THESUN0020140410ea4a00086
