{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3465"}
____
  
News
Cardinal Nichols is soft on immigration because his Church benefits from it
By Cristina Odone   
448 words
22 April 2014
12:51
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Cardinal Vincent Nichols condemns politicians who use "alarmist" language in the immigration debate. We know who he has in his sights because Ukip has just unveiled its anti-immigration poster campaign: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?" with a big index finger pointing at the reader.
I agree with the Cardinal, in principle: politicians should beware of stoking fear and loathing. Portraying the Poles, Irish and Indians who settle here as takers rather than givers is wrong. One in seven UK companies is run by a migrant entrepreneur. Polish entrepreneurs have boosted the economy in the West Midlands, while over 100,000 Britons are employed by Indian-owned companies in this country. And as for benefits, the scroungers are more likely to be home-made, not imported, as Ukip would have you believe.
The leader of the Catholic Church in England and Wales knows his stats better than Nigel Farage, it would seem. But the Cardinal's avowed "respect" for immigrants is rooted in one statistic in particular: immigrants have filled church pews and swollen church coffers.
Until recently, church attendance in Britain was slipping dramatically – thanks in part to public revulsion at the paedophile priest scandals. Immigrants changed all this. The influx of Poles and other Eastern Europeans reversed the trend in Catholic churches across the country, while Africans flocked to the Evangelical churches (though many are also Catholic). Today, more than one million Christians from ethnic minorities worship in Britain.
Britain's multiculturalism is nowhere more in evidence than in its religious life. The atheist lobby would never admit it, but you will encounter more tolerance in the house of God than in the favoured settings of the humanist elite. Look at the university campuses and the north London suburbs the "establishment" regard as their natural stamping ground. Across campuses, anti-Muslim or anti-Christian campaigns are being waged by young atheist fundamentalists. In what should be the training grounds of young minds, bigoted hostility to religious values and rituals prevails: just ask pro-lifers at UCL, who were forced by their student union to invite pro-choice advocates to their meetings.
Or let's take the salons of Hampstead. Here, a former Government Minister found chatter so routinely hostile to Islam that even she felt unwelcome.
The Churches have been generous about immigrants (Cardinal Nichols's predecessor even called for an amnesty for illegal immigrants)because it is in their interest to do so.As a result, churches are rainbow-coloured and multi-cultural, while the atheist lobby remains monochrome.
 
 
Document TELUK00020140422ea4m002e5
