{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3382"}
____
  
Guardian Family Pages
Family: Snapshot My 1950s rockabilly dad
619 words
17 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
6
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
It's 1958, I'm six years old and posing in our backyard with my rockabilly dad while my mother operates the Brownie camera that commits this image to our family history. Dad has just come home from work in this photo. This is his usual look: very stylish, a typically 50s hairdo with a pompadour at the front and a DA down the back. Perhaps uncommonly, for the 50s, he took care of his physique by weight training, boxing, cycling and swimming.
Dad is a working-class chap, becomes a big union supporter and shop steward in his local chapter. But he's not a teddy boy and he doesn't hang out with a gang attacking immigrants. He's on shift work at United Dairies so he works nights some weeks and I don't see him very often. He even works on Christmas Day, so I open my presents at about 4am so that he can see me before he leaves.
We live in a basement flat in north Paddington, London where, despite the damp, we are fortunate to have a decent landlady and a fair rent as we are sitting tenants. Nearby, the infamous landlord Peter Rachman, owns much of the housing and is notorious for his abuse of tenants, many of whom are newly arrived from the Caribbean. The whole area is troubled with undercurrents of racial unrest. There is hostility among the white working classes towards the new West Indian community culminating in race riots just down the road from us in Notting Hill.
I'm blissfully unaware of this racial tension as my friends in the street are a mix of Irish, Nigerian and West Indian as well as white British. We all rub along just fine - I eat their food in their houses and receive invitations to their birthday parties - and vice versa. Round the corner live a beatnik couple. They worry my parents as they are long-haired (therefore dirty) and always wear black. I have no idea what a beatnik is, but they look arty, intelligent and interesting.
There is a vast amount of music around me. Our West Indian neighbours throw open the windows on a Friday evening and the partying begins to the rhythm of the Blue Beat. I can see the dancers inside upstairs and others spill out on to the front steps. Upstairs in our house there is an Irish family in residence, a band of four brothers and their singing sister, Biddy - they treat us to traditional Irish songs into the early hours or until my dad asks them to wind it up if it's a school night.
Where music is concerned, my rockabilly dad is no exception. He plays a mean harmonica and jew's harp and plays on an improvised drum kit. We love the rock'n'roll and skiffle of the 50s so I grow up on a diet of Elvis, Little Richard and Buddy Holly followed by Cliff, Tommy Steele and others. It's great fun having young parents who dance and sing. We like the harmonies of the Everly Brothers and the Dallas Boys. Sometimes, in our backyard, we have our own skiffle band and we sing and play Lonnie Donegan-style numbers, like Tom Dooley and Cumberland Gap. We play a washboard with a thimble and a double bass made from a tea chest, broom handle and a piece of string.
If I had to put my finger on it, I'd say that the strongest influence from my 50s childhood led me to become a beatnik - or a hippy, as it turned out. Sorry, Dad . . .
Christine Seal
Document GRDN000020140516ea5h0006t
