{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3291"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Opinion poll: Fans of Farage more likely to feel alienated and angry
Patrick Wintour Political editor   
627 words
15 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
13
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Ukip voters are more distrusting, angrier and pessimistic than other voters, according to a unique Guardian look into the mindset of the party's supporters that reveals the extent to which resentment of immigration dominates their concerns.
Of those planning to vote for Nigel Farage's UK Independence party in next week's European elections, 67% are more likely than the average Briton to say they feel "alienated", 47% more likely to feel "ignored" and 35% more likely to be "angry". They are 47% less likely to feel "hopeful". Only 3% of Ukip supporters say that they trust politicians and only 10% trust the government, compared with 8% and 15% respectively for other people.
The research, by Opinium for the Guardian among 2,000 voters last week, showed 92% of those planning to vote Ukip in the European polls agree with the statement "mass immigration is making parts of the UK unrecognisable and like a foreign land" while 81% believe that immigration from Europe has been bad for the UK.
Immigration remains the dominant issue for Ukip voters at the European election; 74% of Ukip voters say immigration is an important issue compared with 47% of all voters. Three-quarters of new Ukip supporters cite immigration as the chief reason for Farage's party, and not Europe. On average, Ukip supporters believe that 38% of the UK population are immigrants.
Ukip voters believe that immigration from the EU has had a negative impact on virtually every aspect of UK life, from housing (87%), welfare (85%), population (84%), health (80%), education (80%), jobs (80%), crime (79%) and values (78%).
It comes as Ukip has been accused of peddling scare stories after its core European campaign message was damaged by statistics showing the number of immigrants from the Balkans had fallen since labour restrictions were lifted in January.
Ukip has insisted that lifting border controls on 27 million Romanian and Bulgarian citizens would lead to a flood of new migrants to the UK, but instead the number fell by 4,000 in the first quarter.
Both the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats mounted their most fiercely worded attacks on Ukip with Anna Soubry, junior defence minister, accusing Ukip of making "wild and absolutely offensive claims". She added "These figures just show that Ukip preys on people's fears, it preys on prejudices in many people."
Damian Green, police minister, claimed Ukip was increasing its scaremongering. Vince Cable, business secretary, said the figures vindicated those calling "for calm about scare stories of plane loads of Bulgarians arriving". A Liberal Democrat video highlighted racist Islamophobic statements by Ukip supporters, asking: "Are you going to let these people win?"
According to the Guardian poll, institutions that Ukip supporters are most likely to trust are the monarchy (56%) and the NHS (48%). However, with the exception of the monarchy and tabloid newspapers, Ukip supporters are less likely than the average Briton to trust a range of institutions, including trade unions (35% less likely to trust than average Britons), the judiciary and courts (34% less likely), banks (29% less likely) police (24% less likely) and UK universities (17% less likely). The polling is based on a sample of 2,027 adults interviewed on 7-9 May .
The alienation and distrust revealed in the poll underlines the struggle politicians from the main parties face in trying to convince Ukip supporters that Farage is making simplistic or untruthful claims.
The Guardian research comes as an Ipsos-Mori poll showed Nigel Farage's own personal satisfaction ratings have fallen back by seven points since April, with a net dissatisfaction rating of -11, only two points better than David Cameron.
Document GRDN000020140514ea5f0009c
