{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1268"}
____
  
3,000 NZ visas granted to Britons helping to rebuild; More skilled construction workers from the UK have moved to Christchurch to repair the earthquake damage than from any other nation
By Elizabeth Roberts   
461 words
28 February 2014
16:29
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nearly 3,000 UK construction workers have been granted New Zealand visas in the three years since the earthquakes in Christchurch – more than any other nationality.
The majority are based in Christchurch, working on long-term rebuilding projects following the quake, which killed 185 people on February 22 2011 and caused an estimated NZ$40 billion (£20 billion) damage.
The figures were released by Immigration New Zealand ( newzealandnow.govt.nz ) ahead of expos to be held in Manchester, Dublin and London during March.
"The scale of the work required in the Christchurch area in the coming years means that recruiting from overseas will continue to be a priority for Immigration New Zealand," said a spokeswoman.
"The list of skill shortages currently includes carpenters, drain layers, forepersons, engineers, surveyors and project managers."
The New Zealand construction sector is now experiencing unprecedented growth, added the spokeswoman.
"In 2016, the estimated total value of construction activity is expected to be nearly NZ$32 billion (£16 billion). That’s 23 per cent higher than the previous peak in 2007, meaning that there are a number of long-term opportunities available for skilled British workers," she said.
The full list is available at skillshortages.immigration.govt.nz .
Stephen Holder, from Brighton, Sussex, moved to New Zealand a year ago to work as a project manager on the Christchurch rebuilding effort. He was attracted by the country’s unspoilt landscape, low population and varied outdoor activities.
"With the events that befell Christchurch there appeared to be a clear need for people with good construction experience and I felt compelled to be a part of the rebuild process," added Mr Holder.
Roger Stone, from Walsall, West Midlands, moved to Christchurch 18 months ago. He also works on the rebuilding project as a manager.
"We wanted a better lifestyle, a better work-life balance, a safer more friendly place to live and work, a better climate and a more active outdoor lifestyle," he said of his family’s decision to move.
"I wanted to be part of the earthquake rebuild in Christchurch so I could make a difference for future generations."
As well as opportunities in the construction industry, the expos will feature recruiters from a number of other sectors including health care.
The first will be held at the Mercure Manchester Piccadilly Hotel on March 15 and 16. Another will be held at the Clyde Court Hotel in Dublin on March 19. The final expo will be held at the ILEC Conference Centre at the Ibis London, Earls Court, on March 22 and 23.
Document TELUK00020140228ea2s00568
