{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1372"}
____
  
NEWS
Pass the 'dawicki', I want to have a 'snoozywatch'; New slang words have emerged, often developed within families to describe items such as the remote control, and make mundane conversations more interesting
By Claire Carter   
352 words
2 March 2014
12:22
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Next time you are watching television with the family you may be asked to pass the 'dawicki' or make a cup of 'splosh.
For a “snoozywatch" on a Sunday afternoon is becoming as commonplace as having to clean out the “groolgrums" from the sink.
The emerging form of slang, frequently used around the kitchen table according to linguists, is largely being used in the family home across generations, instead of by teenagers to exclude adults.
The words, such as ‘groolgrums’ which refers to pieces of food left in the sink or ‘snoozywatch’ which is falling asleep in front of the TV, are said to have evolved as families look to make everyday conversations more enjoyable.
“One associated with enclosed communities such as the prison, the army barracks, the factory floor and the older public schools, more recently slang has escaped its boundaries and is running wild," Tony Thorne of King’s College London told the Sunday Times.
Hundreds of newly invented words have been uncovered – including more than 57 for the ‘dawicki’, or remote control.
Experts said immigration policies and the use of English around the world have exposed it to other influences which have led to a new category of informal speech being established.
Many of the words still come from young people, often inspired by street jargon used in the Caribbean, which has brought phrases such as “choong" and “peng", meaning attractive, to the UK.
While slang has often been considered a way of eroding the traditional English language, Mr Thorne said the creativity required to use such words shows some people who use them are actually more literate.
Winchester University ran the English project to catalogue the family slang words, finding many were inspired by the sound the objects make themselves.
Prof Mark Pagel, an evolutionary biologist, said while there was nothing necessarily inferior about slang, it “doesn’t cross boundaries very well."
Document TELUK00020140302ea32003mo
