{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3709"}
____
  
News
Critics round on Charles after he compares Putin to Hitler
Valentine Low   
471 words
22 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
7
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Prince of Wales was accused yesterday of "abusing his position" after his remarks comparing Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler divided politicians.
A Labour MP called for him to "abdicate", while a Russian newspaper said that his remarks risked "triggering an international scandal".
Although a Liberal Democrat peer said that the prince was interfering in Anglo-Russian relations, Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister, said that the heir to the throne should be "free to express himself".
The prince, who is due to join the Russian president at the commemorations to mark the 70th anniversary of D-Day in a fortnight's time, reportedly made his comment during a tour of the Canadian Museum of Immigration in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Marienne Ferguson, a Jewish volunteer at the museum, told the prince how she fled to Canada with her family shortly before the Nazis annexed Gdansk in Poland in 1939.
After the meeting, Mrs Ferguson, 78, said: "The prince said 'And now Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler' ." Mike Gapes, a Labour MP and member of the foreign affairs committee, tweeted: "If Prince Charles wants to make controversial statements on national or international issues, he should abdicate and stand for election. Monarchy should be seen and not heard." Mr Clegg told the Breakfast programme on BBC One: "I have never been of this view that if you are a member of the royal family, you have to enter into some Trappist vow of silence. I think he is entitled to his views."
Although David Cameron refused to comment, Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, told Sky News: "I think lots of people ... will share Prince Charles's concern about President Putin and his actions in Ukraine." Both the prince and Mr Putin are due to attend the international ceremony marking the anniversary of D-Day at Sword Beach on June 6, along with the Queen and President Obama. Clarence House said there were no plans for the two to meet.
Dmitry Peskov, Mr Putin's spokesman, refused to discuss the issue. However, the popular Russian daily MoskovskiJ Komsomolets said the prince's remarks risked "triggering an international scandal".
Lord Taverne, the Lib Dem peer, told The World At One that the prince had abused his position. He said: "He is entitled to his private views, but he has abused his position. You can't have a monarch in a constitutional monarchy who seems to take sides on controversial issues. The Putin incident is very serious because this is a case of interfering with Anglo-Russian relations." The Russian embassyhas demanded a meeting with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office over the comments. The deputy Russian ambassador is due to meet a Foreign Office official today. World, page 30
Document T000000020140522ea5m000bx
