{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3314"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Aherne recovering from lung cancer treatment: Star joins drive to improve patients' care in home city: Third battle with disease for Royle Family creator
Hannah Ellis-Petersen   
541 words
14 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
5
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Caroline Aherne, the award winning actor and comedian, disclosed yesterday that she is recovering from treatment for lung cancer.
Aherne, who co-wrote, directed and starred in The Royle Family, revealed she has been undergoing treatment in her home city of Manchester. It is the 50-year-old's third battle with the disease, having been born with a rare form of retina cancer and later receiving treatment for bladder cancer.
She made the diagnosis public before her launch next month of the Macmillan Cancer Improvement Partnership, which will bring together all cancer care providers in Manchester with a view to improving support for cancer patients.
In a statement, she said: "I've had cancer and my brother's had cancer and we know how it affects people. It's brilliant that all these big institutions want to make cancer care better for Manchester people, but even the best doctors, nurses and managers on Earth aren't going to be able to understand what needs improving unless people affected by cancer in Manchester get involved and tell them what needs to change."
She continued: "They've asked me to get involved and I'm really glad that I can do my bit to encourage Manchester people to speak up about where things do go wrong with cancer care."
The daughter of Irish immigrants Bert and Maureen, Aherne grew up on a council estate in Wythenshawe, in the south of Manchester, and her first job was answering telephones at BBC offices in the city. Her comedy creations have also included the spoof chatshow host Mrs Merton.
Both Aherne and her older brother Patrick were born with a rare form of retina cancer which she was treated for into her 20s. She then underwent treatment for bladder cancer, the same disease that later took the life of her boyfriend, Matt Bower, in 1997.
Aherne, who has been a smoker, has also spoken of her battles with depression and alcohol following the breakdown of her marriage to musician Peter Hook, the death of her father, and struggles with fame. She spent time at the Priory clinic before moving to Australia to escape the public eye.
She recently made her return to TV, however, as the narrator of the popular Channel 4 show Gogglebox. She said in her statement yesterday: "I will be narrating this week's Gogglebox, and I will continue to narrate Gogglebox for as long as Gogglebox want me."
Nicola Cook, of Macmillan Cancer Support, said she was delighted by Aherne's involvement in the new cancer partnership. "We know that its success hinges on the involvement of people affected by cancer in Manchester," she said.
"Caroline's one of Manchester's own - she's loved here and people identify with her. We hope that if people see that Caroline is sitting down and talking to us then maybe they'll know that they can too."
Captions:
Caroline Aherne, currently narrator of Channel 4's Gogglebox, said she would continue with the show 'for as long as Gogglebox want me' Photograph: Empics
Document GRDN000020140514ea5e0001k
