{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2737"}
____
  
News
Farage v Clegg: Farage won easily. On Europe, his argument is now the one to beat
By Tim Stanley   
655 words
2 April 2014
21:55
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
I’ve been too cynical about these debates: tonight’s was brilliant. How exciting to see two people, representing opposite ends of our political divide, actually discussing competing visions for what Britain is and what it should be. On the one side, Clegg represents the entire establishment: Conservative, Labour and that other party whose name I forget. They are economically liberal, pro-EU, culturally progressive. On the other side, Farage speaks for everyone who looks at the establishment and finds it alien. They are economically populist, anti-EU and culturally traditionalist. Britain is increasingly no longer divided by Left v Right but by establishment v populists. It’s an exciting moment in our politics – and we have the promise of an EU referendum to thank for it.
Farage won. Oh, his answers were glib and simplistic; many of his policies are unreal and lacking in substance. But time and time again, he hit Clegg on the things that strike people as vital. On immigration: open borders benefit the rich and hurt the poor competing for jobs and services. On Europe: it has become too distant, too big, too centralising, yet too incompetent to justify its power. And on foreign policy, too, he landed a powerful blow. The orthodoxy in Westminster might be that Putin is evil and needs putting in his place, but most Brits just don’t care. Undeniably, the Russian leader has done terrible things and his position regarding Syria and Ukraine is disreputable. But what Clegg doesn’t seem to understand – and Farage does – is that most voters are weary of Britain and its allies playing the world’s policemen. We’ve gone to war in Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya, and many people now want to give peace a chance. Oddly, Clegg tried to suggest that Farage’s legitimate opposition to EU expansion into Ukraine was “conspiracy thinking” and even a hint of mental instability. Actually, it’s the opinion of a great many members of the respectable media (myself included) and is largely rooted in cold, hard, unpleasant facts. Likewise, Clegg窶冱 insistence that the EU doesn窶冲 want an army is untrue. It does – and Clegg’s coalition partner, David Cameron, is to be thanked for trying to stop it.
Two observations about the politics of the debate. First, it resembled an American presidential contest. Both men talked about their values, their CVs, their party’s manifestos. This highlights the mistake that Miliband and Cameron made in refusing to engage in the discussion. Both Clegg and Farage’s profiles will have been elevated by the contest; they have been allowed to define the terms of the coming Euro elections.
Second, Farage’s profile will have been elevated the most. In the first debate, he was sweaty and shouty. In this one, he was cool and in command and looked – in American presidential language – like the incumbent. What the visuals confirm is that Ukip is capturing an important part of the political zeitgeist. On the European issue, it is no longer a party of single-issue fruitcakes but instead the argument to beat. This is a revolutionary change from just four years ago.
How did a Right-wing party comprised largely of middle-class Tory defectors become Britain’s largest populist movement? Why does no such force exist on the Left? And when will the three main parties stop competing to dominate a shrinking centre-ground and start reaching out to the pockets of anti-establishment feeling that seem increasingly alienated from Westminster? This debate gave me hope that Britain is still capable of debating fundamental issues. What’s worrying is that the beneficiary remains Ukip, and not any of the mainstream parties whose historical duty it is to represent and govern the country to the best of their many abilities.
Document TELUK00020140402ea42004ed
