{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1739"}
____
  
Business
Gloria Minghella
1,029 words
17 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
50
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Matriarch of an Italian ice cream-making dynasty who was a stalwart of many Isle of Wight charities
Fondly nicknamed "the Queen Mum of the Isle of Wight" Gloria Minghella, matriarch of the island's most famous creative family and founder of the award-winning Minghella ice cream company, dedicated more than 60 years to the business of serving others.
During her working life she handed out knickerbocker glories and advice from a buzzing café on Ryde high street, the hub of the gelateria she and her husband Edward, both of Italian descent, established in 1950. In later years she was a mayor, magistrate and deputy lieutenant of the island; one of the first female prison volunteers, an energetic fundraiser, and instigator of the Isle of Wight's first Citizens Advice Bureau. In 2007 she was appointed MBE for her commitment to charity.
Her five talented children grew up in and out of ice-cream vans. Minghella's eldest son, Anthony (obituary, March 19, 2008), theOscar-winning director of The English Patient, Cold Mountain and Breaking and Entering began his relationship with Hollywood selling tubs of Minghella's goods at the cinema next door to his parents' café.
When he held aloft his Academy Award in 1997 he declared it a great day for the Isle of Wight. Minghella whipped up a new flavour — "Champagne Celebration" — to mark the occasion. For the London premiere of The Talented Mr Ripley they made "Ripley's Downfall", which consisted of caramel pieces in dark chocolate.
The family were heartbroken when Anthony died suddenly in 2008, aged 54, of a hemorrhage after surgery for throat cancer. Anthony likened the experience of working on a busy film set to the Minghella family kitchen, also the restaurant kitchen, where "every single person or event, every tragedy, every crisis, every failure, every piece of mischief, every regret was played out in public".
Minghella's daughter Loretta, a lawyer and chief executive of Christian Aid, said her parents would work "29 hours a day, eight days a week". Meal times were noisy: "family, friends, waifs and strays, everyone would be round the table together in the shop. We have a very strong sense of family but a strong sense of being part of a much bigger community." Minghella's second son, Dominic, is a television screenwriter, best known for the series Doc Martin, her eldest daughter Gioia runs the family ice cream business and Edana is a jazz singer.
Gloria Alberta Acari was born in 1930 in Leeds to an Italian immigrant family originally from Valvori, a village near Monte Cassino. After her parents' marriage broke down, she and her sisters Betty and Leonora were brought up by her mother Louisa at a time when there was much stigma attached to fatherless families. She later said: "In those days broken families and dysfunctional families didn't exist. We were regarded as secondclass citizens." The girls helped their mother run a café in Glasgow during the war. They were musical and would sing to entertain customers, mostly servicemen. Minghella went to a convent school, later expressing regret that she left education in her teens — "I would have loved to have been either a lawyer or a writer" — and was exceptionally proud that her children went into both professions.
The Acari family moved to Ryde in 1947 to take over the Mayfayre café. Here she met Edward Minghella at a Christmas Eve dance. He impressed her with his knowledge of Dickens, despite never having had a formal education, and they were married in 1950.
In an interview 57 years later Minghella said of her husband "he remains as fascinating to me as at the first moment." Though Edward Minghella had been brought up on a buffalo farm in Italy, he learnt to be a master gelatier in the Italian community of Portsmouth. Serving from Gloria's mother's café and a small fleet of vans, he and his new wife introduced exotic ice cream to the people of Ryde at a time when it was only ever eaten in one flavour. Minghella's, made of milk and cream from Channel Island cows direct from Isle of Wight farms, now offers more than 200 varieties and exclusively stocks Fortnum &Mason.
From the beginning, though, the café was more than just a place to get a cone for the beach. Minghella said of its early days: "People would talk to Edward and me about their problems — matrimonial and financial, or family or a neighbour dispute, and of course we'd never turn anyone away. We took them ourselves to lawyers. It was a café very much known as a place where people could get help."
When her third child had left for university, Minghella decided to volunteer as a visitor at Parkhurst prison. The prisoners rejected her at first but she persisted for ten years and said the experience of advising those struggling was very rewarding. Already a local councillor, she was asked to become a magistrate and believed she could use what she had learnt talking to prisoners to "contribute something extra".
She was involved in introducing what became the Isle of Wight's Citizens Advice Bureau after spotting an appeal in the newspaper for help to create a centre for people in distress.
After her sister Leonora died from motor neurone disease, Minghella set up the Isle of Wight Motor Neurone Disease Association to give carers and sufferers information and support. She endorsed many other causes including Friends of St Mary's Hospital, the Historical Ryde Society, the Island Dance and Drama Festival and the Isle of Wight Catholic History Society. Each year she could be found cheerfully shaking a collection tin at the Ryde Carnival.
Her philosophy of life was simple: "You put in what you can, no matter how little that is, you don't know how far the ripples will go."
Gloria Minghella, MBE, ice-cream maker, was born on October 20, 1930. She died on March 27, 2014, aged 83
She handed out knickerbocker glories from the family's café
The Minghella family introduced exotic flavours to the people of Ryde
Document T000000020140417ea4h0005z
