{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1251"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Politics: Merkel hints at EU treaty change but warns Cameron to rein in ambitions: Deal doable but not a piece of cake, says chancellor: Downing Street welcomes signals as 'realistic'
Nicholas Watt, Chief political correspondent   
798 words
28 February 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
7
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Angela Merkel has taken the first tentative steps towards outlining a modest framework for negotiations to persuade British voters to remain within the EU, in an
in-out referendum which David Cameron will call by the end of 2017 if he wins next year's general election.
The German chancellor, who pleaded with Britain in a speech to a joint session of parliament yesterday to remain a "strong voice" within the EU, declared in Downing Street that a deal was "doable" though she warned that the negotiations would not be a "piece of cake".
Merkel said that Britain would have to win the support of the 27 other leaders of the EU, and added: "If one wants Britain to remain in the EU, which is what I want, if one at the same time wants a competitive union that generates growth, one can find common solutions."
But she moved to inject a dose of reality by saying that her main priority was to strengthen the euro - by ensuring monetary union was matched by an economic union among eurozone members - with "clear-cut and resilient architecture". The chancellor indicated that this would involve treaty change. But in a warning to Cameron, who would like to use such negotiations to table his demands, she said this would be limited and would leave little room for special treatment for one member state. Merkel said: "I believe we need to adapt the legal foundations of the monetary union in a limited, targeted and speedy way to stabilise the union for the long term."
MPs and peers laughed as Merkel, who recalled her first visit to London in the spring of 1990 shortly after the fall of the Berlin Wall, said those expecting a "fundamental reform of the European architecture" in Britain's direction would be disappointed. Opening her speech at the Palace of Westminster in English, Merkel said: "I have been told many times during the last few days that there are very special expectations of my speech here today. Supposedly, or so I have heard, some expect my speech to pave the way for a fundamental reform of the European architecture, which will satisfy all kinds of alleged or actual British wishes. I am afraid they are in for a disappointment."
Downing Street was delighted with the signals from Merkel, which it regarded as helpful but realistic. The prime minister said: "I believe that what I am setting out, the sort of changes Britain wants to see to build confidence in our membership of this organisation, are possible and deliverable and doable."
But Douglas Alexander, the shadow foreign secretary, who met Merkel with Ed Miliband, said: The gap between what Chancellor Merkel was offering, and what [Cameron's] eurosceptic backbenchers are demanding remains as wide as ever."
The visit by Merkel was the most significant intervention by a German chancellor in London since Helmut Schmidt pleaded with the Labour party to embrace the European project in a speech at Methodist Central Hall, Westminster, before the 1975 EEC referendum. Merkel kicked off her day with a speech to a joint session of parliament in the royal gallery, which is decorated with the Daniel Maclise portrait of the meeting of the Duke of Wellington and the Prussian field marshal Blucher before the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo.
Merkel, whose warm welcome contrasted with the low-key reception for the French president, Francois Hollande, at last month's Anglo-French summit at RAF Brize Norton, headed after her speech to Downing Street for a brief meeting with Nick Clegg. The prime minister then hosted a lunch for Merkel which included a main course of Newlyn stone bass.
Merkel made clear at a joint press conference with Cameron that she was prepared to help Britain - while stressing that her patience was finite - as she outlined a framework for the negotiations. These will cover:
* A renewed focus on the claiming of benefits by migrants within the EU. Merkel made clear she would resist any attempt to restrict freedom of movement within the EU. But she added: "Is immigration into social security possible? No country in Europe would be able to withstand such an onslaught because we have very different social security systems."
* Assurances that EU members outside the eurozone would not be outmanoeuvred in the single market.
Captions:
Merkel, pictured with the Queen at Buckingham Palace, said Britain should remain a strong voice in the EU but there was little room for special treatment Photo: Reuters
A welcome in Downing Street; and Merkel after her address to parliament
Document GRDN000020140228ea2s0001h
