{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2369"}
____
  
NEWS
'Crisis' warning as up to four in 10 refused first choice primary school
By Graeme Paton Education Editor   
1,003 words
16 April 2014
18:18
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Figures show four in 10 children were rejected from their first choice primary school in parts of England – and some were allocated no place at all – as experts warned that record numbers of parents were preparing to appeal
Up to four in 10 children missed out on their first choice primary school in parts of England while hundreds of pupils were not allocated places at all.
There were warnings of a mounting admissions "crisis" as figures show that almost 40 per cent of infants in parts of the country failed to secure places at the main school of their choice.
Officials were also warned to brace themselves for a surge in the number of official appeals.
 >> Primary school admissions: the appeals process 
In some areas pupils were not allocated any places at all, including 75 infants in one area alone, it emerged.
One admissions expert told how some parents were being forced to make do with schools two or three miles away despite living within a few hundred metres of the gates of a state primary, leaving them “distraught”.
For the first time, allocations for 600,000 children entering reception classes were published at the same time on Wednesday as part of national “offer day” for primaries.
Data obtained by the Telegraph showed an overall rise in the number of four-year-olds entering the education system this year. It has been put down to a spike in the birth rate combined with the effect of immigration in some areas.
Nationally, more than half of local authorities reported a decline in the number of parents securing their preferred school for children this year compared with 2013, with parts of the south hit hardest.
The disclosure prompted warnings that more parents were preparing to lodge official appeals against allocations. Numbers are expected to dramatically eclipse the 31,150 made in 2010/11, when the last national figures were published.
The Government insists £5 billion will spent over the course of this parliament to expand primary schools, with 260,000 extra places being created to date.
Ministers have blamed Labour for the shortfall, insisting the party failed to address the looming crisis when it was in power.
But Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, said an increase in the number of academies and free schools – state-funded institutions run free of local authority control – made it harder for councils to plan primary provision.
“We know that there is a present and growing crisis in primary school places,” she said. “We know that the government – for all the money they are throwing at the problem – haven’t got the mechanism or ability to plan school provision where it is needed.”
Graham Jones, an education consultant, who helps families challenge admissions rulings, said: “It’s been my busiest day ever.
“We’ve had parents shocked and distraught to miss out on the school 500 metres away only to be allocated one two or three miles down the road. You expect to travel for a secondary school, but not a primary.”
John Chard, head of School Appeals, said: “I would imagine that we’re going to see an increase in appeals, particularly in these pinch points where there’s not enough primary school places.”
Research by the Telegraph found that:
- Nationally, around one-in-seven pupils – 86,000 – is likely to have missed out on their first choice school;
- The squeeze on places was more pronounced in the south, with fewer pupils secured their first choice school in Brighton, Bristol, East Sussex, Essex, Kent, Milton Keynes, North Somerset, Poole and Wiltshire;
- In Poole, Dorset, the number of pupils rejected from their first choice school more than doubled from seven to 16 per cent in just a year after application numbers surged by just over 11 per cent to almost 1,700;
- Overall, the rejection rate was highest in London where 19 per cent of pupils failed to get their first choice – the same as last year, despite applications rising by 3,000 overall. In Kensington and Chelsea, west London, 38 per cent failed to get into their first choice primary this year, up from 35 per cent in 2013, while 23 per cent were rejected from at least three favoured schools;
- In the Midlands, Derbyshire, Dudley, Solihull, Northamptonshire, Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire also reported fewer first choice allocations, while numbers also fell in some northern authorities such as Liverpool, Wakefield, Knowsley and County Durham.
- Some areas confirmed a number of children had been given no place at all, including 75 in Richmond upon Thames, 26 in Camden and 10 in Somerset;
- But more children gained places at their preferred primary school in several council areas – particularly in the north and Midlands – including Stoke, Rutland, North East Lincolnshire, Middlesbrough, Darlington and Bury.
A spokesman for the Department for Education said: "We are increasing the number of good school places by tackling underperformance and opening new free schools and academies. We have also more than doubled to £5bn the funding available to councils to create new school places, and are allowing good schools to expand without the restrictions and bureaucracy they faced in the past.
"This has already led to the creation of 260,000 new school places - all of which are in areas where there is a shortage of places.”
He added: "In addition we are making the admissions process far simpler for parents. For the first time we have introduced a single national offer day for primary schools so parents will no longer have to negotiate with different councils deciding on places on different days.”
Tristram Hunt, Labour Shadow Education Secretary, said: “David Cameron is failing in his first duty in education: to provide enough good places for every child.
“He has prioritised his free school programme, which has diverted two-thirds of new places away from areas most in need of primary school places.”
Document TELUK00020140416ea4g004sa
