{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3479"}
____
  
News
Say you're guy to say[...]
MATT WILKINSON   
354 words
22 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
2; National
15
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
BRIT ANARCHISTS' ASYLUM ADVICE
BRITISH anarchists are encouraging illegal immigrants to claim they are GAY if they are collared by border officials.
A Sun investigation found activists in Calais coaching illegals on what lies to tell if they are caught in the UK.
At one meeting, an anarchist ringleader called Joy told a man from Ghana: "If you say 'I come to England to find work for a better life' this will be no good — they will deport you.
"Maybe if you say you're homosexual, then this is a good story to claim asylum — because in Ghana they are going to kill you straight away if you're homosexual." Sun reporters tracked down the activists from No Borders — which is anti-immigration controls — to squats near the Calais ferry link to Dover.
We were introduced to Brits Joy, Daisy and Tracy who invited an undercover reporter — posing as a Sikh from India — to attend an asylum coaching session.
Joy — a man who said he was born in East London — took our reporter through the UK Border Agency's asylum forms.
He explained: "You need to say 'I come to England because if I go back to India I will die or be tortured or bad things will happen'." People attending the two-hour session were told to get fake UK passports in order to open bank accounts and advised to BURN off fingerprints to conceal their real identities They were even offered a knife so that if they hid inside a soft-sided lorry they could cut their way out once in Britain.
Joy added: "If they open the door to the f***ing lorry, just run." He also suggested sob stories to give border officials — including pretending to be a persecuted Muslim. Asked about No Borders, Joy said the group was "not strictly legal", adding: "It's more a revolutionary organisation."
Charlie Elphicke, Tory MP for Dover, said: "These people are guilty of trying to undermine our borders and subvert national security. They should be arrested." matt.wilkinson@ the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUN0020140422ea4m000ca
