{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1360"}
____
  
Features
If you want to improve social mobility, Mr Cameron, dish out new genes
Harry Mount   
1,480 words
2 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
7
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
People in the Middle Ages had more chance of improving their station than we do. Bad news for the Tory toffs trying to rebrand themselves as the party for aspirational workers, writes Harry Mount
Sir John Major left office less than 17 years ago, but already he seems some rare relic of a long-lost meritocratic age. The impoverished young Major left grammar school at 16 with three O-levels and rose to become prime minister — and the last Conservative leader to win a general election outright. No wonder the Tory party — constantly dogged by accusations of public-school elitism — is trying to rebuild itself in his image.
Last week Grant Shapps, the Conservative chairman, appeared alongside Major to rebrand the Conservatives as the "workers' party", the party best placed to restore Major's dream of a classless society. Shapps also launched a "John Major apprenticeship programme", which gives young non-graduates a chance to prosper at Westminster.
The only problem is, the upper reaches of the Conservative party remain staunchly public school.
Critics have been alleging that five of the six people putting together the 2015 election manifesto are Old Etonians: David Cameron, the Tory MP Jo Johnson (Boris's brother), Cameron's chief of staff Ed Llewellyn, the policy minister Oliver Letwin and Rupert Harrison, an adviser to George Osborne. The sixth is Osborne himself, who went to St Paul's, another leading public school.
The Tories denied the charge, saying lots of state-educated advisers were also involved in composing the manifesto. Still, it's hard to deny that the decades when three Conservative prime ministers in a row — Edward Heath, Margaret Thatcher and Major — were grammar-school-educated now seem a very long way away indeed.
But was that era, when Britain turned meritocratic for a few years, just a blip in an 800-year domination by a rich elite? That's the chilling conclusion of a new book by Gregory Clark, a professor of economics at the University of California, Davis. In The Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History of Social Mobility, Clark argues that movement up the social ladder hasn't accelerated in eight centuries. By tracking the success of people with the same surnames across the generations, he has discovered that social mobility rates are much lower than previously thought.
According to his research, it normally takes 300-450 years for an elite surname to become average in status. But some of those surnames have retained their power for 800 years. Clark discovered that surnames associated with the 13th-century rich still appeared at a rate 25% more than expected among Oxford and Cambridge students in the years 1980-2009.
So, good news if your 30-times great-grandfather was one of William the Conqueror's richest pals; bad news if you're Grant Shapps and you're trying to attract the votes of aspirational blue-collar voters. Fast social mobility is near-impossible, according to Clark.
He hadn't thought ancient class divisions were a barrier to success until he started researching his book.
"Having for years poured scorn on my colleagues in sociology for their obsessions with such illusory categories as class, I now had evidence that individuals' life chances were predictable not just from the status of their parents but from that of their great-great-great-grandparents," he says. "Our findings do suggest that we can predict strongly, based on family background, who is likely to have the compulsion to strive and the talent to prosper."
Clark first looked into ancient distinguished surnames and examined their descendants' career paths. Among his examples is Samuel Pepys — not just a famous diarist, but also an MP, JP and senior naval administrator. Like George Osborne, he went to St Paul's and Oxbridge — in Pepys's case, Magdalene College, Cambridge; in Osborne's case, Magdalen College, Oxford. In other words, Pepys was a thoroughly pukka member of 17thcentury society.
Seventeen generations later, the Pepyses are still thriving. Of the 18 Pepyses alive in 2012, four were medical doctors. The nine Pepyses who died between 2000 and 2012 left estates worth an average of £416,000, more than five times the national average.
Again and again, Clark found parallels between rich ancestors and modern, prosperous descendants. Sir Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the worldwide web, is descended from a prominent, wealthy family in early 19th-century Britain. The surname Berners is descended from a Norman landowner whose holdings were listed in the Domesday Book of 1086.
Sir Peter Bazalgette, producer of Big Brother and chairman of the Arts Council, is descended from an extremely rich tailor to the Prince Regent in the early 19th century.
This study of social mobility through surnames is particularly effective because it charts social mobility over centuries and many generations. Other studies — which tend to follow social mobility over a single generation — are skewed by one-off, shortterm successes.
So, an extreme degree of social mobility is certainly revealed in last week's story of Ishak Ayiris, 15, the son of Ethiopian immigrants, who has just progressed from an east London comprehensive to Eton. But he is the sort of exception that proves Clark's rule. There were no Ayirises at Eton in the 15th century; there aren't likely to be many more in another 600 years.
Using surname evidence going back to 1300, Clark also examined the effect of having poorer ancestors. In the late 13th century, if your surname was Baker, Cook, Shepherd or Butler, that tended to be exactly what you did for a living. By 1381 only 38% of people with "artisan surnames" were doing the job their name described.
People have always changed their jobs from generation to generation, and have often improved them. But what Clark has discovered is that the rate of improving social mobility hasn't progressed since the Middle Ages — not just in Britain, but in many countries.
"Medieval England looks like a world of astonishing mobility," says Clark. "Artisans in 1300 were mostly illiterate workers scattered across English villages, yet by 1500 their descendants were fully incorporated into the universities.
"Medieval England had mobility rates similar to, though perhaps modestly higher than, those of the modern United States and Sweden. In terms of social mobility, then, what did the scientific revolution, the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution achieve? Very little. Social mobility existed long before people even thought of it as a feature of the good society."
Clark's theory about long-term social immobility makes for depressing news — particularly when combined with the astonishingly lethargic pace of short-term social mobility in modern Britain.
In a 2012 analysis of Who's Who by the Sutton Trust, it was discovered that 31% of the UK's powerbrokers had been to Oxford or Cambridge, and 44% had attended private schools.
A few of these were scholarship pupils from poor backgrounds, like Ishak Ayiris. But the vast majority were the children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren of the richest people in British society.
In May 2012 Michael Gove, the education secretary, listed the areas where the privately educated dominated: not just around the cabinet table and in the media but also, Gove said, "on the bench of our Supreme Court, in the precincts of the Bar, in our medical schools and university science faculties, at the helm of FTSE 100 companies and in the boardrooms of our banks".
Gove's list went on and on: British comedy, theatre and television were dominated by public schools, from Hugh Laurie to David Baddiel and Armando Iannucci. The actors Dominic West, Damian Lewis and Eddie Redmayne all went to Eton.
Last year the Sixties pop star Sandie Shaw said pop music was also being taken over by public-school bands. "Finance is the biggest barrier for emerging artists," she told the culture, media and sport select committee. "At the moment, unless you're Mumford & Sons and come from a public school and have a rich family that can support you, you're on the dole and you're trying to work and, by the time you get a sniff of a record contract, you just grab anything that they might offer you."
Even Britain's most famous outrageous lads are really public-school boys underneath. Al Murray, the comedian who plays the Pub Landlord, went to Bedford School and Oxford — last month, it was revealed he was a cousin of David Cameron (which, in the interests of honesty, I must confess I am too).
My God, even The Guardian has been edited by public-school boys for 60 years. The chances of Britain ever toppling its 800-year-old elite seem vanishingly small.
Harry Mount is the author of How England Made the English (Viking)
Document ST00000020140302ea3200066
