{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1457"}
____
  
NEWS
Conservatives must make a pact with Ukip, Lord Tebbit says; The chairman of the Conservative Party under Margaret Thatcher calls for seat-swapping pact to beat Labour and the Liberal Democrats
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
583 words
13 March 2014
10:40
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Conservatives must make a seat-swapping "pact" with Ukip if they are to have a chance of winning the next election, a former party chairman has said.
Lord Tebbit, the Conservative party chairman under Margaret Thatcher, said that Tories must stop "abusing" former Conservative voters who have been wooed by Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, and his message on immigration and Europe.
The Tory grandee, who has long said working class former Conservatives must not be blamed by the party for choosing to vote Ukip, said his party must now make a deal with Nigel Farage to more effectively target Labour and Liberal Democrat candidates in marginal seats in next year's election.
Where Ukip are more likely to beat a Labour or Lib Dem candidate Conservatives should stand aside and allow Ukip to contest the seat without splitting the vote, he said.
Similarly the deal should mean that Ukip will stand down in seats where Conservative candidates have the best chance of seeing off the opposition.
Lord Tebbit told The Times: "I think a pact would be sensible after the European election. Where a Ukip candidate has more chance of defeating Labour and the Lib Dems we should stand back and let them fight that seat. Conversely, where the Tories look likely to beat the Lib Dems or Labour, Ukip should stand back.
"It would be relatively easy to work out who should contest which seats."
He said that Mr Farage had damaged the Conservatives' electoral prospects by winning over traditional Tories who feel they have been "abandoned" by David Cameron.
"It would help if we didn't abuse former Tory voters by attacking Ukip as nutters," he added.
The Conservatives, he said, were at risk of looking like jealous shopkeepers "shouting abuse" at former customers choosing to shop in a newly opened store.
Instead Lord Tebbit said the Conservatives should learn what Ukip was doing differently that was so appealing to former Tory voters and offer them the sort of "stock that they wanted".
His plan is supported by Paul Sykes, the Yorkshire businessman who is bankrolling Ukip's European election campaign. Mr Sykes, who has promised to spend millions of pounds promoting the Euroskeptic cause, said Ukip should give Conservative candidates who favour of withdrawal from Europe a free run at the General election.
He said: "I don't think you should stand against a candidate who clearly says in his manifesto 'I'm going to campaign to leave the European Union.'
"You shouldn't have candidates against him. That could save their seats and that's the way it should be."
Lord Tebbit made his comments as a major study of Ukip suggests that it can mobilise its support it could attract up to 30 per cent of the vote.
The academic study, which analysed the views of 100,000 voters, said support for Ukip was driven not just by Euroscepticism, but also by 'hostility' to immigration and 'intense dissatisfaction' with the three main parties.
The report, by academics at the University of Manchester and the University of Nottingham, suggested that almost one third of voters share at least two of these values and might be persuaded to vote for the party if it can succeed in getting its message across.
Document TELUK00020140313ea3d003e9
