{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1297"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Parts of UK 'like a foreign land', Farage tells Ukip delegates
Andrew Sparrow Political correspondent   
445 words
1 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
6
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Nigel Farage said mass immigration was making parts of the country appear "unrecognisable" and like "a foreign land" at Ukip's spring conference yesterday.
The speech put immigration at the heart of Ukip's campaign for the European and local elections, which Farage followed with a declaration that he would resign if his party failed to win a seat in parliament in 2015. But he appeared to concede some concerns raised by Ukip about the scale of immigration from Bulgaria and Romania may have been unfounded. The greatest potential threat now came from the eurozone, Farage claimed.
"In scores of our cities and market towns, this country in a short space of time has frankly become unrecognisable," Farage told his audience in Torquay. "Whether it is the impact on local schools and hospitals, whether it is the fact in many parts of England you don't hear English spoken any more. This is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren."
Asked at his press conference to justify the comments, Farage cited a recent experience on a rush-hour train leaving Charing Cross. "It was a stopper going out and we stopped at London Bridge, New Cross, Hither Green, it was not until we got past Grove Park that I could hear English being audibly spoken in the carriage," he said. "Does that make me feel slightly awkward? Yes it does." Asked why he minded people speaking in foreign languages, he replied: "I don't understand them . . . I don't feel very comfortable in that situation and I don't think the majority of British people do."
With some observers tipping Ukip to win the Europeans elections, even though polls have yet to show it overtaking Labour, members arrived in Torquay knowing expectations are high but that the party is still tainted by associations with extremism. Ukip believes its stance on immigration can win votes from all sides of the political spectrum.
Ukip was criticised for saying 29 million Bulgarians and Romanians would have the right to live, work and draw benefits in the UK from January. In his speech Farage raised a fresh concern."It isn't directly Romania and Bulgaria I'm necessarily concerned about. What I'm really concerned about is the fact in the eurozone, in the Mediterranean there is no sign or prospect of any significant recovery at all," he said.
Leader comment, page 36 ≥
Nigel Farage declared that he would resign if his party failed to win any seats in
parliament in the 2015 election
Document GRDN000020140228ea31000bd
