{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"2568"}
____
  
A voice of reason as Mary Beard gets to the heart of sexism and speech
Ellen E Jones   
659 words
17 March 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
46,47
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
The Weekend's TV
A nondescript meeting room in any workplace in the land. Five men in suits and one woman with an up-do are sitting round a table discussing the topic at hand. The woman makes a suggestion and the meeting chair responds: "That's an excellent suggestion, Miss Triggs. Perhaps one of the men here would like to make it."
I'm describing a sketch by the cartoonist Rianna Duncan which appeared in Punch magazine in 1988, but it's a situation with which every woman working today will be wearily familiar. In fact, in last night's televised lecture for BBC4, Oh Do Shut Up Dear! Mary Beard on the Public Voice of Women, the AA Gill-conquering Cambridge classics professor traced the tradition of silencing women's speech right back to the first book of Homer's Odyssey. That's when Telemachus, son of Odysseus, tells his mother, Penelope, to "go back to the house and take up your own work", because "speech will be a concern for men".
Beard has had some public experience of the Miss Triggs/Penelope situation, of course. Her appearance on Question Time in January 2013 was followed by an onslaught of online abuse, much of it focused on grotesque descriptions of genitalia, despite the fact the QT topic was immigration, not female body parts, and the well-bred Prof. Beard hadn't flashed once.
Beard would have much cause to "whinge", "screech", "wail" - or any of the female-only verbs for speech - about her own treatment, but this wasn't that. She hoped instead that taking the historical long view would help get us beyond the simple explanation of "misogyny", and it did. Her suggestion that most of the abuse comes from "people who feel let down by the false democratisation promised by Twitter" was particularly worthy of further exploration.
In fairness to True Detective, which has also been accused of sexism by some critics, nihilist speechifier Detective Rust Cohle (Matthew McConaughey) gets told to shut up rather a lot, by his partner Detective Martin Hart (Woody Harrelson). The problem with Sky Atlantic's drama is rather how conspicuously underwritten the female characters are - be they hookers, abuse victims or patient wives - compared to their menfolk. Having sneaked a peek at the series finale, I'm sorry to report that writer Nic Pizzolatto doesn't really redeem himself on that score. So now might be a good time to switch your Saturday night allegiance to another US import, The Americans, which began a second series on ITV this weekend.
Elizabeth (Keri Russell) and Philip Jennings (Matthew Rhys) are two Soviet KGB spies posing as an all-American family in the suburbs of Washington DC in the early 1980s. Until recently, their children, who really are their children, had no idea that "Mom" and "Dad" were using date night to don ridiculous wigs and undermine the nation's security.
Their teenage daughter, Paige, was beginning to suspect that something wasn't quite right - up until this episode, when she walked in on her parents during a... ahem... love-making session. Scarred for life, the poor girl is now sworn to never again open a door without knocking. Is it too cynical to suspect that Elizabeth Jennings staged the scene on purpose, to deter her daughter from snooping? Perhaps, but Elizabeth is a character complex enough to justify such dark suspicions. That's what makes this show so gripping.
So, it's not an HBO or a Netflix original. So, the cast list doesn't include any marquee name movie stars slumming it between big projects. So what? The Americans still has a lot going for it, including a lovingly crafted period setting like Mad Men, all the spy thriller action of Homeland and two morally ambivalent antiheroes to The Sopranos' one.
Document IND0000020140317ea3h0002l
