{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3473"}
____
  
News
Farage spends Ukip's biggest donation on new billboard blitz
Michael Savage ; Laura Pitel ; Billy Kenber   
495 words
22 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
10
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip is to use a huge cash injection of more than £1 million to fund a campaign attacking immigration, it has emerged.
The billboard posters, described as racist by one Labour MP, are to be paid for by a £1.5 million donation from Paul Sykes, the Yorkshire businessman.
Mr Sykes, who backed the Tories under Margaret Thatcher but has since switched his support to Nigel Farage's party, said he was backing "the biggest advertising campaign in Ukip's history to bring home to the British people what is at stake".
The posters will appear alongside digital and newspaper advertisements in the run-up to the May 22 poll.
One poster reads: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose job are they after?" Lord Deben, a Tory peer who served in John Major's cabinet, said that Ukip "stands for the worst in human beings: our prejudice, selfishness, and fear". Mike Gapes, the Labour MP for Ilford South, said the posters were racist.
Mr Farage defended the campaign, arguing the posters were "a hard-hitting reflection of reality" faced by many workers "struggling to earn a living outside the Westminster bubble".
"Are we going to ruffle a few feathers among the chattering classes? Yes! Are we bothered about that? Not in the slightest," he said. "Ukip is hugely grateful to Paul Sykes for his contribution to the great cause of restoring Britain's ability to be a self-governing nation. The political earthquake I have spoken of is on its way."
Mr Sykes said the European Parliament elections were "the most important for many years".
"We have the chance to support a party — Ukip — that represents a complete break with the past," he said. "The other parties, whatever their merits, are content to work within the existing Brussels straitjacket.
"They cannot do anything about immigration or British workers being undercut by cheap foreign labour, and they are prisoners of the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights, which stops us deporting foreign criminals and terrorists."
The campaign comes as Ukip said that its membership had topped 36,000 after Mr Farage's TV debate against Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem leader. The party could soon overtake the Lib Dems, who have about 44,000 members.
Mr Farage was challenged for benefiting from an EU second pension plan. The scheme, which closed in 2009, allowed MEPs to pay only £1 in every £3 contributed to their fund and now has a £187 million shortfall, a threefold increase since 2012, which will have to be met by taxpayers, The Daily Telegraph reported.
Asked if he would renounce rights to the second pension, Mr Farage replied: "Since I'll probably be dead before I can claim the money, the least I can do is leave my family some income."
Thunderer, page 24
Document T000000020140422ea4m000am
