{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3804"}
____
  
Features
Points
692 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
14
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
FANGS A LOT Well done Eithne Shortall for not only bringing Sheridan Le Fanu back to our attention ("Culture vulture", last week) but also for boosting Irish tourism. Every vampire aficionado, Gothic horror fan, para-psychologist, ghost hunter, and the simply curious, will now head to Dublin. After all, who would want to miss the unique spectacle of Fanu's ancestors renovating the family vault? I hope the writer's descendants will be able to cope with all the publicity.
Bernd Biege Mount Nugent, Co Cavan SPEECH IMPEDIMENT Does Brenda Power ("Cartoon row shows 'free speech' still comes with a filter", Comment, last week) believe that free speech should extend to shouting "Fire!" in a crowded cinema? Ryan Cronin Macken Place, Dublin 2 BEAUTY TIP Like most men, I find the Style section of your paper superfluous but the cover last week "Can we stop our daughters obsessing about their looks?" amused me. No, you can't, but if you really want to do something about it, dumping the Style's page after page of flawless models, make-up tips and beach bodies would probably be a decent start.
Simon O'Neill Clontarf Road, Dublin 3 THE PARTY'S OVER You say "it will take more than a cabinet reshuffle to change the public perception" of Fine Gael ("Scandals put Fine Gael in the voters' sin bin", Editorial, last week). Surely it is the government as a whole which has lost its way. "Married in haste" has given way to "repenting at leisure".
One poll has suggested half of those intending to vote in a general election (now likely before 2016) have no confidence in any of the main parties. Even among those intending to vote for those parties, there is acute unease. We may have been naive to have expected a political class which belongs firmly in the 20th century to have made the leap into 21-century realities. Maurice O'Connell Tralee, Co Kerry POPE WITHOUT FRONTIERS Pope Francis's social-policy adviser Margaret Archer wants trafficked women to be allowed to get residency and citizenship in the West because, she says, "They did not come here voluntarily; they are not illegal immigrants" ("Woman takes lead in Pope's crusade", News, last week). However, almost all have been smuggled, albeit with the promise or hope of decent work. Of course they must be rescued from the abuse they find themselves in, but then deported. The problem with Pope Francis and his views on immigration is that, by his own admission, he cares nothing for national borders. He has described himself as "the pastor of a church without frontiers". He should not be listened to on the subject of immigration. Áine Ní Chonaill Immigration Control Platform, Dublin 2 GUITAR GRATES On his piece on Bernard Butler last week ("A new string to his axe", Culture) Dan Cairns describes the Fender Stratocaster as "arguably one of the least loved of all guitars". Eh? The list of famous Stratocaster lovers is lengthy, but to name just a few: Buddy Holly, Hank Marvin, Jimi Hendrix, Rory Gallagher, Eric Clapton, David Gilmour, Pete Townshend, Ronnie Wood, Mark Knopfler. The Stratocaster may not have the faux-coolness bestowed on some other guitars by indie acts (Jaguar? Please!), but those of us who have fallen under its spell would beg to differ with Cairns's opinion.
Seán O'Flynn Kilcolgan, Co Galway CLARIFICATION A report ("Palace outgun Cardiff", Sport, April 6) on the match between Cardiff City Football Club and Crystal Palace referred to speculation that Iain Moody, Palace's sporting director and formerly head of recruitment at Cardiff, had been refused entry to the Cardiff directors' box by the club's owner, Vincent Tan. We now understand, and accept, that Mr Moody did not even request entry to the Cardiff directors' box — he was not banned by Mr Tan. We are happy to clarify the position.
Letters should arrive by midday Thursday and include the full address and a daytime and an evening telephone number. Please quote date, section and page number. We may edit letters, which must be exclusive to The Sunday Times
Document ST00000020140427ea4r0008k
