{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2933"}
____
  
Features
Home is where the heart is
PK York   
753 words
31 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
42,43
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
SCOTTISH DAILY EXPRESS Select
Homing instincts are stronger than wanderlust, says PK York
THE old man looked into the camera and smiled through a thick white beard. His face was tanned, weather–beaten and deeply lined, but then he was the oldest person in the village. The interviewer asked him about his life. He said, via an interpreter, that he had been born in Russia and spent his childhood in Poland, before living in Germany, the USSR and finally Poland again. "You're a well–travelled man," said the interviewer only slightly patronisingly. "No, I've lived in this house", he jerked a thumb towards a small cottage, "all my life. Why would I move? This is my home." The purpose of the TV clip was to show how in certain parts of Eastern Europe the frontiers have changed and the maps redrawn over the 20th century.
But what also come across loud and clear was how important the idea of "home" was to this old man, and to people in general. And how unsettling it can be when circumstances dictate we must move somewhere else. I remember vividly the room I had as student. It was damp, cold and kitted out very sparingly with the sort of furniture and carpets that even the most desperate charity shop would refuse. On the wall outside my door the landlady had hung one of those irritating little homilies stitched on fabric. It read: "There's no place like home." "Too right," I thought, bare feet freezing on the cracked lino as I limped down two flights of stairs to the bathroom.
Although I'd been keen to get away, my parent's house was now seen in a new and wonderfully attractive light. I was learning that home isn't just a place, it's a state of mind; the reason ex–patriots and even no –going–back immigrants cling to vestiges of the "old country". Living in New Zealand for some years, I'd hear people whose parents had emigrated in the Fifties still refer to England as "home". Scotland, too. The South Island in particular is full of McKenzies, MacIntyres, Campbells and Camerons. (Burns Night is a big deal; pipe bands abound.) They've even evolved a Kiwi Scottish accent; similar but not quite the same as the real thing. So, home needn't be the place you were born.
During the recent Olympics, a number of our athletes claimed Yorkshire as their real, spiritual or adopted home. Which led to the amazing claim that the county best known for its savoury batter puddings could boast more medals than Australia. Just pause for a moment and let that fact fill you with joy. Now, the tradition of leaving home to build a better life somewhere else is as old as mankind. From the Celts and Germanic tribes sweeping into Western Europe in the dark ages to the tired, poor, huddled masses flocking to America in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, people with ambition and aspiration have always been on the move. But sometimes the concept of home is so strong that against all logic people stay put.
Take Italy's Mount Vesuvius for instance. Its slopes are terraced with vineyards, lemon trees and vegetable plots; there are houses and small villages complete with churches and schools. At the same time, it's also a pressure valve for the earth's molten core, and liable to blow its top at any time. Because this is a volcano (dormant at the moment) with serious form. Like Rome, Pompeii wasn't built in a day; but it vanished in one when Vesuvius erupted in AD 79.
There are a surprisingly high number of inhabited volcanoes around the world, not to mention seismic faults (earthquakes a speciality), river deltas prone to flash flooding and alpine villages waiting for an avalanche to happen. The risks may be high, but it's home – for better, for worse. All of which makes me grateful that the most we have to worry about is a long, cold winter. So stock–up, batten down the hatches and settle in for the long haul; you're in the best possible place. As lyricist Sammy Cahn said: "It's oh, so nice to go trav'ling/ But it's so much nicer/Yes, it's so much nicer to come home.
"Home isn't just a place, it's a state of mind"
Document THEEXP0020140331ea3v00095
