{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1124"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Election 2015: Eight possible outcomes
Analysis by Tom Clark   
1,179 words
6 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
8
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Labour majority
There are many psephological reasons why the Conservatives ought to lose in 2015 - but reasons, too, why Labour shouldn't be able to win. We guide you through the post-election scenarios, and take into account Scotland's vote on independence. While ahead in the voting intention polls, Ed Miliband's lead is said to be soft because he is consistently behind on the questions of leadership and economic stewardship, which are generally thought to settle elections. Labour's hopes rest on the apparent failure of the recovery to translate into rising living standards, the faith that the tide of history has turned against the free market right, and wear and tear blighting a five-year-old Cameron administration.
Scotland factor After a yes vote Labour would lose 40-odd Scottish MPs, a year into the parliament, so if Labour did win in 2015 its future would be immediately in doubt.
Labour/Lib Dem coalition
The polling and the electoral system point to this being relatively likely. Even if the Tories catch up with Labour on share of the poll, the electoral system could still hand Labour the edge. More opposition voters live in more electorally propitious places, and too many Conservatives turn out in safe seats; Labour seats also have fewer potential voters on average. All this makes it more likely that Labour will be pushed decisively over the winning line by a majority with a diminished Lib Dem party. Most Lib Dem activists would probably be keen. Clegg might be less comfortable, but the betting must be that he would not last long after the end of the Tory partnership. The relative stability of the Cameron years would probably incline Miliband to a partnership, rather than seek to go it alone. But would his party let him?
Labour minority
Deep tribal feelings, which can be traced to Ramsay MacDonald's move into the National Government in 1931, associate coalition with betrayal. Allergy to coalition is not a preserve of the Labour left, either - in 2010 John Reid and David Blunkett were early voices raised against trying to stitch together a Lib/Lab deal. If Labour comes out ahead in seats in 2015, some within its ranks will say that the very idea of coalition is discredited and urge the party to follow Harold Wilson's precedent in the face of a micro-majority in 1964 and a hung parliament of 1974, which is to govern alone for a short spell before going back to the electorate to try for a working majority.
Labour rainbow coalition
The idea of all anti-Conservative parties standing together in a progressive government was mooted after the last election. Plaid Cymru and the Northern Irish SDLP could be reasonable allies, but they are likely to be few in number. If the single Green MP, Caroline Lucas, were re-elected (which is uncertain) and even joined by a colleague or two, Labour would be nervous about how long a programme for government would endure with a party that has some protest movement instincts. By far the most important stripe in the rainbow (besides the Lib Dems, who some on the left no longer class as progressive) would be the Scottish National party. But its relations with Labour are poisonous.
Scotland factor After a yes vote all sorts of temporary arrangements could become possible. After a decisive no vote, a bruised SNP might not be in any mood to help Labour.
Conservative majority
No party of government completing a proper stretch in office has increased its share of the vote since 1955, when new prime minister Anthony Eden went to the country to seek a fresh mandate and romped home with nearly 50% of the poll. David Cameron could muster only 36% of the UK-wide ballot when up against Gordon Brown's fag-end administration in 2010. Next year he will almost certainly need to expand his appeal to secure an outright majority. Cameron's hopes of defying the record books rest on the economic recovery, and the reality that all politics is relative - so that even if voters do not "do gratitude" some may switch to him out of fear of an Ed Miliband administration.
Scotland factor If Cameron again came just short after a yes vote, the secession of Scottish MPs in (probably) 2016 could well lend him a majority, although whether he could survive in these circumstances is moot.
Conservative/Lib Dem coalition
Although the continuation of the status quo is always easy to countenance, there are substantial obstacles in the way of the Cameron/Clegg partnership continuing past 2015. Personal relations have been strained and Cameron's recent insistence that an in/out EU referendum would be a red line for negotiating any future coalition would make the haggling even harder: Clegg's deepest political commitment is to the European project. Nonetheless, with the right parliamentary arithmetic Cameron and Clegg might be tempted to go for it again - so long as their parties would let them.
Scotland factor The Lib Dems are disproportionately represented in Scotland. So if Scottish MPs were set to leave Westminster, the prospective usefulness of coalition would diminish to the Tories.
Conservative minority
Relations between the two coalition parties are even more strained than those between the men at the top. Tories blame the Lib Dems for a lack of red meat on tax and deregulation, while the Lib Dems have criticised Tory stances on immigration, human rights, and Europe. If, as the polls suggest, both parties win fewer seats than in 2010, neither would be enthusiastic about keeping a partner of sagging popularity in power. So in a parliament where the Conservatives are the biggest single party, a Tory minority government becomes the most likely option, even if its lack of a majority would still preclude the sort of policies that activists are keen to see.
Scotland factor: after a yes vote, governing in a minority would be more viable and attractive for a Conservative party that would anticipate the arithmetic shifting in its favour after the ejection of the Scottish MPs.
Conservative rainbow coalition
Nigel Farage has claimed his party will hold the balance of power after the next election. This is unlikely. Ukip does not have a single MP, and Farage's own recent refusal to stand in the Newark byelection indicates a lack of confidence about exceeding strong second and third places chalked up elsewhere. Even if Ukip does get a few MPs it could only make up the numbers needed for a Tory majority with exactly the right arithmetic. An understanding with the unionists could be more plausible, but the Tories might be nervous about entering the thicket of unionist policies, and making themselves hostage to unionist demands.
Scotland factor Ukip fares badly
in Scotland, so the relative clout of
any Ukip MPs, as well the Ulster
unionists, would increase after a yes vote, making this very unlikely
scenario marginally more tenable.
Analysis by Tom Clark
Document GRDN000020140506ea560000i
