{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"2321"}
____
  
News
Right-wing collapse will force Tories into hardline EU alliance
NIGEL MORRIS DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
435 words
20 May 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
8,9
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News
David Cameron faces the embarrassment of witnessing the collapse of the right-wing grouping he created in the European Parliament.
The Conservatives could be forced to forge alliances with nationalist parties with hardline views on immigration in order to keep the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) coalition alive after this week's elections.
Its survival is in the balance as voters prepare to return more MEPs with staunchly Eurosceptic views to the Parliament, paving the way for fresh deals between the right-wing parties that will fill the seats in Brussels and Strasbourg.
Mr Cameron set up the ECR following his promise in the Tory leadership contest to take the Conservatives out of the centre-right European People's Party, whose members include Angela Merkel's Christian Democratic Union.
The ECR has 57 members drawn from 11 EU states, although it is dominated by the Conservatives (26), the Czech Civic Democratic Party (nine) and 12 Polish MPs.
But polling suggests the alliance could shrink to just 40 members from six countries.
That would be a disastrous outcome for Mr Cameron and his allies, as alliances need to contain members from seven states to become an official grouping which receives cash and posts in the Parliament.
Under those circumstances, the ECR would then have to recruit allies. That could lead the Prime Minister into some very murky waters.
Conservative MEPs have put out feelers to the Finns Party, which has described immigrants as "parasites on taxpayers' money" and suggested ethnically Finnish women should have more babies. It is also courting the Danish People's Party, which is strongly critical of Muslim women wearing headscarves in public.
An alternative ally could be NVA, a separatist party pressing for Flanders to break from Belgium.
Writing on The Independent's website, Gareth Thomas, the shadow Europe Minister, said: "Conservative MEPs are already stranded at the margins of the European Parliament, but for his MEPs to be even further isolated would undermine David Cameron's ability to negotiate for Britain's interests in Brussels."
The dramatic surge of support for the UK Independence Party is echoed by growing popularity across the Union for groups which are instinctively suspicious of Brussels and hostile to immigration.
* Nigel Farage has defended remarks he made about Romanians, saying people would be right to be concerned if a group moved in next door. On four occasions in an interview with the BBC’s political editor, Nick Robinson, the Ukip leader was offered the opportunity to apologise but refused.
Document IND0000020140520ea5k00017
