{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"291"}
____
  
Observer Home News Pages
Just one in 10 can name MEP
339 words
11 May 2014
The Observer
OB
8
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
Continued from page 1
was just 34% - the findings will alarm members of the EU establishment who fear that voter apathy and lack of involvement with the European project is allowing anti-EU forces such as Nigel Farage's Ukip to gain a bigger foothold in the European parliament.
Today a special Observer report shows anti-EU sentiment is also on the rise throughout the continent. Brussels is braced for a historic breakthrough for Eurosceptic parties in this month's elections, as polls across the EU show they could obtain as much as 30% of the vote and up to 200 MEPs.
The Front National leads French polls, having campaigned on a platform of withdrawal from the euro and a crackdown on immigration. The party's leader, Marine Le Pen, and the Dutch far-right populist Geert Wilders are hoping to form a new anti-EU alliance of at least seven parties within the European parliament.
The grouping could include the Flemish nationalists of Vlaams Belang and the Italian separatists of the Northern League. Meanwhile, the Italian comic Beppe Grillo's grassroots Five Star Movement, which is campaigning for an Italian referendum on the euro, is on course to win 25% of the vote and send more than 20 MEPs to the Strasbourg parliament. In the last European elections in 2009, Ukip won 13 seats and could double that number in these elections with a share of the vote that could be as high as 30%.
In today's report on the rise of Euroscepticism, the celebrated Italian satirist and playwright Dario Fo backs Grillo's calls for a referendum on the single currency.
Guy Verhofstadt, the former Belgian prime minister and leader of the Liberal group in Strasbourg, told the Observer: "You will see a kind of victory for the Eurosceptics in the election. But that will hopefully lead to the emergence of a pro-European electorate and eventually to the new leap forward that we need."
Document OB00000020140510ea5b00032
