{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"573"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion; Columns
You'll be sorry you backed bully, Cam
TREVOR Kavanagh   
710 words
7 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
8
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
DAVID CAMERON wants us to see his support for defiant Maria Miller as a leader's steadfast loyalty to an embattled colleague.
In fact, it is a disastrous and perhaps fatal error.
At a stroke he has unravelled all his Government has achieved in persuading cash-strapped voters that we are "in it together" and reinforced the image of the Tories as "toffs".
Along with Lib Dem Nick Clegg, he has played into the hands of Ukip troublemaker Nigel Farage and his crusade against an arrogant and out-of-touch "metropolitan elite".
Together, in just a few days, they have handed Ukip the chance to torpedo both parties in next month's local and EU elections and the General Election in 2015.
Voters now know that despite the expenses scandal, which landed mostly Labour MPs in jail, a Tory can still trouser a million quid from a dodgy property deal financed from their hard-earned taxes.
Punters who may never set foot on the property ladder must watch a snooty politician game the system and make more money than the average citizen can earn in a lifetime.
This "them and us" message reflects the recent Tory Budget advert suggesting ordinary folk should be grateful for a penny off a pint and bigger bingo prizes.
But Maria Miller is not worth saving. She is not just a dull and unimaginative minister, but a proven bully who is quick to abuse her Cabinet clout.
Her first instinct was to try to intimidate the parliamentary watchdog who dared suggest she should repay £45,000 to the taxpayer.
After this watchdog was overruled by a secretive bunch of MPs, she forked out a grudging £5,800 and rubbed salt in with a churlish 32-second "apology".
The explosion of public fury could be heard across the land. A staggering 82 per cent of TORY voters want Miller sacked as a minister.
Almost as many want her out of Parliament altogether.
In fact Miller should have been sacked long ago.
She is the minister in charge of the media, nominally the guardian of a free Press. Yet she threatened to throw newspapers to the Leveson wolves when they dared to ask about her expenses.
An aide rang a newspaper to "flag up" her boss's role in deciding whether or not newspapers should answer to politicians.
The threat was explicit: Ask too many questions and you can kiss goodbye to Press freedom.
She spoke with her mistress's voice Nobody has denied this act of intimidation, probably because it was taped.
Since the adviser was not sacked, as she deserved to be, we can assume she spoke with her mistress's voice.
In which case Maria Miller is not fit for office and should have been out of government at the first reshuffle.
Now, instead of reeling in the political fruits of a growing economy and a successful Budget, David Cameron may have thrown away the 2015 election.
Having reined Labour back to level-pegging, the Tories are once again five points adrift in the polls.
This crisis is perfectly timed for mischievous Nigel Farage, who is mopping up Tory votes.
The chances of a major Ukip upset next month have also been increased by Nick Clegg's ill-judged TV debates.
Despite his treachery on tuition fees, Cleggie had got away with looking Nice-But-Dim.
On Wednesday he emerged in his true colours as a shabby and dishonest politician.
He ducked serious issues, smeared Farage and lied about his own promises on a referendum.
He ignored the scourge of EU unemployment and even had the nerve to describe Farage as "Billy No-Jobs".
The audience must have wondered how Cleggie could be so damned smug when he has got it wrong on every major issue of the day — jobs, mass immigration and the euro.
David Cameron doesn't speak for the Lib Dems.
But he is the leader of a party fighting to stay in power, probably in another coalition.
In just one week, those chances have been seriously dented — not by Labour's efforts but by the doomed Maria Miller and the shifty actions of his deputy Nick Clegg.
Document THESUN0020140407ea47000av
