{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1685"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Fame, but no fortune, from pounds 100 survival experiment: Mixed fortunes of Polish MP who tried to live like an immigrant in London
Esther Addley   
858 words
19 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
13
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
On a noisy pavement next to the Earls Court exhibition centre in London, two Polish-Australian documentary-makers are filming a Russian TV crew filming the Guardian's photographer as she urges Artur Debski to loosen his crossed arms and smile a bit. A couple of pedestrians glance as they pass but, not spotting a face they recognise, hurry onwards with an impatient tut.
The 45-year-old Polish MP may not be a celebrity, but a fortnight after he landed in the UK he is in so much demand that his two phones buzz continually throughout our meeting. "Journalists," he says. "I get 100 calls a day. But this is good. This is meant to be a provocation."
Debski was criticised as a publicity-seeker when reports first emerged that he had come to London to live like a Polish immigrant, with a plan to pick up casual work and survive on pounds 100 a week. The politician, a member of the liberal opposition party Twoj Ruch (Your Movement), is happy with that. "In Poland, 70% of young people are thinking about emigration. Last year more people died than were born. This is very dangerous for our country.
"People in Poland are calling me stupid, but at least now we are talking about it. BBC, Der Spiegel, Hong Kong TV - everybody in the world is now talking about this problem for Poland."
At the time of the last census, in 2011, there were 579,000 Polish-born people in the UK. Debski decided to ask some of them what to do about the brain drain. "I put a message on Facebook: 'Who lives in London?' I got 20, maybe 50 answers from Polish people: 'What do you need?'" Four days later, on 5 April, he flew to Stansted where "this guy I met on Facebook" greeted him and took him to his house in Poplar, east London. The MP spent his first night sleeping on a mattress in his new friend's tiny single bedroom.
The next day he met a Polish woman who offered him two nights in her house in Wandsworth, south London, for pounds 28 all in. He tried a jobcentre but didn't get far. A trip to see a contact in Ealing, in the west of the city, brought five names and numbers. One of them yielded six days' work in a Polish-owned accountancy office in Harrow, in the capital's northern suburbs - "four days with a computer, two days with a hammer," Debski says.
His first week's payment was pounds 284.95, which was handy, as his pounds 100-a-week plan had been jettisoned pretty quickly. ("It's not possible! We stopped that experiment by day three.") He plans to return home on 22 April.
Emigration was never an option when Debski was a young man, he says. At 16 he ran away from home to escape an alcoholic father and went to Warsaw where he started two businesses "buying and selling". He was 20 when the Berlin Wall fell in 1989. "For young people, this was a big chance, and I took this chance. I went to China and bought items and sold them in Poland, Russia, Ukraine, Czech Republic, Lithuania." He now sells to 5,000 outlets of the Polish equivalent of pound shops. Has he made a lot of money? "Yes." But it is much harder now, he says.
How can a rich entrepreneur persuade Poles to stay, or to return - aren't they just trying to make their way in life like he did? "Those who want to go back will go back, those who don't, won't." The important thing, he says, is for Polish politicians to learn from the experience of emigres who have made successful businesses abroad, and to liberalise the Polish economy pronto to help create those conditions at home.
"I tell these people, help me, we must change our country together. Now. Today. The government doesn't help. We must help. For the next generation."
He envies the pounds 2,000 tax cut for small businesses in the UK, and thinks jobcentres are much more efficient here than back home. What else? Draconian Polish drug laws need to be lifted, he thinks, and the favoured, tax-free status of the Catholic church must be challenged.
It doesn't sound like a comprehensive market liberalisation policy, though in fairness his limited English doesn't help. "Every day I am here I talk to my [party leader] and my partners in Poland, and we have ideas. This is the first step to starting the discussion in the Polish parliament."
pounds 28
The price of a two-night stay Debski was offered in Wandsworth.
'Emigration was never an option when I was young'
Captions:
Artur Debski, the Polish MP trying to live like an immigrant in London on pounds 100 a week, says: 'It's not possible!' Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian
Document GRDN000020140418ea4j000df
