{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2038"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Hague puts fears over EU at heart of debate
Hamish Macdonell   
733 words
28 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Scotland
1,2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Salmond warned of independence consequences Hague enters fray with warning on EU prospects
William Hague entered the independence fray last night, delivering a warning that Scotland faced an uncertain and expensive future in Europe, should it break from the UK.
The foreign secretary's remarks were designed to undermine a speech that Alex Salmond is due to make in Bruges today.
The first minister will arrive in Belgium determined to convince European politicians that an independent Scotland would add value to the European Union.
Mr Salmond knows he needs the support of European leaders if Scotland is to secure the easy and early accession to the EU that he has promised.
Mr Hague signalled the start of a campaign to devalue Mr Salmond's European visit by raising questions about the EU which, he claimed, the first minister had ducked.
The clash between the two political heavyweights marks the beginning of a new front in the battle over Scottish independence that puts Europe at the top of the agenda for the first time in months.
Mr Salmond has always insisted that Scotland would become a pro-European member state of the European Union easily.
Indeed, the first minister has claimed that Scotland would be able to become a full independent member of the EU as soon as it breaks from the UK, in March 2016.
The first minister has also argued that an independent Scotland would not have to join the euro and would be able to negotiate a favourable deal on immigration too. However, in a letter to Mr Salmond, the foreign secretary argued that an independent Scotland might have to join the euro, might have to wait a considerable time to be allowed to join the EU and would then have to contribute to the financial rebate enjoyed by the rest of the UK.
He asked what Mr Salmond's "plan B" was if Scotland failed to get into the EU by the time it had broken away from the UK.
Mr Hague declared: "Scotland's negotiations to join the EU are likely to be complex and long and the outcome would certainly prove less advantageous than the status quo.
"People in Scotland deserve to have the available facts ahead of making one of the most important political decisions in the history of our Union." Mr Salmond responded by saying that there would be no problems with Scotland's accession to the EU. He turned on Tory divisions on Europe by accusing the foreign secretary — not Scottish independence — of posing the biggest threat to Scottish membership of the EU.
The first minister said that there was no mechanism to force any country into the euro and the timetable for Scotland becoming a member of the EU had been described as "realistic" by one of the UK government's own top advisers.
Mr Salmond added: "People in Scotland can see the advantages of Scotland's interests being promoted in Europe by a government which is clear about our position, as opposed to a London-based party still riven with division 25 years after Lady Thatcher's address Continued on Page 2, col 5 Continued from page 1 and who are prepared to put that position at substantial risk.
"In this — as in much other in this debate — a positive vision is proving far more powerful than the depressing negativity of the London approach."
Today Mr Salmond is expected to emphasise Scotland's pro-European credentials during his key speech in Belgium.
He is due to describe Scotland as "one of the linchpins of the European Union" and to say: "Our huge energy reserves, our economic and financial contribution, our fishing grounds, our academic, cultural and social links, and our commitment to the founding values of the European ideal place us at the very heart of the EU."
Mr Salmond is expected to stress the importance of Scotland's natural energy resources, its fishing waters and its oil reserves as key assets for Europe.
He is also due to point out that 160,000 European Union citizens now live in Scotland.
"Perhaps more than any of this, Scotland shares and promotes the values of solidarity, freedom and democracy that are the heart of the European project," he will add.
'Scotland is one of the linchpins of the European Union'
Document T000000020140428ea4s000eu
