{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2310"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Farage remarks branded racist by three senior Labour figures
Rowena Mason, Political correspondent   
464 words
20 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
4
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Nigel Farage's comments about Romanians have been branded racist by three prominent Labour figures - Yvette Cooper, Diane Abbott and David Lammy - after the Ukip leader said people might not want to live next door to immigrants from the eastern European country.
Farage declined the opportunity to apologise for his comments in an interview with the BBC. After a day of criticism, Farage was asked if Ukip were the Millwall FC of British politics. "Perhaps we are the Millwall . . . I think in Westminster we're loathed and feared," he replied.
Labour leader Ed Miliband earlier said Farage had made a racial slur but was not racist, but his view was contradicted by Lammy. The MP, whose parents are from Guyana, told the BBC's Daily Politics that Farage's comments reminded him of the racism encountered by his mother and father when they first came to the UK.
"What Nigel Farage said over the weekend was racist. So I'm clear, he's a racist," he said. "I am from a background where my parents arrived here as immigrants. I remember a context in which some people said: 'You don't want these people living next door to you.' That was racist."
Cooper, the shadow home secretary, told ITV News: "It's not racist to be worried about immigration or to want stronger controls, but it is racist to somehow stir up fears about Romanians living next door. So Ukip should say they were wrong on that."
Abbott, a former shadow health minister, said "his remarks were racist" and she was "glad everybody has stopped pussyfooting around".
It comes after David Cameron described the comments as "pretty unpleasant" and accused Ukip figures of saying a "succession of pretty appalling things".
Farage said in a Guardian interview that British people should be wary of Romanian families moving into their street. He subsequently repeated his position on LBC 97.3 Radio. "I was asked if a group of Romanian men moved in next to you, would you be concerned? And if you lived in London, I think you would be," he told the interviewer, James O'Brien.
Farage said last night that he felt "hurt" following criticism of Ukip in recent weeks and that a growing number of people believed that it was a racists' party.
Questioned about his recent comments about Romanians, he said on BBC 2's Newsnight: "I have no problem with Romanians; I have a big problem with Romania," saying the country had failed to make the transition to western democracy after communism fell.
Captions:
Labour MP David Lammy said: "What Nigel Farage said was racist" - a stronger line than that taken by leader Ed Miliband
Document GRDN000020140520ea5k00022
