{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3095"}
____
  
News
Ukip expels builder and decorator who ranted about race on Twitter
Billy Kenber   
663 words
25 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip has suspended one of the stars of its latest election broadcast after it was discovered that he had posted a series of Twitter messages describing Muslims as animals and suggesting that Africa should be abandoned by white people to "let them [black Africans] kill themselves".
Andre Lampitt, 36, a builder and decorator, was one of the principal characters in Ukip's political broadcast shown on BBC and ITV on Wednesday.
In the film, he appeared walking across a building site with a hard hat as he complained about the difficulties of finding work as a result of unrestricted immigration from Europe.
Mr Lampitt, who is also standing for the party in next month's local elections in Merton, south London, told viewers: "Since the lads from Eastern Europe are prepared to work for a lot less than anybody else I've found it a real struggle. It's getting hard to provide for my family."
Last night, the builder, who speaks with a Zimbabwean accent and describes himself as "born British in Rhodesia", had his Ukip membership suspended over his posting of a string of inflammatory tweets.
In messages dating back more than a year, Mr Lampitt shared his views on issues including Islam, Aids, forced sterilisation and the ancestry of Ed Miliband.
"Get over it, slavery was an act of war," he wrote in one message last month. "You lost, stop being so damn jealous and move forward." Responding to other Twitter users, he wrote: "Muslims are animals, their faith is disgusting their prophet is pedophile". On Africa, he wrote: "I was born and grew up in Africa please leave Africa for the Africans let them kill themselves off don't go there".
Another tweet read: "Most Nigerians are generally bad people I grew up in Africa and dare anyone to prove me wrong". Mr Lampitt said that the Labour leader, Ed Miliband, the son of a Jewish refugee, "is Polish and not British", writing that "being British is earned through generations of existence not through birth".
He suggested that the majority of rapes in Europe were committed by Muslims. He wrote that "98% of rapes in Oslo committed by foreigners — of that nearly 100% Muslim men!". He then asked: "How many rapes will there be when my daughter is 9 in 5 years time ... please ban Islam."
A Ukip spokesman said: "We are deeply shocked that Mr Lampitt has expressed such repellent views. His membership has been suspended immediately pending a full disciplinary process." Mr Lampitt did not respond to requests for comment last night and has deleted his Twitter account.
Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, has repeatedly insisted that the party has no place for racists. Last year, The Times revealed that several candidates in last year's local elections had appeared on a British National Party membership list, which the Ukip leader explained by saying that they "don't have the party apparatus to fully vet 1,700 people".
It also emerged yesteday that a man who appearinged in a Ukip poster campaign as a "British worker" who could not find a job because of an influx of cheap labourers from Europe was actually an Irish actor from Dublin.
A Liberal Democrat peer said yesterday that his party had lost the anti-establishment vote to Ukip. Lord Oakeshott of Seagrove Bay, a critic of Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister, told Channel 4 that the Lib Dems had lost the "plague on both your houses" vote. ? Police are investigating after alleged explicit pictures of a Ukip aide were leaked. Lizzy Vaid, 27, who posed as an ordinary voter in the party's manifesto despite being Mr Farage's paid personal assistant, was said to appear in photos that The Sun claimed were "too graphic [to] describe in a family newspaper". Scotland Yard confirmed that it had received an "allegation of harassment" and was investigating.
Document T000000020140425ea4p00033
