{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1076"}
____
  
NEWS
Afghan immigrant saved after attempt to cross Channel on raft
By Henry Samuel Calais and Ben Farmer   
739 words
7 May 2014
11:17
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Afghan immigrant rescued while trying to cross the Channel on a makeshift raft
A young Afghan man has been rescued by French coastguards after risking his life trying to reach Britain on a makeshift raft fashioned from six planks and a bedsheet sail.
Asif Hussainkhil, 33, was picked up two miles off Sangatte near Calais, after he was spotted from a ferry as he tried to make the 21-mile Channel crossing.
Rescuers said he was lucky not to have capsized and been killed, and had “zero per cent chance of making it to Britain” on the flimsy craft.
Mr Hussainkhil, from Kabul, had spent three weeks building the vessel behind sand dunes, constructing a mast from two crutches spliced together. He had not included a rudder on the raft.
He had no compass or food when he was saved and was dressed in a thin windcheater and rainproof trousers.
The perilous crossing attempt was made amid reports of increasing desperation among migrants trying to get illegally from France to Britain.
Mr Hussainkhil said he had been in Calais for a month and a half, but left Afghanistan in 2000 when the Taliban were in power and he feared for his life. To reach Calais, he went through Iran, Turkey, Greece, Macedonia, Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Italy, and Switzerland. “England is my last stop,” he said. “I was sitting in the tent, thinking how can I get to England. Ever since I was a child, I have liked England. It’s a strong, powerful country. I want to join my uncle and cousins there. It was so hard here, so I thought I’ll make a boat and try and get there myself. I have no money, so I just used stuff around me at the camp.”
The boat was made of six pieces of wood, with three buoys underneath and blue life jacket material to sit on.
He added: “The plan was to get over the Britain, but the wind wouldn’t let me. I was never scared of drowning. I can swim. The boat was made of stuff that doesn’t sink.”
This was his third attempt at crossing the Channel, he said. The first two times he swam wearing makeshift flippers built out of wood.
“I swam for about three hours but got caught. The second time, I only swam for an hour and they caught me,” he added.
Christian Salomé, who runs the Auberge des Migrants association, which offers food and assistance to migrants, said Mr Hussainkhil had built the boat “before everyone’s eyes” in a makeshift camp in front of the port.
“He was really desperate to get to Britain after having failed to get across hidden in lorries and being picked up by the police so many times,” he said. “People told him not to try, that it was impossible, but he reacted like a child who wanted to absolutely have a go. His mind was made up. It was almost as if it were a game. He is very young and childish.”
Bernard Barron, the head of the coast rescue service in Calais, said the would-be sailor had been “pretty disappointed at being rescued until we explained to him the perils awaiting him”.
The raft was quickly swept into a ferry lane after he set off from Bleriot beach and he had only been on the water 30 minutes when he was spotted from the P&O ferry Spirit of Britain, which radioed coastguards to pick him up.
Mr Barron said if Mr Hussainkhil had not been rescued, the raft would have drifted into rougher seas. He said: “He was no sailor. He had no rudder, no compass, nothing at all. The greatest danger for him was to capsize, in which case his raft would have disintegrated.
“The chances of reaching the British coast were zero.” Water temperatures of around 63F (17C) meant he would have lasted a maximum of 45 minutes if he had fallen in, it was estimated. “After that, he would have drowned. The water is so cold at the moment that he wouldn’t have lasted long,” said Mr Barron.
Mr Hussainkhil was undaunted by his failed attempt, however. “The boat will get better and better each time and God willing I will make it across,” he said.
Document TELUK00020140506ea56003jw
