{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3704"}
____
  
NEWS
Trust me, no need to vote Ukip, says David Cameron
By James Kirkup and Steven Swinford   
492 words
22 May 2014
07:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Prime Minister makes last-ditch attempt to stop voters in European elections deserting Conservatives for Nigel Farage's party
David Cameron has appealed to “frustrated” voters not to back Ukip on Thursday, promising to salvage Britain’s relationship with the European Union just as he said he has overhauled the UK economy.
As Britain votes in European elections, the Prime Minister made a last-ditch attempt to stop voters deserting his Conservatives for Nigel Farage and the UK Independence Party.
The Conservatives face finishing third in the European elections when results are declared late on Sunday. Mr Farage said on Wednesday that his party would win the poll to elect MEPs.
The Tories also face losing scores of councillors in elections to more than 160 councils across England, with results declared on Thursday night and Friday.
In his last public remarks before the polls open, Mr Cameron conceded that voters, including some who previously supported the Tories, would back Ukip.
“I would accept that in an election like the European election, people do use that as an opportunity to send a message and make a protest. I understand that,” he told Channel Four News.
“People have had a difficult economic time in our country. They are frustrated about some of the issues they want gripped and dealt with like immigration, welfare and Europe.”
However, he insisted that only he and the Conservatives could deliver real change in the European Union. “Just as we’ve turned the economy around, we can deal with the situation in Europe.”
Mr Cameron has promised to renegotiate Britain’s EU membership deal and - if he is returned as Prime Minister next year – put the new arrangements to the British people in a referendum.
Critics in other parties, and some Conservatives, have questioned whether Mr Cameron will be able to deliver substantial changes in the EU, but the Prime Minister insisted his reforms can be accomplished.
“These things are doable. It will be tough,” he said. Top of his reform agenda was ending “benefits tourism” and tightening rules on EU migrants’ access to British welfare payments.
• VAT could remain at 20 per cent beyond the next election, after Mr Cameron said he could not promise to cut it.
The Prime Minister was urged to reduce the tax by a market trader on a campaign visit to Newark, Notts.
VAT was cut from 17.5 per cent to 15 per cent as a stimulus measure by Labour after the financial crash, but raised to 20 per cent by the Coalition as an emergency measure in order to reduce the deficit.
Mr Cameron said: “We haven’t dealt with the deficit yet.”
Asked if the tax would be cut if he was returned to Government, he said: “I can’t make that promise. We’ll set out all our promises in our manifesto.”
Document TELUK00020140522ea5m000b5
