{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3807"}
____
  
News
LITTLE LITHUANIA
BEN GRIFFITHS   
880 words
27 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
20,21
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
IMMIGRATION BRITAIN: LOCALS SQUEEZED BY INFLUX
Town where one in six are migrants
Quarter of High Street run by them
Work camps for foreign labourers
HUDDLED outside a shop selling Eastern European goods, a group of women with foreign accents talk excitedly while Euro-pop music blasts out from a car.
One jokes that the English people in the town are "like tourists", such is the number of immigrants here.
But this is not Ukraine, Latvia or Poland. This is the once thriving English market town of Wisbech, Cambs — now dubbed "Little Lithuania".
There are now an estimated 5,000 Lithuanians living among Wisbech's population of 28,000 — meaning one in six here are from the Baltic state.
Many have come looking for work and it is available to them for £50 per day. There is even an immigrant only work camp on the outskirts of the town.
Unemployed local engineer Nev Tharby, 44, says the low rates of pay taken by the foreign workers make it hard for people like him to find a job.
He said: "Many of the Lithuanian guys will do what I do for half the price that I used to. They take the low-paid jobs leaving our young with nothing to go for apart from the dole."
Work is a cause of friction between the immigrant community and locals, with tensions rising on the high street too. Around a quarter of shops in the town's Norfolk Street exclusively sell Eastern European items.
And one food retailer, who refused to be named, told The Sun on Sunday he will be forced to close his 108-year-old family business this year — and he blames migrants buying their own food instead of local produce. Lithuania Halina Paskovska, 47, who has been here for five years and works as a care assistant, claims some of her countrymen are not willing to integrate.
Rasa Venckute, 27, who came over from Lithuania six years ago and runs a phone shop on Norfolk Street, said: "It is not good here. You rarely hear an English accent, but when you do lots of people are angry here about how many foreigners are here."
Last year there were protests over the number of migrants.
Poundland worker Ben Tuen, 21, says he is concerned about the safety of his partner Hannah Wright, 19, and one-year-old daughter Daisy and is thinking of moving away. He said: "There are a lot of tensions between the foreign communities and the English. I think it stems from who is taking all the jobs.
"It's not safe in the evenings and I don't want my family getting caught in the crossfire of any violence."
But resident Dean Reeves, 46, has founded the We Are Wisbech group to try to bring local and immigrant communities together.
He said: "We've had 5,000 people come, but many are quickly becoming part of the settled community here. In many cases we are on the second or third generation. A lot of their children speak English and support the England football team."
Labour town councillor Reg Mee is also looking at the positives. He said: "They have opened up lots of restaurants and shops in the town. Those shops would be empty otherwise and I would rather have an Eastern European shop than no shop at all.
"There are a lot of people in this town who don't like the number of Lithuanians who have come here, but are they prepared to work in the factories and in the fields?"
Among those fields sits the Fridaybridge Farm Camp. It held Italian POWs during World War Two, but today offers £36-per week accommodation for migrants, who can earn up to £140-a-day working on the surrounding farms. Vatalia Plilikate, 50, came over in 2010 and has been at the camp since it opened three years ago — working nightshifts at a farm produce warehouse.
She said: "I like it here. I came over thinking I would only work a few months, but the money is good and the rent is cheap and I can make a good living."
Workers stay eight-to-a-dorm and enjoy onsite facilities such as free wifi, a swimming pool, gym, tennis courts, football pitch, supermarket, tanning salon — even a nightclub.
Camp boss Wayne Cotterill says there are plans to open similar camps in towns around the country.
He added: "We try to give immigrants a good life here. A happy worker is a better worker."
Around 130,000 Lithuanians now live in the UK compared to 22,000 when they joined the EU in 2004.
But Nev Tharby, who has now been out of work for more than two years, remains unconvinced that there is any benefit for people like him.
He said: "Wisbech has become Little Lithuania. You can understand why people want to vote Ukip."
ben.griffiths@the-sun.co.uk
The Sun on Sunday Says — Page 16
'Money is good and rent is cheap'
'It's not safe here in the evenings'
I'd rather have East European shop than no shop - REG MEE
They do what I do for half the price I used to - NEV THARBY
Document THESUN0020140427ea4r000be
