{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3759"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Britain is now post-Christian, ex-archbishop Williams argues
Andrew Sparrow, Political correspondent   
458 words
28 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
6
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Rowan Williams, the former archbishop of Canterbury, has declared that Britain is no longer a nation of believers and that it has entered a "post-Christian" era.
Entering a debate triggered by David Cameron's declaration before Easter that Britain should be "more confident about our status as a Christian country" and "more evangelical" about faith, Williams said that Britain was "post-Christian", but not "non-Christian".
Speaking in an interview with the Sunday Telegraph, Williams - now Lord Williams of Oystermouth - said it was important to "pick your way quite carefully" in the debate about the nation's relationship with Christianity.
"A Christian nation can sound like a nation of committed believers, and we are not that. Equally, we are not a nation of dedicated secularists. I think we're a lot less secular than the most optimistic members of the British Humanist Association would think."
Professor Jim Al-Khalili, president of the British Humanist Association, was one of more than 50 public figures who signed a letter to the Daily Telegraph criticising Cameron's comments about Britain being a Christian country. They said that, apart from in a "narrow constitutional sense", there was no evidence to justify labelling Britain as a Christian state and that to assert otherwise ran the risk of fostering "alienation and division".
In his interview, when pressed for a yes/no response to the question about whether Britain was a Christian country, Williams replied: "A Christian country as a nation of believers? No. A Christian country in the sense of still being very much saturated by this vision of the world and shaped by it? Yes."
He also said: "Given that we have a younger generation who know less about this legacy . . . there may be a further shrinkage of awareness and commitment."
But this could also lead to people discovering Christianity afresh, he said. "I see signs of that, talking to youngsters . . . in school visits. There is a curiosity about Christianity."
According an ICM poll for the Sunday Telegraph, 56% of people say Britain is a Christian country, compared with 30% who say it is a non-religious society. Some 14% of respondents told ICM that they saw themselves as practising Christian, 38% said they were non-practising Christian, 41% non-religious, and 5% members of another faith.
Lady Warsi, the Foreign Office minister and minister for faith, told the paper that immigration was making Britain more Christian because "some of the biggest church-goers are people whose heritage is in Africa and the Caribbean".
Captions:
Lord Williams says Britain is not a nation of believers, but equally it is not a country full of dedicated secularists
Document GRDN000020140428ea4s0001e
