{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3764"}
____
  
News
Labour has started a class war. But Ed Miliband doesn't know which side he is on
By Dan Hodges   
1,051 words
28 April 2014
14:29
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ed Miliband’s guru is back. In an interview with the Times (), Maurice Glasman has popped up to warn his political padawan he’s flirting with electoral disaster by being too “middle-class”. Labour is losing voters hand over fist to Ukip in its “heartlands”, he said. “That is the dilemma at the heart of the party’s strategy — is it possible to address these economic, political and cultural concerns when the party is becoming, in many ways, very middle-class? What I mean by that is liberal and progressive in its sensibility.”
Warning Ed Miliband he is in danger of becoming excessively middle-class is a bit like warning the Pope he’s in danger of becoming too associated with Catholicism. When I finally get round to establishing my Occupy the Middle Class movement, Ed is going to be our honorary life president. Whether he likes it or not.
But Glasman’s latest intervention is still an illuminating one. First, it represents the latest incarnation of the Labour Party’s favorite new pastime, “Defining the Defeat”. Most senior Labour supporters recognise the game is almost up. They can read the polls, and the economic indicators, and Miliband’s personal approval ratings. And they know what they foreshadow.
So the various Labour factions are starting to put down markers. They are attempting to ensure that when Labour loses in 2015 it will have lost because their personal strategy wasn’t followed. Which is why last month we had the think tanks warning that Miliband wasn’t being radical enough. That was immediately followed by Len McCluksey warning he wasn’t being Left-wing enough. This morning Jessica Asato, Labour’s candidate in Norwich North – and something of a New Labour poster girl – has warned Labour “has still got a lot of convincing to do” on the economy, and more generally needs to “lift the conversation into a serious offer for the future”. Norwich North is significant because it represents the seat Labour needs to win to secure an overall majority.
What’s also interesting is the tone of Glasman’s comments on Labour’s middle-class dilemma. “Ed [Miliband] is trying to address it,” he claims. “This is a long-term trend since 2001, in terms of the working-class vote just declining quite dramatically. The Labour middle-class vote held up [in 2010]. It was the working-class vote that died. These are often people who are earning, who have jobs, but they don’t see Labour as representing their interests."
Polling day is now just over a year away. And yet within Labour’s ranks the debate about strategy is being conducted in essentially the same way it was in the weeks immediately following Miliband’s election in 2010.
Should Labour reach out to the middle classes? Should they appeal to their lost blue-collar base? Should they be pitching to disillusioned Lib Dems? Should they be attempting to ward off a rampant Ukip? Should they be pitching to potential Tory switchers?
These questions needed to be put to rest 18 months ago. Labour’s strategy should now be locked; the debate centered on the most effective way to implement it.
But it isn’t. As the polls narrow, and the recovery becomes embedded, Labour is becoming sucked into a conversation with itself about what conversation it should be having with the British people. Contrast that with the Conservatives, who have been doggedly setting out their “things are slowly getting better. Don’t let Labour ruin it” mantra for the best part of two years now.
Then there is the substance of Glasman’s comments. And of course, he’s right. For all the talk of consigning Blairism to the dustbin of history, Labour is a more middle-class party now that it’s ever been. Partly this is a natural extension of the persona of its leader, partly it’s the hangover from Blair’s modernisation project, and partly it’s because Labour has been embracing the Lib Dem refugees that have swelled its ranks in the wake of Nick Clegg’s great betrayal.
The problem this presents is that Labour has reacted to the realisation it’s insufferably middle-class in the way the middle classes always react to the realisation they’re middle-class. It’s run around pretending to be working-class.
Pretending is the operative word, here. The Labour Party basically consists of two kinds of people. Those elements of the Labour Right who adopted the view “Labour’s base will take care of itself”, and then set about tailoring a political message that would resonate with a mythical place called “middle England”. And those elements of the centre-Left who would theoretically like to engage with the working-class, but are too terrified of the impact that engagement would have on their own liberal sensitivities.
Under Ed Miliband the latter group are in the ascendency. Which is why Labour talks a good game about representing “the workers”, but then comes out with a policy agenda in areas such as immigration, welfare reform and law and order that is unrecognisable to most working-class voters. Essentially, Labour has declared a class war without making up its mind which side of the war it wants to be on.
Maurice Glasman, to his credit, recognises this, hence his efforts to get Miliband to sign up to his working-class “Blue Labour” agenda. Unfortunately, those efforts have failed. Partly because of the naivety with which Glasman himself initially pursued them. And partly because the adoption of that agenda would have entailed a shift to the Right politically unpalatable to a party still coming to terms with Tony Blair’s own great betrayal.
So Labour will run in 2015 as a middle-class party pretending to be a working-class party by trying to win over working-class voters with middle-class policies. And it will lose in Norwich North, as it will just about everywhere else.
At which point the markers placed down over the past few months will be picked up and pocketed. And the debate will begin all over again. And again. And again.
Document TELUK00020140428ea4s002ut
