{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1827"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
This killer shouldn't be free to stay here
Ann Widdecombe   
605 words
23 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
13
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
A MAN who cannot be named for legal reasons but referred to as JR arrived in this country at 15 on a temporary visa to visit his mother. Refused permission to stay, he did anyway and a few months later stabbed a schoolboy of 15 to death over a drug debt.
He was jailed and, upon release, appealed against deportation. That appeal was rightly rejected so he app ealed again, stating for the first time in this long saga that it would be dangerous for him to return to Jamaica because he is gay.
Astoundingly this appeal has been upheld so this nasty murderer is free to stay in Britain, despite the best efforts of Theresa May to get rid of him.
There is now so much anxi ety about large numbers of lawful migrants from eastern Europe that we have begun to forget just how badly abused our asylum laws are and this case should act as a sharp reminder.
Any illegal immigrant has only to utter three words: I claim asylum. Then he or she will stay in the country while the claim is assessed and as we have no identity cards, a flourishing black economy and make limited use of detention it is a very easy country in which to disappear.
The international conven tion governing asylum was enacted to prevent any repe tition of the appalling events of the 1930s when boatloads of Jews had been turned away at port after port, with the result that many perished in horrendous circumstances under the Nazi regime. Inter national law now says that anybody fleeing persecution must be given a safe haven and nobody must be sent back to his country of origin if it would put him in danger.
That was just, but the world has moved on since 1951 when that decree came into being. Then there was very little civilian air travel but now people can cross the globe in 24 hours. Then there was only limited television but now anyone in the Third World eking out an existence in a makeshift hut, with tar paulin for a roof if lucky, can see daily images of the West, where even the poorest are housed and adequately fed, where the shops are piled high with goods and the schools have roofs on. That understandably is what they want for their own families.
In 1951 large tracts of the Third World were still colo nised and run peaceably. The withdrawal of the West over succeeding years gave rise to wars, genocide and pers ecution and, more frequently, the collapse of economies under incompetent and cor rupt regimes. The impetus to escape was huge and Britain is seen as a soft touch, which is why the people at Sangatte do not apply to stay in France but spend their days trying to get unlawfully into Britain.
WE WILL not stop the abuse of our asylum system until we automatically detain all new applicants so that we know where they are, until immigration officers rou tinely meet planes so that they know exactly which country asylum seekers have come from and until we deport those who commit serious crimes. After all, if they need safety it should not be granted at the expense of the safety of our own nationals.
I am sorry if JR would suf fer in Jamaica for being gay but I am vastly more sorry for the teenage victim who died at his hands. The first duty of government is to keep its citizens from harm.
Document THEEXP0020140423ea4n0005j
