{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1741"}
____
  
News
Thousands of children miss out on chosen school
Graeme Paton   
653 words
17 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
10
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Surge in appeals predicted as national 'offer day' leaves four in 10 infants in some areas without a place at their parents' favoured primary
UP TO four in 10 children have missed out on theirfirst choice primary school in parts of England and hundreds of pupils were left without a place.
There were warnings of a mounting admissions crisis and officials were told to brace themselves for a surge in appeals as school allocations for 600,000 children were published on national "offer day" for primaries yesterday.
In some areas children were not allocated any places in reception classes at all, including 75 infants in one borough.
One admissions expert said some parents had been given schools two or three miles away despite living within a few hundred yards of the gates of a state primary, leaving them "distraught". Data obtained by The Daily Telegraph showed an overall rise in the number of fouryear–olds entering the education system this year. It has been put down to a spike in the birth rate combined with the effect of immigration in some areas.
More than half of local authorities reported a decline on last year in parents securing their preferred school, with parts of the South hit hardest.
The disclosure prompted warnings that more parents were preparing to appeal against allocations. The number is expected to eclipse the 31,150 made in 2010–11, the last national figures to be published.
Graham Jones, an education consultant who helps families challenge admissions rulings, said: "It's been my busiest day ever." John Chard, head of School Appeals, which advises parents, said: "I would imagine that we're going to see an increase in appeals, particularly in these pinch points where there's not enough primary school places."
The Government insists £5billion will have been spent over this parliament to expand primary schools, with 260,000 extra places created already.
Ministers have blamed Labour for the shortfall, saying the party did not address the problem. But Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, said an increase in academies and free schools made it harder for councils. "The Government, for all the money they are throwing at the problem, haven't got the mechanism or ability to plan school provision where it is needed."
The Daily Telegraph found that:
Nationally, about one in seven pupils – 86,000 – is likely to have missed out on theirfirst choice school;
The squeeze on places was worse in the South, including Brighton, Bristol, East Sussex, Essex, Kent, Milton Keynes, North Somerset, Poole and Wiltshire;
Rejections were highest in London. In Kensington and Chelsea, 38 per cent failed at theirfirst choice, and 23 per cent were rejected from at least three schools;
In the Midlands, the councils of Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, Northamptonshire, Dudley and Solihull also reported fewer first choice allocations. Numbers also fell in northern authorities such as Liverpool, Wakefield, Knowsley and Co Durham;
In some areas, several children were not given a place, including 75 in Richmond upon Thames;
But more children gained places at their preferred school in several areas, including Stoke, Rutland, North East Lincolnshire and Middlesbrough.
A spokesman for the Department for Education said: "We are increasing the number of good school places by tackling underperformance and opening new free schools and academies." Tristram Hunt, the shadow education secretary, said David Cameron was failing "to provide enough good places for every child".
Editorial Comment: Page 25
Pressure points Local authority % first % one choice of three choices The best Rutland 97 99 North East Lincolnshire 96.97 n/a Doncaster 96.7 98.7 Shropshire 95.8 98.5 Central Bedfordshire 95 98 And worst Lewisham 75.42 n/a Hammersmith and Fulham 74.5 89 Islington 74.2 n/a Wandsworth 73.26 n/a Kensington and Chelsea 61.59 77.3
Document DT00000020140417ea4h0007y
