{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3520"}
____
  
NEWS
European elections: Conservatives face poll humiliation as one in three Tory voters defects to Ukip
By Tim Ross Political Correspondent   
1,079 words
20 April 2014
18:03
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Telegraph/ICM poll finds David Cameron faces a grim third-place finish behind Ukip in the European elections, as up to half of Tory voters abandon the party
The Conservatives face being forced into third place in next month’s European Parliament elections, as up to half of Tory voters prepare to desert the party, an exclusive poll for The Telegraph has found.
Labour is currently in first place, with 30 per cent of the vote, while Ukip are second on 27 per cent. The Conservatives are a distant third on 22 per cent, according to the ICM survey of 2,000 adults.
The poll reveals how many of those who voted Conservative at the last general election will turn against the party next month - the first UK-wide poll since 2010.
One in three voters who backed the Tories four years ago - 37 per cent - now say that they plan to vote for Nigel Farage’s UK Independence Party in the European elections on May 22, among those who intend to turn-out.
Mr Farage’s support is greatest among the over 65s, with four in 10 of those backing the party falling into the pensioner age range.
In total, some 50 per cent of those who voted for David Cameron in 2010 will either support a rival party or abstain next month, according to the ICM survey.
The survey demonstrates the extent of the task facing the Tories in averting what many fear will be a “disastrous” result in the European elections.
Some MPs have privately warned that there could be “consequences” for the Prime Minister if the results prove to be as bad as this poll suggests. Even at their most optimistic, Conservative strategists concede that the poll is likely to be “very tough” for their party.
The ICM online survey found however, that even taking the radical step of changing leader would not significantly improve Conservatives fortunes.
Even Boris Johnson, regarded as the most popular politician in the county, would deter as many voters as he attracts if he replaced Mr Cameron as party leader.
There was some support for the idea of a deal between Ukip and the Conservatives at the next general election, a prospect which David Cameron has refused to contemplate, to the disappointment of some Tory MPs.
The poll also shows that the Liberal Democrats are facing another bruising night at next month’s European elections, despite Nick Clegg’s recent publicity in national broadcast debates with Mr Farage. They currently stand on just an 8 per cent share of the vote.
However, the Conservatives are offered some hope by findings that suggest Ukip is simply a protest party, rather than a serious contender capable of winning seats at next year’s general election.
The poll analysed the reasons behind Ukip’s recent surge in support, asking how voters would explain the party’s rise in popularity. The most popular answer was that “people feel dissatisfied with the mainstream parties”, chosen by 42 per cent of respondents.
Some 26 per cent said Ukip’s “strong” stance on immigration was their most attractive feature, while 24 per cent attributed the party’s success to its promise to take Britain out of the EU.
Only two per cent said Ukip’s “credible plan for Britain’s economy” explained the party’s rise, and just five per cent regarded Nigel Farage’s leadership as the most significant factor.
Martin Boon, head of ICM Research, said: “This speaks volumes about the nature of politics at the present time. Ukip really are the convenient mid-cycle opportunity to kick the ruling classes.
“People are honing in on them when it is easy and convenient to do so in a second order election which they don’t really care about.
“Immigration is obviously something that is important to people but it is a distant second, and only 24 per cent of people mention the question of Europe which is Ukip’s central proposition.”
Mr Boon said the findings suggested Ukip would not be such an “attractive proposition” at next year’s general election.
However other polls, notably a large scale survey of thousands of voters in marginal seats last September, published by the former Conservative deputy chairman, Lord Ashcroft, have suggested that Ukip’s popularity could be enough to deny the Conservatives victory next year.
Some Tory MPs have proposed standing on joint Conservative-Ukip platforms, or signing a “non aggression pact” with Mr Farage’s party whereby Eurosceptic Conservatives would not be opposed by Ukip candidates next year.
Mr Cameron has repeatedly ruled out any deals with Ukip but today’s Sunday Telegraph/ICM poll suggests that such a deal would persuade 48 per cent of potential Ukip voters to consider backing the Tories.
Some 30 per cent of Tory voters would be more likely to turn out for the Conservatives in future if the party struck a deal with Ukip, compared to 24 per cent of Tory supporters who said they would be put off by such an agreement.
A number of Conservative MPs are said to be ready to stand aside to allow Boris Johnson, the Mayor of London, to take their seats and re-enter Parliament to revive the party’s fortunes and stand for the leadership.
However, the poll suggested that even Mr Johnson would not save the Conservatives if he were in charge. Some 43 per cent of voters would be more likely to support the Conservatives if Mr Johnson were leader, with 57 per cent saying they would be less likely to vote Tory.
Other potential leadership candidates fared even worse. Theresa May, the Home Secretary, would sway only 18 per cent of the electorate in the party’s favour, with 82 per cent turned off by the prospect of her leadership.
George Osborne, the Chancellor, won the backing of only 15 per cent, while Michael Gove, the Education Secretary, would appeal to just nine per cent of the electorate as a leader more likely to attract their vote than Mr Cameron.
:: ICM Research interviewed a random sample of 2000 adults online on 15-17th April 2014. Interviews were conducted across the country and the results have been weighted to the profile of all adults. ICM is a member of the British Polling Council and abides by its rules.
Document TELUK00020140419ea4j0053e
