{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"794"}
____
  
FINANCE
Speciality foods are a tasty business; From gluten-free treats to authentic British fare with a Halal twist to kielbasa sausages for Polish natives, speciality foods are booming, reports Rebecca Burn-Callander.
By Rebecca Burn-Callander Enterprise Editor   
1,382 words
25 February 2014
18:36
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Gluten-free products, once dismissed as tasteless, stodgy fare for coeliac sufferers, have hit the mainstream. Advances in food science and new trends in nutrition have seen the niche come on in leaps and bounds.
“Gluten-free" is now the most popular dietary search term on Google in the UK. As well as gluten-intolerant consumers, health-conscious Brits are now seeking to vary and improve their diets. According to last year’s research from Datamonitor, a third of British consumers either already buy gluten-free products or would consider doing so in the next 12 months.
One of the pioneers of the gluten-free movement is Lucinda Bruce-Gardyne, founder of Genius Foods. In 2007, she found out that her son was allergic to wheat and began scouting for gluten-free alternatives.
“All the gluten-free bread products that I could find were dry and gritty and had a nine-month shelf life," she said. “I didn’t want to feed my child a chemical experiment. He was miserable at children’s parties with nothing to eat, so I began experimenting with gluten-free recipes."
Mrs Bruce-Gardyne, a trained chef, spent three years working alone in her kitchen, improving her recipes through trial and error.
In 2009, she cracked it. “I made a bread that was soft, could be sliced, and tasted like bread," she said.
She launched her company and found a bakery in Scotland to manufacture her product. But it took another year to turn her Magimix recipe into an industrial batch.
The fledgling Genius Foods had a few false starts – only 2.4pc of consumers bought gluten-free bread at the time, so buyers were wary of taking on a new range that might end up in supermarket bins. But when Mrs Bruce-Gardyne approached Tesco, it placed an order for 700 stores. “They embraced the idea," she said. “We went from zero to 10,000 loaves a week within a fortnight."
The consumer response was unprecedented. “People were queuing outside shops and buying crates of our bread. The shops couldn’t order our products fast enough to keep them on the shelves."
This year, Genius Foods will turn over more than £40m and the company employs more than 400 staff. Its loaves are available in every major supermarket in the UK, as well as in North America, the Middle East, Spain and Australia. It now boasts a wide range of products, including pastry and cakes.
The company acquired two bakeries last year for £21m to allow it to embark on a huge expansion drive across the globe. “We’ll be selling gluten-free flatbreads and naan in Dubai, croissants in France and pies in Australia," said Mrs Bruce-Gardyne.
The gluten-free market will be worth $6.6bn worldwide by 2018 according to Markets and Markets, and many of the big corporations are hoping to grab a slice. The likes of Warburtons and Udi’s both offer gluten-free ranges, but Mrs Bruce-Gardyne is confident of her advantage.
“Our customers are very loyal to our product and it’s very hard to copy," she said. “Our recipe is a closely guarded secret. There are lots of challenging variables. Yeast is a living organism. The processes we use to turn the flours into something substantial, without using chemicals, are unique."
Today, Genius Foods bakes 1m loaves a week. “When I first started out, I wanted to be the UK brand leader in gluten-free," she said. “We were there in two months. Now we are on course to be the global brand leader."
Halal with a twist
“My business was born out of hunger," explained Shazia Saleem, founder of ieat, a Halal manufacturer of British ready meals. “When I was at university, most of my friends weren’t Muslim. We would go to the supermarket together and they all had lovely food in their trolleys while I was stuck with cheese and onion pasties and tuna sandwiches. I so wanted the shepherd’s pie."
Like the majority of Muslims, Ms Saleem observes a Halal diet. The word means “permissible" in Arabic and excludes certain foods like pork, as well as alcohol, prohibits any cross-contamination of products and demands that all animals are blessed before slaughter.
“Growing up, the only Halal foods that I could get at were curries," she said. “I knew that many other Muslims were also frustrated that they couldn’t buy authentic British food that was also Halal, so I decided to do something about it."
Ms Saleem spent six years honing her business model, taking jobs at Waitrose and What If! Innovation to learn about food retail and branding, and working for Dragons’ Den investor Peter Jones to learn how he turned Reggae Reggae sauce into a multi-million pound success story.
Finally, in October 2013, she decided to take the plunge and start her company. She was scrupulous in her Halal practices: no alcohol-based hand sanitisers; vinegar, a grey area under Halal rules, was banished from her dishes.
A single meeting with Sainsbury’s led to a contract, and her initial range of 12 products will be available in 23 stores across the South East at the end of this month.
The potential market for ieat is huge. According to the 2011 Census, there are 2.7m Muslims living in Britain and well over half of those are under 30. “It’s the younger generation who wants to eat spaghetti Bolognaise and cottage pie," explained Ms Saleem. “Our parents wanted the food they grew up with but we feel British, we are British and we love the culture."
Ieat’s recipes are not only Halal, but “Tayyab", which means “pure" or “ethical". “All the recipes use only kitchen cupboard ingredients – you could make them at home," explains Ms Saleem. “The animals come from certified farms to guarantee the best quality meat."
Non-Muslims have also taken to ieat’s products. “We’ve given the dishes a bit of a twist for an ethnic palate," said Ms Saleem. “We’ve added more spices, herbs, garlic and onion. But it’s not just Muslims who like the extra flavour. People are having Mexican for lunch and Thai food for dinner. The dishes we created, with these different flavour profiles, were extremely popular with the non-Muslim testers at our focus groups, too."
Satisfying the Polish palate
In the multicultural UK, a taste of home for Polish immigrants is also generating significant revenues for one UK company. Maciej Skarbonkiewicz, founder of Polish Food Products, imports delicacies including Krakowska kielbasa [smoked sausages from Krakow], Polish beer Zywiecka and is about to launch Polish Standard Vodka in the UK.
Mr Skarbonkiewicz founded his business in 2006, two years after the EU changed the immigration legislation, allowing Poles to live and work in the UK.
“Between 2006 and 2007, there were more than 1m Polish people living in the UK," he said. “There are a lot of Polish people wanting Polish foods. Now that number has come down to 600,000, but it’s a stable market."
Polish Food Products sells to cash and carries including the Millenium Group and Dhamecha, as well as supermarket chain Lidl and retailer Nisa. It focuses primarily on London, which is home to 200,000 Polish immigrants.
Many major supermarkets have created Polish sections to meet demand. “In Asda, there is a Polish cold cuts section," said Mr Skarbonkiewicz. “And it’s not just Polish people who love our products but British people, too. Polish dumplings have become a real favourite, and many people love Polish beer."
The popularity of Polish products among Brits has prompted Mr Skarbonkiewicz to look at China and Hong Kong as potential markets for his products.
Mr Skarbonkiewicz, who has lived in the UK for 21 years, has a tip for entrepreneurs looking to anticipate the next speciality food market for immigrants.
“The second wave is from Romania," he said. “Look out for the Romanian equivalent of the Polski sklep [Polish shop] opening up soon."
Document TELUK00020140225ea2p005bp
