{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3607"}
____
  
Features
Scots offered tax powers to stay in UK
Jason Allardyce   
1,137 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
1,7
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
LABOUR, the Conservatives and Lib Dems are to promise Scots greater tax powers for Holyrood in the event of a No vote in September to try to erode nationalist support.
With the polls narrowing, all three are believed to favour MSPs becoming responsible for at least 50% of the parliament's £35bn budget. The devolved parliament is responsible for less than 15% of its budget.
Following a meeting of an internal commission last week, Labour is expected to unveil proposals next month for "significant" devolution of income tax which could hand MSPs power to decide the rates and bands of income tax.
Air passenger, vehicle excise duties and aspects of welfare are also expected to come under Scottish control under the plans.
Tory sources say Scottish leader Ruth Davidson will pledge greater fiscal responsibility when their internal review team reports in May.
The Lib Dem offer may be the most wide-ranging of all, letting Scotland raise around two-thirds of its budget, collecting almost all income tax, capital gains tax, inheritance tax and air passenger duty.
The latest Scottish polling has put the No campaign's lead down to about 10 points, putting unionists under pressure to set out a positive alternative to independence. It follows Chancellor George Osborne's threat to ban Scotland from using the pound in the event of a Yes vote in September's referendum, which nationalists claim has backfired.
An SNP-commissioned Panelbase poll today puts No on 47% (-2 since the company polled two weeks ago) and Yes on 37 (unchanged), with 16% undecided (+2) — described by deputy first minister Nicola Sturgeon as "very encouraging".
The warnings on sterling from Osborne, Treasury chief secretary Danny Alexander and shadow chancellor Ed Balls are widely felt to have benefited the Yes camp (43%) more than the No campaign (25%), although unionists believe that it will help them in the long run.
However, a YouGov poll for The Sunday Times today finds that in England and Wales more people than not believe the opposite, with 28% thinking the Westminster intevention makes a Yes vote less likely and only 14% considering it more likely. But 58% of people in England and Wales would oppose an independent Scotland remaining in a currency union with them.
The Scottish government has threatened to refuse to shoulder a share of UK national debt unless such an arrangement applies.
Today it claims this would saddle English taxpayers with up to £130bn in extra debt and up to £5.5bn a year in additional interest payments — equivalent to increasing the basic rateContinued on page 7 ?? WW Tax powers on the table Continued from page 1 ?? of income tax in the rest of the UK by one pence.
Meanwhile, David Cameron is under pressure to debate independence with Alex Salmond when they take their cabinets to the northeast of Scotland tomorrow.
With the pair coming within 10 miles of each other on the outskirts of the Aberdeen, today's Panelbase poll indicates two-thirds of voters back a televised head-to-head for the occasion.
The prime minister has so far resisted the temptation, insisting the debate should be among the people of Scotland. Instead Cameron intends to use his visit to set out plans to strengthen the North Sea oil and gas industry within the Union, claiming it benefits from the UK's "broad shoulders".
Senior Labour, Lib Dem and Tory sources believe a clear commitment on more devolution before voters go to the polls will boost the prospect of a solid No vote in the referendum. Under the unionist party plans, defence and foreign affairs, along with corporation tax and VAT is expected to remain with Westminster.
The Labour commission's proposals have encountered resistance from some of its MPs who fear they will play into nationalist hands. However, senior party sources say the Scottish Labour leader Johann Lamont has won her battle to make a commitment to substantial extra devolution.
Dave Watson, a former Scottish Labour chairman and a senior Unison union official, said "the few siren voices" claiming more devolution would lead to independence are "stuck in a 1970's time warp".
Writing in The Sunday Times, he adds: "All the polls make it clear that the majority of Scots want greater devolution short of outright independence.
"Scottish Labour has to go with that majority by arguing for the fiscal powers that can help deliver a vision of the fairer and more equal society. Anything short of that really would encourage a drift to independence."
A draft of a proposed unionist cross-party agreement on more devolution, seen by The Sunday Times, suggests all three parties are prepared to let the Scottish parliament raise at least half of what it spends although they are not expected to make a formal detailed cross-party agreement before the referendum.
Under the proposal, drawn up by the cross-party campaign group Devo Plus which has members on each of the party's devolution commissions, Westminster would retain power over defence, foreign policy, immigration and monetary policy. The Queen would also remain head of state in Scotland.
Scotland would keep its 59 largely Labour MPs at Westminster in the event of further devolution, in a substantial concession to Ed Miliband's party.
Meanwhile, the Tories have claimed an independent Scotland would be "forced" by Europe to apply VAT on a whole range of products which are currently exempt from the charge. The party said a Yes vote would leave Scotland facing a "massive tax bombshell" which would have an impact on businesses and families across the country.
Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson has now challenged Salmond to "tell us fairly and squarely" what VAT rates would be charged on those items which currently have a zero VAT rate.
She made the demand after a letter from Donato Raponi, the head of the VAT unit at the European Commission, said that member states of the European Union "must apply" EU rules on VAT.
A Scottish government spokesman described the Tory claims as "preposterous scaremongering" and said an independent Scotland would negotiate continued membership of the EU from within the organisation.
The Tories say the UK could apply zero VAT rates on 54 areas because of a longstanding agreement with Europe. It means that shoppers here do not pay the charge on items such as newspapers, books, some foods, equipment for the disabled and children's clothes.
It came as the Public and Commercial Services — one of Scotland's largest trade unions — yesterday voted to remain neutral in the independence debate, despite nationalist hopes it would join the Yes campaign.
The union represents about 30,000 civil servants in Scotland.
Fiscal devolution is the simplest way to reduce inequality, page 25
Document ST00000020140223ea2n000zd
