{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1416"}
____
  
Four First World War artists who defined the conflict; Works by Wyndham Lewis, Otto Dix, Paul Nash and David Bomberg helped define the Great War, representing the challenging landscapes and the voices of the soldiers who would never return
949 words
3 March 2014
12:42
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The First World War was the first conflict to spawn a wealth of artistic output from those who fought on its battlefields. The Somme alone saw more writers take part than any other battle in history, including Siegfried Sassoon, Robert Graves, JRR Tolkien and Edmund Blunden. There, and on other fighting fronts, a new breed of well-educated soldier vividly chronicled their first-hand experiences through words, art and music.
Some were killed in action, bright lights of their generation such as the composer George Butterworth – another Somme casualty – whose creative promise would never be fulfilled. The “luckier" ones were left forever with a survivor’s guilt that darkly permeated their future work. All leave an invaluable legacy, whether through poetry, memoirs, fiction or art, that helps future generations to understand the reality of war. Here, Patrick Bishop selects four artists, composers and writers (and their key works) who experienced the conflict first-hand and whose works have not only come to define the war; they changed what came after.
WYNDHAM LEWIS: A BATTERY SHELLED (1919)
Wyndham Lewis perhaps knew more than any of his artistic contemporaries about the business of war.
He was in his thirties when the conflict began; and had already established himself as a leading light of the avant garde as the founder of the cubism-inspired Vorticist school and the author of its short-lived but hugely influential journal, Blast.
As an gunnery officer, he was intimately engaged in the artillery duels that did most of the killing on the Western Front. As well as commanding a battery, he acted as spotter, operating from exposed forward observation posts to call down fire on the enemy.
A Battery Shelled (above) is a mysterious construct. A group of soldiers, one of them apparently Lewis, look out with seeming indifference over a sterile landscape of bunkers and geometric trench lines peopled by robotic stick men.
Vorticism did not survive the war and subsequently Lewis applied his questing energy to writing and criticism, much of it contentious.
OTTO DIX: TRENCH WARFARE (1932)
Dix was a 23-year-old art student in Dresden when the war broke out and he enlisted enthusiastically in the German Army. He fought as a machine-gunner on the Eastern and Western fronts, took part in the Battle of the Somme, won the Iron Cross and left the trenches only after being shot in the neck a few months before hostilities ended. His experiences were to haunt him for the rest of his life and inform some of his darkest and most brilliant work. The results are exemplified by his 1932 painting Trench Warfare (below), whose macabre imagery and charnel-house palette evoke a medieval atmosphere of suffering and evil. Dix was determined to confront the public with the reality of the war, but his honesty was unwelcome and the picture caused an outcry when first shown in Cologne. The “unpatriotic" message of pointlessness was not lost on the Nazis, who included it in their 1937 exhibition of degenerate art.
PAUL NASH: WE ARE MAKING A NEW WORLD (1918)
No human figure inhabits this 1918 landscape (left). Nash seems to be saying that they are all gone, subsumed in the churned, polluted earth, stagnant water and shattered tree stumps, which the rising sun will never restore to life.
Nash was a public schoolboy, the son of a successful London lawyer. In 1914 he was at the Slade School of Art, one of a brilliant batch of students that included Stanley Spencer, Ben Nicholson and CRW Nevinson. He volunteered first for the Artists Rifles and arrived as a subaltern on the Western Front in February 1917. He was sent home after injuring himself in an accident but returned that autumn as an official war artist. His work did little to popularise the cause. As he declared in a letter to his wife, he was “no longer an artist, interested and curious", there to observe and record, but a “messenger" bent on bearing witness to the horrors of trench life. He succeeded triumphantly. Over the years, the flat colours and bold shapes of his wartime paintings have embedded themselves in our consciousness. When the next war broke out, Nash served once again as an official artist, creating images that are perhaps less bleak but equally unforgettable.
DAVID BOMBERG: SAPPERS AT WORK (1918-19)
Bomberg was the son of working-class Polish- Jewish immigrant parents and one of the most precocious talents of his generation. He was another product of the prewar Slade but left after disagreements with the surgeon-turned-teacher Henry Tonks, the school’s presiding genius who disapproved of his avantgarde approach. Bomberg drew inspiration from cubism, futurism and Vorticism, employing an angular, machine-age aesthetic.
He joined the Royal Engineers in 1915 and his first-hand experience of the most mechanised war in history was to have a profound effect on his artistic development. By the time he painted this picture of Canadian tunnellers burrowing under Hill 50 at Saint Eloi, south east of Ypres, he was moving back to the more naturalistic style that he would employ for the rest of his working life.
Bomberg lost his brother and his friend, the poet Isaac Rosenberg, to the war. His subsequent preoccupation with the colours and shapes of nature can be seen as a response to his own harrowing experiences.
READ: Four writers who defined the conflict >>
READ: Four composers who defined the conflict >>
Document TELUK00020140303ea33004ph
