{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3754"}
____
  
NEWS
Labour's working class support 'died'
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
527 words
28 April 2014
21:54
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Middle class Labour has permanently lost support to Ukip, claims Lord Glasman
Labour’s working class support has “died” as the party becomes “very middle class”, an advisor to Ed Miliband has said.
Lord Glasman, the policy guru ennobled by Mr Miliband, said Labour voters who defected to Ukip may never return because the party is failing to address concerns on welfare and immigration.
He told The Times: "That is the dilemma at the heart of the party's strategy — is it possible to address these economic, political and cultural concerns when the party is becoming, in many ways, very middle class? What I mean by that is liberal and progressive in its sensibility.”
"Ed [Miliband] is trying to address it. This is a long-term trend since 2001, in terms of the working-class vote just declining quite dramatically. The Labour middle-class vote held up [in 2010]. It was the working-class vote that died.
“These are often people who are earning, who have jobs, but they don't see Labour as representing their interests."
Many working class communities have a feeling of “dispossession and abandonment”, the peer said.
"There was possibly an assumption at first that [the rise of Ukip] would just work against the Tories," he said. "But there is a view that says that after the European and local elections are over, there could be a swing back to the Conservatives of Ukip voters. But will there be necessarily a swing back to Labour from the Ukip voters?"
Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, yesterday said Ukip is attracting racist candidates who make “disgusting” and “un-British” comments.
The Health Secretary, said Ukip leader Nigel Farage had to denounce one of his candidates who suggested that Lenny Henry, the comedian, should emigrate to a “black country”.
The gaffe was the latest embarrassment for Ukip, which last week was forced to suspend the “poster boy” of its European party election broadcast after it was revealed he had posted a series of racist comments on Twitter.
However, weekend polls suggest the rows have failed to dent Ukip’s popularity among voters, with polls giving Ukip a lead over Labour for the first time.
The survey by YouGov for The Sunday Times gave 31 per cent of the vote in next month’s poll, ahead of Labour (28 per cent), the Conservatives (19 per cent) and the Liberal Democrats (9 per cent).
Mr Hunt said: “It’s for Nigel Farage to make clear that isn’t Ukip’s official view, but also to explain why so many people with those kinds of views seem to be attracted to becoming candidates for Ukip. I think it is racist.
“I think it is totally unacceptable, he is as British as you and I are. There is a broader risk for Ukip here. They position themselves as a patriotic party, they plaster the Union Jacks all over their leaflets but actually there’s something very un-British about this kind of language, very unpleasant. We are not a divisive country, there are some real dangers for Ukip.”
Document TELUK00020140428ea4s001gv
