{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2915"}
____
  
Guardian Comment and Debate Pages
Comment: A vision of a better yesterday won't give Farage the future: Ukip could do well in European elections but better times will chip away at its bedrock of insecurity and nostalgia
Chris Huhne Chris Huhne is a former cabinet minister and Liberal Democrat MEP   
964 words
31 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
28
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The second Clegg-Farage bout may be even more engaging than the first. Snap polling last week judged Nigel Farage the winner. But Nick Clegg won too. He was seen as a conviction politician prepared to mix it for his unpopular beliefs, and as the champion of pro-European sentiment that spreads wider than his party.
There was also a straw in the wind pointing to happier times: YouGov just found more people saying they would vote Lib Dem in the European elections in May than in the general election. If true, that reverses the norm, whereby the Lib Dems poll lower in the European elections than in local or Westminster competitions.
Judged on the arguments, Clegg also won because he caught out Farage making up facts. Farage admitted as much when he said he had estimated that 75% of UK law was made in Europe (against a House of Commons library estimate of 7%). As Senator Daniel Moynihan said, everyone is entitled to their own opinions, but not to their own facts.
In politics, though, never ignore emotion. The belief that propositions should be consistent with facts - empiricism - is far from universally held, let alone practised. Fewer than half of US Republican voters believe that human beings evolved over time. Millions are prepared to ignore peer-reviewed climate science because its conclusions call for what they fear may be uncomfortable change.
The belief in rational argument is a progressive phenomenon. One disappointed US Democrat, Drew Westen, even wrote a book called The Political Brain that sought to explain why rational and right Democrats kept losing to emotive and wrong Republicans. In evolutionary psychology, fear - the instinct to fight or flee - trumps reason.
The belief in argument is particularly strong among liberals, which may account for the Lib Dems' voting support. One factor consistently associated with Lib Dem voting is higher education (which is also why the student tuition fees issue has proved so toxic).
Clegg's problem tackling Farage is that Ukip supporters are least likely to be well educated. A recent Populus poll showed nearly eight out of 10 Ukip supporters never went beyond secondary school. That compares with six out of 10 Labour and Tory supporters, and half of Lib Dems. Many of the people watching last week would have been less fussed about Farage's facts and more titllated by his prejudices.
Ukip is a classic party of the threatened and the left behind, the people who most fear social and economic change. Extraordinarily for Labour, Ukip is also now the only party where the blue-collar working class account for more than half of its support. Except Ukip, we are all bourgeois now.
In this sense, Ukip is the polar opposite of the Lib Dems. The well-educated can afford to embrace change, because those who learn can do so again. They are confident and capable. Globalisation is not a threat, but an opportunity. Immigration provides cleaners, not competition.
By contrast, Ukip's supporters are old, fearful and anxious. The party's appeal is laced with nostalgia for a past in which jobs were secure, teenagers were respectful and smokers never died of cancer. It's a vision of a better yesterday.
This used to be Tory terrain: Sir John Major quoting Orwell's old maids bicycling to holy communion through the morning autumn mist. But with Ukip, it is not just an elegy for a mythical age, but also a call to action.
Its solutions are simple, xenophobic and authoritarian. They appeal not just to middle-class people weaned on self-reliance - the small shopkeeper who has always been the bedrock of Poujadist and fascist revolt - but also to working-class folk menaced by insecurity.
It is quite wrong to think of a left-right spectrum that prevents leftwingers flipping rightwards. A better model is a political circle in which rightwing authoritarians can trade votes with left-wing ones. Jean-Marie Le Pen's Front National drew support from the Parti Communiste Francais, another authoritarian and nationalist party. (The old PCF happily backed nuclear missiles as long as they pointed in "all directions".)
The mayoralty that the Front National won outright last week was Henin-Beaumont, a working-class former mining area in the Pas-de-Calais. This appeal to the threatened working class is also why some of Ukip's most likely targets are Labour seats such as Great Grimsby, as Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin recently argued.
If Ukip support is widespread but not too high, it will still come more from working-class Tories, and it will damage the Conservatives in Labour-Tory marginals. But the call of the Tory right to match Ukip's policies - on immigration, Europe or gay marriage - is unlikely to have any effect.
Ukip's appeal has little to do with policy, and everything to do with fear of change. It is no accident that Ukip peaked last year at 17% (when polled about voting in a general election), and that economic recovery has whittled that down to 12%. Better times are pricking Farage's bubble.
Ukip will still do well this May: on the subject of votes in the European elections, Ukip now polls 26% compared with 17% five years ago. A European success may temporarily bolster its standing, but it is running up a down escalator. There is hiss of air escaping from the Ukip balloon.
Chris Huhne is a former cabinet minister and Liberal Democrat MEP
Document GRDN000020140330ea3v00006
