{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1202"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Ukip or UKIP? It's over to you, Nigel
Damian Thompson   
626 words
22 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
22
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
I had coffee with Peter Whittle this week. He's an openly gay British writer and former television executive who spent years working in Los Angeles. He founded and runs a trendy think tank called the New Culture Forum (NCF). He is unequivocally anti–racist and supports gay marriage.
Also, he's just been made the culture spokesman for the United Kingdom Independence Party.
Yes, Ukip. Or UKIP, as traditionalists prefer: they hate the way newspapers use lower–case letters. (In case you were wondering, our rule is that acronyms are "capped down" if they can be pronounced as words – other examples are Nato and Aids. I'll come back to this Ukip/ UKIP thing later.)
I didn't know Whittle was a member of Ukip. What a smart appointment by Nigel Farage! The NCF is my favourite think tank. It's made up of media professionals who look as if they're employed by the Guardian/BBC. But, actually, they've turned their backs on multiculturalism and its weaselly contempt for Britain. Nor are they keen on the Cameroons' multiculti lite with a dusting of ironic patriotism. Instead, they celebrate British culture in a way that isn't "sheepish, tentative and inhibited".
Although the NCF isn't politically affiliated, Ukip has effectively adopted its ideas by putting Whittle in charge of culture. "We must replace multiculturalism with integration," he says. "Britain must be totally colour–blind but reject any subtle ambivalence about national pride." He favours using the weapons of the Left against it: for example, mocking the student–union "comedy" of Radio 4, which is far too busy policing cultural boundaries to be funny – and gets away with it because the Tories, with the exception of Michael Gove, are such cowards.
Peter Whittle is someone who could persuade middleof–the–road voters to support Ukip. His appointment is a reminder that Nigel Farage can be nuanced and flexible when it suits him – note how skilfully (i.e. unobtrusively) he ditched Ukip's campaign against gay marriage this week on the grounds that the battle is lost.
And yet… Whittle tells me that since joining Ukip "I haven't met any Godfrey Bloom types, or any bigots or racists". To which I can only reply: Peter, have you read any comment threads underneath online articles that discuss immigration, Islam, sexuality or Europe? No website is safe from Ukip's equivalent of the SNP's cybernats. Tirades against "LibLabCon", gays, Muslims etc, of varying degrees of unpleasantness, are almost invariably signed off with "vote UKIP".
We are hearing a lot at the moment about how ex–Labour voters are emerging as a bloc within the party. But I see another division: between a sensible outfit that wants a classical liberal Britain outside the EU, which I think of as lower–case Ukip; and permanently angry conspiracy theorists whom I think of as UKIP, or maybe UKIP!!!!, whose American equivalents have made the Republicans unelectable.
This isn't to say that Nigel Farage is wrong to chase the protest vote, or that he should tone down his attacks on the corruption of Brussels and the Conservatives' terrified cringeing in the face of Leftwing pressure groups.
But he's got to stop giving "maverick" activists the benefit of the doubt when, as happened recently, one of them talks about "sending them all back" – and he has to find a way to drown out the professional bores who bang on about "LibLabCon traitors" in online discussion forums.
They're hijacking your brand, Nigel, and driving away potential supporters just when you should be entering the mainstream. So which is it to be: Ukip or UKIP?
Document DT00000020140322ea3m0006k
