{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1227"}
____
  
News
Tory MPs warn of 'near-obsession' with migrants
Jack Grimston   
339 words
23 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
MODERNISERS in the Conservative party are to begin a fightback against anti-immigration rightwingers, warning that its target of pushing net migration below 100,000 is arbitrary, damaging to the economy and "undeliverable".
Conservatives for Managed Migration, which will be launched on Tuesday, warns that the two biggest parties, egged on by UKIP, have tried to outdo each other in tough rhetoric on immigration.
The result, the group's founder believes, is that Tories appear to many outsiders to have a "near-obsession" with immigration and to be "fundamentally hostile" to those not born in Britain.
The group, chaired by Mark Field, MP for the Cities of London and Westminster, wants to remove barriers that stop businesses and universities bringing high-fliers to Britain.
They believe this should be combined with tougher measures to ensure immigrants who abuse the system are deported.
Field's campaign is the latest attempt to stop Tory policies being dragged to the right in advance of the European elections in May. Other groups have been launched by pro-European and green Conservative MPs.
Field writes today on the Sunday Times website: "The current immigration crackdown has big implications for our nation and our economy. A cap on numbers is not only undeliverable but leads to an unhealthy focus on headline figures that is disconnected from reality."
The Conservatives in government have a target to push net immigration down to the "tens of thousands". However, this is becoming increasingly difficult to meet.
Net immigration rose by more than 30% to 212,000 in the 12 months to September 2013.
Other members of the new group include Brooks Newmark, MP for Braintree, and Nirj Deva, an MEP for southeast England.
Field argues that the government has few ways of cutting immigration. Nationals of other EU countries can move here freely, while asylum seekers are protected by human rights legislation. The result is that academics, business people and students from outside the EU are being targeted.
Document ST00000020140323ea3n000rg
