{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3253"}
____
  
News
Brick attack on Ukip MEP in new raid by 'Left thugs'
Anil Dawar   
336 words
15 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
22
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
THUGS attacked the home of a Ukip MEP, throwing a brick through his front window while he and his family slept upstairs.
It is the fourth time yobs have targeted Gerard Batten's house in recent years and he believes Left-wing extremists were responsible.
The attack came just over a week before the Euro elections when Mr Batten's anti-EU party is set to create a huge political upset having overtaken Labour in the polls. Speaking from the threebedroom house in Forest Gate, east London, he said: "Someone is clearly trying to intimidate me but it won't work. "Why would someone target my house unless it was to do with my political work? It fits in with a campaign of intimidation against Ukip going on around the country.
"We have seen Ukip premises vandalised, billboards destroyed and elected representatives, campaigners and activists targeted with physical and verbal abuse.
"Many if not all of these attacks appear to have been driven by the hard Left and their allies operating under the guise of 'anti-racism'.
"These thugs clearly don't want us to have any debate on immigration and the EU."
Mr Batten, 60, his wife Lina, 56, and two sons aged 25 and 23 were first woken by a loud bang at 3.30am on Tuesday but found no damage. About 45 minutes later, they heard a huge crash and found the double-glazed window smashed and a half brick on the carpet.
Outside they found broken bricks from the first unsuccessful attack.
Mr Batten, whose home was targeted three times in a week in 2008, said: "There were huge shards of glass all over the sofa. Someone could easily have been sleeping on the sofa and I dread to think what would have happened."
A police spokesman said last night: "Our inquiries into a case of criminal damage are ongoing. No one has been arrested at this stage."
Document THEEXP0020140515ea5f0004m
