{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3266"}
____
  
News
Romanians and Bulgarians quit Britain despite lifting of curbs
Richard Ford   
382 words
15 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
18
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The number of Romanian and Bulgarian migrants working in Britain has fallen since labour market restrictions were lifted at the beginning of this year.
Figures published yesterday by the Office for National Statistics showed a surprise 4,000 drop to 140,000 in the number of people from both countries working in the first three months of the year, compared with the final quarter of 2013. Despite this, the number rose year on year by 25 per cent from 112,000 to 140,000.
The number of migrants from eight former Soviet-bloc states, including Poland, working in Britain increased by nearly 75,000.
The figures appear to contradict predictions that lifting border restrictions on Romanians and Bulgarians seeking work in Britain would lead to a huge influx in numbers.
Ion Jinga, the Romanian ambassador to Britain, wrote on the HuffPost UK website: "The Romanians' flood to the UK is over even before it started."
The year-on-year rise suggests that thousands of Romanians and Bulgarians came before labour market curbs were lifted to work in a self-employed capacity, a criteria not covered by the restrictions.
The figures brought demands that Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, should apologise for scaremongering.
Anna Soubry, a Conservative defence minister, accused him of peddling "nonsense". She told BBC Radio 4's World at One programme: "Ukip preys on people's fears — it preys on prejudices in many people. And they make these wild, actually rather offensive claims, and hey, what happens? It was all a load of nonsense." The minister added, however, that the Conservatives were unlikely to meet their pledge to reduce overall net migration to the tens of thousands by next May.
Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons home affairs select committee, said that the figures were unsurprising. "The committee viewed for itself how the supposed flood of immigration from Romania and Bulgaria was little more than a trickle. It would appear now that many may have actually left the UK."
Danny Alexander, chief secretary to the Treasury, said: "The very modest numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians coming to work in Britain this year is in stark contrast to the inflammatory rhetoric of earlier this year."
Leading article, page 32
Document T000000020140515ea5f000ab
