{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3757"}
____
  
NEWS
Election candidate arrested over Churchill speech
By Martin Evans Crime Correspondent   
755 words
28 April 2014
20:40
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
European election candidate was quoting an anti-Islamic passage from Winston Churchill book when he was arrested
A candidate in the European elections has been arrested after making a speech quoting from a book by Winston Churchill about Islam.
Paul Weston, chairman of the far right Liberty GB party, was making the speech on the steps of Winchester Guildhall, Hampshire, on Saturday, when a member of the public complained to police and he was arrested.
He had been reading from Churchill's book The River War, written in 1899 while he was a British army officer in Sudan.
Mr Weston, who is standing as a candidate in the South East European elections on May 22, was detained after he failed to comply with a request by police to move on under the powers of a dispersal order made against him and he was arrested on suspicion of religious/racial harassment.
A former UKIP candidate, who fell out with the party over what he described as its failure to address issues around Islam in Britain, went on to found the British Freedom Party.
The group formed an alliance with the far right English Defence League, but he quit the group last year launching Liberty GB.
Mr Weston, who recently predicted a war in Britain within 20-years between the white working class and immigrants, is married to a Romanian migrant.
He claims to have worked as a deep sea diver, a pilot in Africa and a property developer in the Czech Republic.
A Hampshire police spokesman said: “A 50-year-old man from Dorset was arrested outside Winchester Guildhall at approximately 2.30pm on Saturday April 26 after he failed to comply with a section 27 dispersal order.
"The dispersal order was issued following complaints from members of the public about the man's behaviour.
"He was further arrested on suspicion of religious/racial harassment. He has been bailed pending further inquiries to report back to police on May 24."
A Liberty GB spokesman said: "Mr Weston was standing on the steps of Winchester Guildhall, addressing the passers-by in the street with a megaphone. He quoted an excerpt about Islam from the book The River War by Winston Churchill.
"Reportedly, a woman came out of the Guildhall and asked Mr Weston if he had the authorisation to make this speech. When he answered that he didn't, she told him 'It's disgusting!' and then called the police.
"Six or seven officers arrived. They talked with the people standing nearby, asking questions about what had happened. The police had a long discussion with Mr Weston, lasting about 40 minutes.
"At about 3pm he was arrested. They searched him, put him in a police van and took him away."
His arrest has led reignited the debate about freedom of speech, particularly given that Mr Weston was reading from a book by wartime Prime Minister, Winston Churchill.
But those in the Muslim community said the police were correct to act if Mr Weston’s actions were deliberately intended to incite hatred.
Mohamed Shafiq, leader of the Ramadan Foundation, said: “Of course there should be freedom of speech, but with freedom of speech comes responsibility. If someone was to deliver this message in the centre of Bradford for example where there is a large Muslim population then it could be seen as a deliberate act of incitement.
“We are banning extremists from the Muslim community, the likes of Anjem Choudary, so it is right that the policy is applied equally.
“I think such people are very unpleasant people who thrive on publicity and thrive on winding people up and deliberately trying to upset people.
“Winston Churchill said and wrote many great things, as Muslims we do not agree with his description of Islam in this passage and obviously a member of the public who heard these comments was offended enough to contact the police and complain.”
A spokesman for the Muslim Council of Britain said: “We are sure that even Mr Churchill, if confronted with what he wrote as a young man would now blush at his own writings, just as he would when presented with his description of Gandhi as a 'half- naked fakir.'
“Our faith has often been criticised and attacked, so we are used to it. The question is, will Mr Weston's action lead to a credible violent attack against Muslims in this country? We leave that for the courts to decide.”
Document TELUK00020140428ea4s002jt
