{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2267"}
____
  
News
Vote of frustration will be shown at polls
Alison Little   
357 words
21 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
5
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
DAVID Cameron said yesterday his EU referendum pledge will be a vote-winner at next year's General Election but may not shift opinion at tomorrow's European elections.
Polls suggest that Ukip will win the Euro poll with Labour second and the Tories third.
Asked on BBC Radio 4's Today programme why his promise to re-negotiate EU membership then have an in-out referendum by 2017 did not seem to have benefited his party, Mr Cameron said people had been through a tough recession and were "frustrated" over issues like immigration. He said: "Inevitably in a set of elections people want to send some messages to the Government about issues they are frustrated about.
"I don't only share those frustrations, I'm acting on them. We are the only party that has a clear plan for dealing with immigration, reforming our relationship with Europe, keeping our economy on track."
But he conceded: "I think in many ways the referendum pledge will have its greatest relevance at the time of the next election when people will be choosing, do you want to have the Conservatives, David Cameron, continuing with a longterm economic plan that's turning the country around and an in-out referendum? "Or do you want Labour - that will tax, spend and borrow - or do you want another party that could risk not having a long-term economic plan and referendum?" He rejected Deputy PM Nick Clegg's claim that it was unpatriotic to want to leave the EU because it would damage the economy. Mr Cameron said it was possible either to want to stay in or leave the EU and be patriotic.
He said: "Your patriotism isn't defined by your position on this question. Your patriotism is defined by your love of your country, its institutions, its history, what it can do in the world."
He believed Britain would maximise its influence if it achieved reform which recognised its wish for a relationship based on trade and cooperation - and other EU leaders were starting to echo his points.
Document THEEXP0020140521ea5l0004t
