{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3201"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Labour to end reliance on migrant workers
Georgia Graham   
367 words
10 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
1
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
BRITAIN risks becoming "dependent" on cheap migrant labour, Yvette Cooper will say today.
A Labour government would create laws to stop companies using migrants to under–cut the wages of British workers, and the "serious exploitation" of migrants by businesses would be made a criminal offence, she will say.
The shadow home secretary will also attack the Government for having a "worst of all worlds" stance, in which illegal immigration is getting worse while businesses are unable to find people with the skills they need.
Last month, James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, accused better–off families and big businesses of helping to support mass immigration of benefiting from the recent arrival of foreign workers in Britain.
Mr Brokenshire said a "wealthy metropolitan elite" of middle–class households has helped to support mass immigration to Britain by demanding cheap labour and services.
Miss Cooper will say: "We do not want to live in a society dependent on the exploitation of cheap migrant labour – it increases low skilled immigration, increases unfairness and resentment.
"This kind of exploitation should be illegal. But the law isn't working. We need change.
"The truth is that, for too long, exploitation in the labour market – a cause and effect of low–skilled immigration and illegal immigration – has gone unchecked.
"But we want to go further. We want clearer, stronger laws so businesses know where they stand and responsible employers know they won't be undercut, but so that it is clear that employers who use pressure or force to exploit people and get round employment law are committing a crime."
Her words come as Labour announce a nationwide consultation with businesses, trade unions, communities and workers into the laws around exploitation and undercutting of wages.
Miss Cooper will also use her speech at the Local Government Association in Westminster to commit to proper exit checks as part of UK border policy as well as fingerprinting illegal immigrants caught at the border.
The shadow home secretary will also admit that the last Labour government "got things wrong on immigration" and should have put transitional controls in place for countries such as Poland.
Document DT00000020140410ea4a000aj
