{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1223"}
____
  
Editorial
Cor blimey, Mary Poppins, you make William and Kate look radical
TANYA GOLD   
549 words
23 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
27
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have hired a Norland nanny. She is a Spanish woman called Maria Teresa Turrion Borrallo; she is single and described, presumably by palace sources, as being "married to the job". (There is always something suspect about an unmarried woman, something needing to be explained.) Before we go further you must be apprised of the facts of the Norland nanny, a creature so romanticised that she comes with her own scent of nostalgia and myth. She is like a Bentley Continental, but human; a nanny to the aristocracy and, now, the plutocracy. I heard there is a Norland nanny on a superyacht right now, employed just to wait for visiting children, a floating babysitter out on the high seas.
During a three-year course in a mansion in Bath, the students practise with an electronic doll in a Silver Cross pram; they wear a twee Edwardian uniform that makes them look like Mary Poppins (their idol); they were invented in 1892 by a woman who looked like the Alastair Sim character in The Belles of St Trinian's whose inspirational mantra was: "Put a silver-backed hairbrush on your dressing table when you arrive. That way you won't be taken for one of the servants." They wear gloves and lace-up shoes and I fantasise they are trained in hand-to-hand combat and are actually all jewel thieves, but I doubt this is true.
Rumours are that the uniform is a husband-deterrent, or chastity belt, although not all nannies wear it. It is at the employers' discretion, although the Cambridge Norland has already been spotted in "a jumper and slacks".
I know the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge would never do anything deliberately interesting — that is not their way. But as trendsetters (a foul term and a foul thing) they have entered what we must presumably call the nanny wars at a fascinating time and made a subtle point.
Since James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, slagged off people who hired foreigners over natives, to which the prime minister had to respond that his nanny is, actually, Nepalese, people have been arguing about the correct kind of nanny; the politically correct kind. It became uncomfortably confessional as politicians rushed to audit their domestic staff; Nick Clegg had to admit to employing a Belgian.
Of course, what they have actually been arguing about is immigration and class, while pretending to argue about nannies, because actually arguing about immigration and class upsets them, as well it might, because they do not come out of it well. Columnists have written, with judicious stupidity, that they can't employ an English girl — too stroppy! They really mean too working-class. "Isn't it more comfortable to have a friendly foreigner?" is the self-serving subtext; in Britain there is a whiff of discomfort about employing a member of the servant class.
So the Norland founder's advice to her girls was excellent; and in choosing a top British brand rather than a poor eastern European immigrant — but one in a posh foreign ... (what is the word?) shade — the Cambridges have managed the astonishing feat of appearing, of all things, progressive.
@tanyagold1
Document ST00000020140323ea3n000px
