{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1863"}
____
  
NEWS
Foreign workers force out low-skilled British workers during recession, says report; Home Office study concludes foreign immigrants do have an effect on job market, but mainly for 'lower skilled natives'
By David Barrett and James Kirkup   
423 words
6 March 2014
18:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Low-skilled British workers have been forced out of jobs by migrant labour during the recession, an official government report has concluded.
The landmark study is expected to give more weight to Conservative efforts to tighten immigration rules in the face of opposition from Liberal Democrat members of the Coalition.
Its main conclusions - that “lower skilled natives" suffer the most from competition with migrant workers - are also likely to form a cornerstone of the Government’s ongoing argument with the European Commission over the need for radical reform of EU “free movement" rules.
The 80-page Home Office study said there was “relatively little evidence" that migration caused British workers to be “displaced" from jobs during a “buoyant" market.
But it added: “However, there is evidence of some labour market displacement, particularly by non-EU migrants in recent years when the economy was in recession.
“Where displacement effects are observed, these tend to be concentrated on lower skilled natives."
Significantly, the report’s authors admitted they could not give a full picture of the impact of immigration on the job market because they had not considered some “major changes", such as the EU accession of Poland and seven other eastern European countries in 2004.
Another key factor omitted from the report was that rising net migration over the last 12-18 months has been mainly driven by workers from within the EU, particularly from countries suffering high unemployment such as Spain and Italy.
Therefore, the study’s findings could already be significantly out of date.
“Significant EU migration is still a relatively recent phenomenon and this does not imply that impacts do not occur in some circumstances," it said.
Ministers have repeatedly cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee - published in 2012 and covering the period from 1995 to 2010 - that found 23 British workers were left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals from outside the EU.
But the new analysis stated that “when data from part of the period of economic downturn (2009 and 2010) were omitted, the impact of non-EU migration was not found to be statistically significant".
It added that the MAC was careful to highlight a “tentative association" identified in the data rather than a “causal interpretation" and “this should be emphasised in any interpretation of this report’s results".
Document TELUK00020140306ea3600568
