{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3827"}
____
  
News
Polish immigrants could mean that 'tak' or 'nie' votes decide referendum
Mike Wade   
611 words
26 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Scotland
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A wave of new arrivals from Eastern Europe could play a decisive role in the fate of the 300-year union between England and Scotland, pushing Alex Salmond's nationalists over the winning line in the independence referendum.
Ania Lewandowska, 29, a campaigner who works for Alyn Smith, the Scottish National Party MEP, has no doubt that many "new Scots" will vote "yes" in September's ballot. "Poles know that change can be for the better — they are not afraid of it," she said. "Of course, some are still undecided — that's true of any sector of Scottish society — but in my mind most Poles will decide yes."
About 55,000 Polish-born people lived in Scotland at the time of the 2011 census, and by the time of the referendum it is possible the population will have almost doubled. Maciej Wiczynski, an SNP supporter, has pooled information from local authorities and found that 30,000 Poles have registered to vote. He has still to receive data from Edinburgh, home to Scotland's largest Polish community.
Mr Wiczynski, a health worker, arrived in Scotland four years ago and was initially sceptical about independence. However, after researching the issue, he was won over.
"Money is not the issue," he said. "It is more to do with social justice. Westminster is not working for the people of Scotland. We are more centre-left."
Tomek Borkowy, 61, agreed. He is an actor and Edinburgh Fringe promoter who came to Britain in 1982, when he fled martial law in his country, and has lived in Scotland for the past 25 years. He likes that Scotland is small, and described the ease with which he was able to arrange a lunch meeting with John Swinney, the country's cabinet secretary for finance — "me, a foreigner, living in Edinburgh! Would that have happened if I had approached George Osborne? Absolutely not."
He added: "Small is beautiful, small is better government. This is now my country. I will vote for independence. Most Poles will. This is a no-brainer."
Pawel Nuckowski, 41, however, is one who will not. The film-maker, who has lived in Edinburgh for 18 months, said he was inclined to support the Yes cause, but was unlikely to vote. "How would Poles feel if British people moved in and decided on the future of my country?" he said.
Marcin Wilkolaski, who has a shop on Leith Walk selling Polish hams and pickles, took a dim view of the Yes campaign, saying: "Scotland and England have been together for centuries — that is very profitable for everyone."
Anecdotally, he may be pulling against the tide, but the Polish community remains too small to register in many opinion surveys. The numbers involved, and the transitory nature of a substantial part of the population, leave some inclined to dismiss the notion that Poles could influence the outcome of the referendum.
John Curtice, professor of politics at the University of Strathclyde, said that only 8 per cent of Scotland's population was born outside the UK and Ireland, adding: "EU citizens are less likely to be on the register — partly it's motivational, partly it's circumstantial. How much they engage in politics is debatable."
But if the polls keep narrowing, 10,000 votes could be decisive. Should the Yes campaign prevail, Mr Borkowy said, David Cameron would have only himself to blame for failing to offer Scotland "devolution max".
Like Mr Wiczynski, Mr Borkowy identified with "we" Scots. "We should escape," he said. "We have the possibilities now, an historic chance to change everything."
Document T000000020140426ea4q000ko
