{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"742"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
CLEGG'S LEADERSHIP IN DANGER AFTER DEBATE MAULING
Macer Hall   
466 words
5 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
31
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
INSIDE POLITICS
MICHAEL PORTILLO used to employ a sly trick to wrong–foot opponents whenever he appeared on the BBC political debate show Question Time.
The former Tory Cabinet minister would seek out panellists from rival parties in the green room before the programme was filmed and be as rude to them as possible. Once the studio cameras were rolling he would turn on the charm and suave politeness.
His plan was that in the eyes of the audience he would come across as a paragon of calm and good reason while his thoroughly wound–up opponents would rant and rave with boiling fury.
Nigel Farage practised some similar gamesmanship on Nick Clegg in their second live broadcast debate about Britain's future in Europe on Wednesday night.
The UK Independence Party leader's team goaded the Lib Dems by threatening the Deputy Prime Minister with a highly personalised character assassination that never materialised in the BBC Two studio.
Clegg walked right into the trap. He clattered into the debate full of indignation and let fly with a string of hyperbolic insults and feeble scripted jokes. Mr Farage remained serene and let the barbs bounce off, sticking to the key issues of immigration and democracy rather than indulging in personal attacks.
It gave the Ukip leader an unexpected statesmanlike air and left the Deputy PM looking like the swivel–eyed loon. For all his experience at the top of politics Mr Clegg was tactically undone over the course of the two debates and is a diminished figure at Westminster.
His aim had been to turn himself into the leading advocate for Britain's membership of the EU and at least rally the dwindling band of Brussels enthusiasts around the Lib Dem banner.
But the overwhelming verdict of the snap opinion polls – more than two thirds in favour of Mr Farage – have left that strategy in tatters.
Mr Clegg's reputation as a formidable gladiator in the arena of the live television debate – won at the last general election – is fading.
Lib Dems and Europhiles in general are beginning to wonder whether Mr Clegg is really up to the task of being their leader.
Tim Farron, the Lib Dem president and a potential future leadership challenger from the Left of the party, was noticeably on manoeuvres this week. He distanced himself from the cuts to housing benefit that Mr Clegg helped to bring into force.
The Lib Dem leader's authority is vanishing fast as his party faces a hammering at the general election.
Tory backbenchers frequently ask what is the point of Nick Clegg? The danger for the Deputy PM is that now his own MPs are beginning to ponder the same question.
Document THEEXP0020140405ea450003p
