{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3842"}
____
  
News
Fruitcakes, herberts and the Gateshead Conga: when Nigel took on the North
Michael Deacon   
1,203 words
26 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
6
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Sketch
IF I had to pick one moment that summed up Ukip's tour of northern England, it would be this. It was Wednesday night in Gateshead, and, sporting the leer of satisfaction that must haunt David Cameron's dreams, Nigel Farage had just sauntered on stage at Ukip's largest public meeting yet, to the idolatrous acclaim of more than 1,000 supporters. Finally the applause died down. He opened his mouth to speak.
It was at this point that two young men in the audience stood up and, to the tune of the Conga, began chanting, "F–––off back to Toad Hall! F––– off back to Toad Hall! Na, na, na, na – hey! Na, na, na, na – hey!" Mr Farage declined their invitation, and the two men – still merrily chanting – were thrown out.
Whereupon, presumably, they were congratulated by the 100–odd protesters – or, to quote Mr Farage, "herberts" – gathered outside. (Banners: "Migrants Welcome, Bigots Aren't" and a caricature of Mr Farage, with a speech bubble that read, "I represent the interests of the ruling class".)
Well, it was never going to be easy. In an effort to dispel the impression that Ukip is merely a party of south–east England, supported by Tories who find the Tories insufficiently Tory, Mr Farage spent this week campaigning in the North. Labour, he kept declaring, had "betrayed" the northern working class – and, at the European elections next month, the northern working class could get its own back by voting Ukip. "This Labour Party, they have turned their backs on you," he told Gateshead. "You are no longer represented by them."
The question was: could Gateshead be represented by a Thatcherite public schoolboy from Kent?
The tour started on Tuesday in Sheffield, where Mr Farage unveiled Ukip's blunt new billboards ("26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?"). Then it was off to a hotel conference room for the first of his nightly public meetings.
The protesters outside were easily outnumbered by the 600 admirers in the audience. I glanced around the room. Roughly 50:50, men and women; many but not all middle–aged and above. The only non–white face I spotted was on stage, and belonged to Amjad Bashir, Ukip's spokesman for small business. (The next day, on the campaign trail, a journalist asked Mr Farage whether Ukip was racist. "I mean, frankly," he replied, shaking his head, "you've only got to look at… where's Amjad?" Mr Bashir was in a nearby florist's, paying for the six red roses Mr Farage had just picked up to mark St George's Day.)
The Sheffield speech went down a storm. Ukip rallies are far livelier than those of other parties: they seethe with a kind of angry energy, a furious optimism. "I didn't know there were so many fruitcakes in Sheffield!" honked Mr Farage. The room guffawed. The night finished with a Q&A session. One man was thrown out, after refusing to stop shouting out hostile questions about the party's immigration policy.
The next day, Mr Farage was due to visit the town of Yarm, Stockton–on–Tees. Awaiting his arrival outside, I spent 10 entertaining minutes watching a local man subject three glum Ukip officials to interrogations of Paxmanlike aggression. I wish I could convey in print his gasp of appalled glee when a Ukip candidate proved unable to tell him how many EU migrants work in Britain.
Sadly, Paxman had gone by the time Mr Farage pulled up in his battle bus. The Ukip leader spent 40 minutes strolling round town amid a swarm of journalists. Perhaps the swarm put locals off — I saw him speak to just two of them. One was a man in a vest with a shaven head and murky tattoos. "Never voted in me life before, but I'm voting for you," he told Mr Farage. A beaming Mr Farage asked why. "This is not our country no more," replied the man, darkly.
Next day's stop: Knutsford, a wellheeled Cheshire town best–known as the inspiration for Cranford. It didn't look as if it could be easily classified among the "Labour heartlands" Mr Farage had so noisily set his sights on. The local MP is one G Osborne. Still, explained the Ukip leader, it was important "to remind ourselves that there are some Tories who are thinking about voting Ukip as well". Evidently so. He found Knutsford almost universally adoring. After a good half–hour of handshakes, he was chauffeured away. Mere minutes, coincidentally, before news broke that Andre Lampitt, a Ukip candidate, had been suspended by the party for sending racist tweets.
That night's rally was in Manchester. Although Mr Lampitt's name was all over the news, it received no mention at the rally. Mr Farage did, though, announce that Ukip could be proud of having turned immigration into "a mature and respectable debate". I googled Mr Lampitt's tweets. "Inner peace will come when Aids does what it should and reduce African density." Well, I suppose that one was more about population growth than immigration.
Louise Bours, a Ukip councillor, told the audience that "the only time that people call you racist is when they've got nothing else to say. They've lost the argument. They have to insult us. It's like playground bullying". I hope Mr Lampitt doesn't feel he's been bullied.
So: Ukip in the North. From what I saw, it can win plenty of votes there. On the other hand, those who don't like it really don't like it. In Gateshead, Mr Farage told his audience that Ukip "will beat Labour in their heartlands" and that "the days of mockery of Ukip are over". The first prediction may come true; the second may be optimistic.
Ukip blunder Poster 'Briton' is Irish migrant
Nigel Farage last night faced embarrassment over his plans to curb migration from Europe, after it emerged that an actor in a UK Independence Party billboard is an Irish immigrant.
The "destitute builder" in Ukip's latest advertisement is believed to be a Dubliner, a party spokesman confirmed.
Dave O'Rourke is pictured sitting on a pavement with a beggar's cup, with a caption suggesting he is British.
The poster was unveiled by Mr Farage earlier this week, when he said he would like to see immigration cut to 30,000 to 50,000 people a year. Britain would no longer be subject to "open–door" immigration but would install a restricted work permit scheme, he said.
Mr O'Rourke has lived in the UK for 10 years, according to an online profile. Under Ukip proposals, he would not be able to move to Britain unless he showed he was "highly skilled".
Patrick O'Flynn, Ukip's head of communications, said: "The vast majority of people used in political poster campaigns are actors. It is totally standard practice. It is nonsense for the Conservative Party to try to depict this as anything out of the ordinary."
Document DT00000020140426ea4q00071
