{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2074"}
____
  
NEWS
I would pass the Tebbit test, says Sajid Javid
1,402 words
18 May 2014
11:08
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Sajid Javid, the new Culture Secretary and the first Asian man in the Cabinet, tells Tim Ross that only the Conservatives can change EU law to cut immigration
Sajid Javid had just landed at Heathrow on a flight from New York on the morning of April 9, and was waiting for his suitcase to trundle around the baggage carousel when he received an urgent message from Downing Street.
The Prime Minister needed to speak to him immediately.
“I had just got off the plane,” he said. “I thought, ‘what’s that about? Have I done something wrong?’”
In fact, David Cameron was calling to invite him to become the first Asian man ever to join the Cabinet.
Maria Miller had resigned hours earlier over her expenses and the PM wanted him take her place as Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport.
Six weeks after accepting the job, Mr Javid, 44, is now pitched into the heat of battle, with European Parliament elections across the UK and polls in 161 English local councils on Thursday.
The contest is being seen as a dry run for next year’s general election, with all the main parties using Thursday’s polls to “stress test” their campaign machines.
“These are the most important European elections in a generation,” Mr Javid says, on his return to Euston Station after a full day meeting residents in the streets of his Bromsgrove constituency.
“It’s the first time that British people will have a say on Europe since the Eurozone crisis. The vast majority want fundamental change in Europe. They are not happy with the status quo.”
His pitch is that only the Tories can “deliver” reforms to Britain’s relationship with the rest of the European Union. The Lib Dems and Labour do not want change while the UK Independence Party is not capable of mustering the required support.
The Prime Minister, by contrast, has already vetoed one European treaty, cut the EU budget, and pulled Britain out of costly bail out deals which Labour had signed up to, he says.
“Imagine what we could achieve if we had more Conservative MEPs in the European Parliament, in terms of getting a better deal for Britain and negotiating fundamental reform and putting that in a referendum to the British people.”
So why has Nigel Farage’s party soared in popularity, despite the racist pronouncements of some of its candidates and to the cost of the Tories, in recent months?
Mr Javid, the son of Pakistani bus driver who came to Britain with just £1 in his pocket, suggests that Mr Farage is right to offer a response to legitimate public fears over migration.
“When he talks about immigration, the reason he’s talking about it is that many people throughout Britain are concerned about excessive immigration. And they should be,” he says. “Politicians do need to respond to those concerns.”
It is not good enough for migrants to have lived in the UK for 50 years but still not to be able to speak English, he says.
“My parents were immigrants from Pakistan. My father has passed away now, but my father and mother were very proud of Britain and they have always respected the country and always wanted to make a contribution.
“I think that is the story of most immigrants I have met - the vast majority.”
What about the rise of Sharia law courts, which have reportedly been established in communities in London, Birmingham, Bradford, Manchester and other areas?
“Where people want to have their own private arrangements between them, that is a matter for them,” he says. “But there is no place for Sharia law in British law.”
Mr Javid grew up in Rochdale and Bristol as one of five brothers, living in a two-bedroom flat above a shop. His father worked hard at two jobs to make ends meet.
His rise to the Cabinet has been rapid. A graduate of Exeter University, he was made a vice-president at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York aged just 25, and moved on to work at Deutsche Bank, reportedly earning millions of pounds in the process.
He stood for Parliament in 2010 and his story has captured the imagination of many modernising Conservatives, especially those who remember fondly the rise of Baroness Thatcher from grocer’s daughter to Downing Street.
After just two years as an MP, he was given a ministerial job in the Treasury before joining the Cabinet last month. Seasoned political commentators have tipped Mr Javid as future Prime Ministerial material.
For the moment, though, the father of four has a full in-tray at the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.
Although it was once nicknamed the “Ministry of Fun”, the DCMS has been required to handle some of the most controversial policies of the coalition’s four years in power, including same-sex marriage and Press regulation after the phone-hacking scandal.
Mr Javid has already been clear that there will be no further government action on regulating the press, which he has defended as “the best in the world”.
As Minister for Equalities, another of his responsibilities, he is equally clear that legalising gay marriage was “quite right”, despite fierce protest from religious groups and an exodus of Conservative grassroots members.
At the top of his agenda in the months ahead will be the future of the BBC.
Lord Patten, the former Tory Cabinet minister, resigned on health grounds as chair of the BBC Trust and Mr Javid is responsible for recruiting a replacement.
But at a time when the BBC is facing allegations of bias, calls to axe the licence fee and a public shocked by failures over the Jimmy Savile scandal, should the Trust itself be abolished when the BBC’s Royal Charter is renewed in 2016?
“We have to go through the Charter Review process and decide.”
Mr Javid seems prepared to be radical. “I think we should look at all the options during that time, as part of the proper formal process.”
In a veiled warning to the corporation’s editors, he says he “will take a very close interest in” the question of whether the BBC is “unbiased, in many of ways, not just its news coverage”.
Does he agree with 70 per cent of those polled by this newspaper last year, who called for the £145.50 licence fee to be cut or abolished?
“I understand when people say the licence fee is a lot of money. For many families £145.50 is a lot of money each year,” he says.
“The question of what is the best arrangement going forward for the BBC is a question that’s best dealt with in Charter Review.”
His comments on funding for the arts seem to be aimed at reassuring those who feared that a Treasury man would simply want to cut state grants to theatres and galleries.
In fact, the taxpayer will always have a role in supporting cultural institutions but the rich should do more, too.
“There was a report last week that said London has more billionaires than any other city. Let’s get more of those billionaires giving to the arts sector and the cultural sector that I am sure they value as one of the reasons they live in Britain.”
Composed and articulate, despite the frantic political campaigning, Mr Javid seems taken with his new job, although he admits it is “a big change”.
While not the largest of departments, the DCMS remit “touches lives”, such as with Olympics, which “changed Britain and gave our national pride a big boost”, and other sports events.
Mr Javid would clearly pass Norman Tebbit’s famous “cricket test”, having been a keen player and always supported England.
In 1990, the former Conservative chairman, now Lord Tebbit, suggested controversially that immigrants and their children could not show loyalty to Britain until they supported the England team at cricket.
“Growing up in Rochdale I think all the kids in my street, pretty much every boy was playing cricket,” Mr Javid says. “I had four brothers as well and we played a lot together. When it was just me on my own, I was bowling at a drainpipe.”
Did the determined young all-rounder hit his target?
“A bit too much actually, on one occasion.”
Document TELUK00020140517ea5h005ei
