{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2089"}
____
  
News
Three shocks leave Miliband needing to swing the Ax at UKIP
ADAM BOULTON   
1,079 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
25
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Axelrod's brief sojourn in London last week confirmed that the attraction between Barack Obama's strategist and Labour's leader is mutual. That's just as well, since "the Ax" took the trouble to point out to the shadow cabinet that the £300,000 or so he and his team are being paid by Labour does not make this a serious business proposition for him.
Long before he signed up, Axelrod liked what Ed Miliband was saying about hardworking people getting left further behind the rich even as the economy improves. His job will be to embellish this "narrative arch" rather than to start building it from scratch.
The two men also agree on the task ahead in what Axelrod has dubbed "the age of alienation": a time when people who feel shut out from prosperity are also alienated from the politicians who preside over it. The task of "progressive parties" — Labour in the UK and the Democrats in America — is to persuade voters that they can improve their reallife circumstances, but without exploiting their fears and anxieties.
Awkwardly for Ed, there are others keen to recruit the alienated in the imminent local and European parliamentary elections. Unlike Labour, UKIP has no record in government that can be held against it, while the SNP is promoting Scotland's future, not its past.
The Conservatives can try to shrug off any forthcoming electoral setbacks as mid-term blues. The Liberal Democrat leadership will certainly plead that they are still enduring the growing pains of becoming a party of power. But Labour's credibility as an alternative government after the general election will be on the line in each of the council, European and Scottish contests.
Most of the council seats in contention this week were last fought on general election day 2010 — so they should provide a pretty direct indication of the change in political mood since then. That year was bad for Labour, so Miliband should expect to make big gains. Recent opinion polls certainly point that way.
So do recent council by-elections, according to The Sunday Times's election analysts, Colin Rallings and Michael Thrasher of Plymouth University. They calculate the current national equivalent vote share as Labour 33% (up five points on 2010), Conservatives 30% (down five points), UKIP 16% (from a standing start), and Lib Dems 14% (down 11 points). If this pattern is confirmed in the postal votes now being cast and the ballot papers filled out on Thursday, Labour should make almost 500 net gains in councillors.
A senior Labour official tells me "good progress" would be 200 gains. Playing down expectations is a common tactic for spin doctors but Thrasher and Rallings believe even 300 gains would mean "Bad night: voters still blame Labour. Miliband victory in 2015 unlikely".
No party wants shocks in the last few days before polling and Labour had at least three last week: two opinion polls — from the reliably independent maverick Tory Michael Ashcroft and from ICM — showed the Tories narrowly in the lead on general election voting intentions for the first time since 2012. ICM even put the Conservatives narrowly ahead in the share of the vote in the European elections.
A Conservative showing third behind Labour and UKIP has long been part of the expected narrative when the EU results are called at 10pm next Sunday, but now it seems the opposition cannot be so sure.
Labour has switched tactics. Miliband is no longer leaving David Cameron to worry about UKIP while he belittles the Lib Dems. Last Friday his main campaign event was a speech about immigration, and yesterday in Crawley he pepped up Labour canvassers with an explicit attack on UKIP as the party that wants to keep the flame of Thatcherism alive.
During this campaign Nigel Farage has explicitly targeted former Labour voters, with some success, according to Robert Ford, an academic and co-author of the new book Revolt on the Right. His research on UKIP loyalists "suggests many are from working-class, Labour-leaning backgrounds and are deeply hostile to all the Establishment parties".
Last month Lord Glasman, Miliband's sometime "Blue Labour" guru, issued a similar warning in this newspaper: "[In 2010] the Labour middle-class vote held up," he said. "It was the working-class vote that died ... will there necessarily be a swing back to Labour from UKIP voters?" By common consent, about 40% of UKIP's core support comes from Tory voters, but in April to May, ICM and other pollsters show the biggest swing has been from Labour to UKIP. Unlike Labour, UKIP has no scruples about exploiting the anxieties of alienated voters. Unlike Miliband, Farage has no need to "apologise" for the last Labour government's openness to EU immigration. Talking tough on immigration is always going to be a delicate issue for Miliband, the son of immigrants, especially when he must protect his left flank, and any support by disillusioned Lib Dems, from an unexpectedly strong challenge by the Green party.
The British people regard the European elections as a protest vote. In the last five cycles of voting since 1989, the main opposition party has won the largest share of the votes cast. This certainly doesn't mean it goes on to win the subsequent general election but it is still not a test Miliband can fail lightly.
As for the Scottish referendum — Labour's authority is the most exposed, while Gordon Brown, Douglas Alexander and Alistair Darling squabble. Miliband is already planning to spend much of the summer north of the border. He needs to. Should the Scots vote no to the union, they will not only overthrow Labour's long dominance; they will also deprive the party of as many as 40 potentially majority-determining MPs in the Commons.
The UK's political superstructure seems to be fragmenting at speed. Labour is already budgeting that UKIP will hold at least 9% of votes in the general election — and who is to say that those who stay with Farage will all be ex-Tories? The shared philosophy is the easy part. The real world is harder — "Milliband" and "Alexrod" can't even spell each other's names.
Trivia aside, the two men have set Labour a gargantuan task — to hold on to mainstream voters and win over the largest slice of the alienated.
@adamboultonsky
Document ST00000020140518ea5i000ma
