{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3538"}
____
  
Features
AT A GLANCE FICTION
Francesca Angelini   
478 words
20 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
39
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
AT A GLANCE T
HE WALK HOME by RACHEL SEIFFERT Virago £14.99/ebook £14.99 pp294
FICTION
Clad in battered trainers and adept at pocketing others' goods, Stevie is a symptom of the sectarian allegiances that divide Glasgow. Having run away from home after his father's insistence on joining the Orange marches and his mother's subsequent disappearance, Stevie anonymously returns to Glasgow to work as a builder with some Polish immigrants. Moving between the present and the events that led to Stevie and his family's current predicament, Seiffert, the author of the Booker-shortlisted The Dark Room, includes a fairly wide cast of characters but few truly develop and many feel artificial — the Polish builders working with Stevie, for instance, are sketchily drawn. Seiffert has an ear for dialogue, though, and when she gives full rein to the terse Glaswegian vernacular the novel comes alive.
THE PRINCE'S BOY by PAUL BAILEY Bloomsbury £16.99/ebook £14.99 pp160
Romania has long been an obsession of Bailey, the Booker-shortlisted novelist, and the country is the source of inspiration for The Prince's Boy. Dinu Grigorescu, the narrator, is a Romanian literary critic living in London. Troubled and dying, he reviews his life, beginning with the bohemian summer he spent in 1927 as a 19-year-old in Paris, where he lost his virginity to "a beast" in a brothel, who turned out to be the adopted child of a Romanian prince. Bailey writes exquisitely about everything he touches upon, from falling in love to fascism, and by carefully focusing on the formative life events that dominate Dinu's thoughts in old age, he provides an insightful meditation on love and memory's selective relationship with the past. There is no grand denouement to this novel, but the elegant narrative holds an intensity that crackles to the very end.
HISTORY OF THE RAIN by NIALL WILLIAMS Bloomsbury £18.99/ebook £16.99 pp359
"I am going to read them all because that is where I will find him," explains Ruth Swain, Williams' bedridden, kooky narrator. Determined to uncover the "heart of her father", a poet, Ruth devours the thousands of books lining the wall of her bedroom in Faha, County Clare, and begins to write a chronicle of her father's unfortunate life. This is familiar Williams territory — Only Say The Word (2005) was also concerned with the healing power of writing — but History of the Rain is so steeped in literary references, quirky meanderings and watery metaphors that it risks falling into the category of taxingly obscure pretension rather than sophisticated literary fiction. When Williams lets up on the oddities, though, the novel becomes extremely moving, poignantly capturing Ruth's doomed childhood relationship with her twin brother. By the final chapter I was weeping. Francesca Angelini
Document ST00000020140420ea4k000g9
