{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2874"}
____
  
News
Has Labour ditched Arnie Graf, the Obama guru who was supposed to win them the election?
By Dan Hodges   
491 words
29 March 2014
09:37
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
So farewell, Arnie Graf. The 70-year-old Chicago-based political activist who mentored a young Barack Obama, and pledged to sweep Ed Miliband into Downing Street with his unique brand of community organising has returned to the United States. “Arnie’s gone,” a member of the shadow cabinet told me yesterday.
Actually, it may not be goodbye, but au revoir, given that Graf now finds himself at the centre of the latest bout of infighting afflicting Miliband’s increasingly fractious political operation. Labour insiders claim that Graf has essentially been sacked by the party’s new general election coordinator Douglas Alexander, who was unconvinced by the innovative – some would argue daft – theories of a man who by his own admission has never worked on a major election campaign in his life.
“Douglas is trying to pull the Labour Party into shape in preparation for what will be one the toughest elections we’ve ever faced,” one insider informed me, “and there just isn’t any room for passengers.” To many full-time Labour officials, Graf was the quintessential political passenger, and quite an expensive one. “He was wandering around the country, talking to people about how we’d win the election by sweeping streets and emptying bins. It was costing us a fortune in hotel bills alone.”
The writing first appeared on Graf’s hotel wall after Labour’s organisational election grids were published last year. Graf was conspicuous by his absence. Then a story appeared in the Sun, questioning his immigration status.
Graf’s supporters believe these slights were the work of Alexander. And that in turn lies behind the publication earlier in the week of a letter from Labour movement 窶徘rogressives窶 warning that Labour was not being radical or innovative enough in taking the election fight to the Tories.
“If you look at the signatures on that letter, it was all Arnie’s mates,” says a Labour official. “Everyone thought it was about policy, and it was, in part. But it was also a coded attack on Douglas. They blame him for taking out Arnie. So they were hitting back.”
I understand that Miliband’s office is now in discussion with both Alexander and Graf to see if some way can be found of “reinserting” him into the campaign. But Graf had agreed to work for Miliband on the basis he that would have a major role in shaping Labour’s election strategy. And it’s clear that is now off the table. “Arnie Graf will not have a significant position onLabour’s election team,” one Labour source told me.
When Graf arrived many people were questioning whether Barack Obama’s community organising guru could sprinkle some of the Obama fairy dust on Ed Miliband and the Labour party. They now have their answer. No, he could not.
 
Document TELUK00020140329ea3t001e1
