{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3696"}
____
  
News
THE Kick politicians in the ballots
460 words
22 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Ulster
12
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
CAN you name your Euro MP? We're betting not. Let's face it, who can? Another question: Did you know there's a Euro election today at a polling station near you? No? Don't worry. You won't be alone.
Few outside Westminster care what happens. It doesn't much affect Britain. The Brussels gravy train will keep rolling. But it is significant and useful in one respect.
No one likes politicians. Not since the expenses scandal. No one believes a word they say.
And there are specific reasons to loathe all three of the main parties.
You may hate Labour for borrowing vast sums, spending it like drunks, negligently exposing our economy to the full wrath of the global recession and then refusing to apologise for it.
Treachery You may hate them for letting millions of immigrants into Britain without a thought for schools, hospitals, transport and housing.
You may hate the Tories for agreeing with much of Labour's spending back then, and the apparent unfairness of some cuts they've made to balance the books.
You may hate the Lib Dems for ditching the principles that bought them votes in 2010, and for their self-serving treachery in coalition.
The most obvious way to give them a kicking is to vote Ukip. Many will.
But we don't urge you to do that. We have grave doubts about the apparently limitless extremists among the party's supporters and candidates — and Nigel Farage's inability to weed them out. To say nothing of his own remarks.
We DO share Ukip's anger over the EU. We believe the referendum David Cameron has promised is vital and, though we are sceptical how much he can achieve, we back him first to negotiate to reclaim our powers.
Democracy This election serves as a vent for our fury at politicians. Next May's General Election will decide our fate for real, including our EU future.
A Ukip vote then won't be a protest. It won't reinvent our democracy. It seems unlikely to result in a single Ukip MP.
Ironically, a big Ukip vote will make an EU exit less likely because it will effectively be a vote for Ed Miliband. The referendum will die the day he walks into Downing Street, which if enough ex-Tories vote Ukip he will. Ed's counting on it.
It's rare for The Sun to endorse no one at an election. Today that is what we do.
It doesn't matter which candidate you put your cross by. But get the anger out of your system.
Next year your vote will matter. To make the right choice you'll need a cool head.
Document THESUN0020140522ea5m000im
