{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"324"}
____
  
Guardian Features Pages
G2: Film & Music: A week in radio: Death in the desert
Bim Adewunmi   
389 words
2 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
28
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Robin Reineke has been called a magnificent person, a humanitarian, an angel who has brought peace to people. This is effusive praise indeed, but once you know what Robin does for a living, it starts to make sense.
Crossing Continents (Radio 4) was in Tucson, Arizona to follow Robin and her team at the Missing Migrants Project. Their job is a grim one: they identify the dead and decomposing bodies found in the desert; the remains of migrants from Mexico and Latin America, heading to the US for a better life. In lieu of the better life they never got to experience, Robin tries to give their families peace by delivering the bodies of their loved ones. It's no way to live - or die - but there's some closure, at least.
They find clues - tattoos, piercings, clothes and personal effects - and try to locate their relatives either in the US, or in various Latin American countries. The earliest Jane and John Does go back to 1991, and the database the project has built allows families to come and search without the usual fear that comes with emerging from the shadowy corners that make up undocumented immigration.
The BBC's Mexico correspondent Will Grant was a good presenter: he provided information and context, asked questions and then hung back to let the people involved answer at length. It's a dying art. He spoke to members of the families of the young men who had tried to make the crossing. One bereaved Mexican mother whose 19-year-old son never made it issued a warning to other young men seeking to cross the border: "I'd say, look at me - your mother could end up like me."
The gratitude of the families was tough on Robin. "They are so grateful that it makes me feel bad because I feel I am a part of the system that has done this to their family," she said. "It breaks my heart. I can't imagine being thankful to the person that told me my father died." For one woman who had lost an uncle, though, it was simple: "She held my hand, and gave me strength. I have a lot to thank her for."
Document GRDN000020140502ea520001m
