{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1021"}
____
  
News
What I call compromise others call a betrayal -LIB DEM LEADER ON COALITION
STEVE HAWKES   
1,046 words
19 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
22
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
SUN CABBIE V NICK CLEGG
EXCLUSIVE
THE Sun's cabbie Grant Davis, 50, is interviewing the four main party leaders ahead of this Thursday's Euro elections. Lib Dem chief Nick Clegg is the latest to step into the back of real-life driver Grant's cab — pimped up for the campaign — to win over voters who are still on the fence.
Q Voters don't seem to trust politicians, Nick - is that the attraction of Ukip? They feel Nigel Farage is someone they can trust?
A I think all politicians are in the doghouse. But when I speak to people who are going to vote Ukip they don't talk about the European Union much or this or that directive ... it's immigration and a lot about modern life they do not like.
Q Do you think what happened under Labour gave Ukip a massive boost? I mean, there was mass immigration?
A Yes. The UK lifted border controls on people in Eastern Europe before others did. Everybody has learned that if there is a next time, you have got to have long, long transitional controls. I'm very hard-headed about the need for us to have an immigration system that simply works, that counts people in and people out.
Q Like the one in Australia, based on a points system?
A No, it's more simple than that.It's exit checks. I personally insisted when we formed the Coalition that we were going to reinstate border controls so we counted people out as well as counting people in.
Q But that has not happened yet?
A It is so frustrating. I say to Theresa May, David Cameron and others, look, instead of chasing targets, let's do the homework on the stuff we have got control over. I have now bashed heads enough in Whitehall that we are going to be well on the way to finally doing it by the General Election.
Q I've got a friend who has been told to sign a new contract - lower wages or you're on the dole. And 70 per cent of the people working at his company are from Eastern Europe. That can't be right, can it?
A I can understand how your friend feels. But I just think the solution Nigel Farage is giving is the wrong one. If you pull out of Europe, unemployment would go up. It will be harder to get jobs.
Q Does the guy in the street look at you, Labour and the Conservatives and think you're doing nothing to address it? All I hear is that David Cameron is going to renegotiate.
A If you look at the shopping list of things David Cameron is talking about, actually most of it I could agree with, a lot of it is fine. But it is not actually going to satisfy those people who want a complete redrawing of the map.
Q You said that if we left the EU it would be unpatriotic, but we are English aren't we?
A No, no, hang on, I just really believe one of the basic patriotic duties of anyone in politics is to make us as prosperous as possible. Having people chucked out of their jobs is not a patriotic thing to do.
Q You've had a bit of a fallout with (Education Secretary) Michael Gove. Is there any Tory you like?
A I get on with ... look, I sit next to Ken Clarke in the Cabinet. Ken and I get on incredibly well. David Cameron and I, we are very tough in dealing with each other. We have always got a big job to keep the show on the road.
Q Crack the whip?
A Sometimes. To keep decisions coming and to make sure Government remains stable. Despite the argy bargy, people will look back and say, "Wow, they got so much done despite all the predictions. "
Q If it looked like Labour were going to get in and Ed Miliband phoned and said: "Why don't you come into a coalition with Labour?", would you feel comfortable?
A It cannot be about personal likes and dislikes. It has got to be about what the British people have said to us politicians.
Q But is it important to have Liberal Democrats at the top table?
A Well, I think there is no way that Labour can be relied on to sort out the economy because they crashed the economy and still have not apologised. And there is just no way the Conservatives left to their own devices would look after people on middle and low incomes.
Q But can you be trusted? Look at university fees. Can the Lib Dems be trusted to keep their word?
A I had to make a compromise. That is what happens in a Coalition. What I call a compromise other people call a betrayal. I'd love to implement all my policies.
Q Your wife Miriam, from Spain, is absolutely gorgeous. Does she ever say, in bed at night, "Look we could move to Spain ..."
A No, no — look, I am so committed to my job. Some people may want to shout at me, but I am really proud of the fact we have got this economic recovery going because of what my party did.
TRICK QUESTIONS: How much is a bottle of beer in Spain? Nick: In Spain much cheaper than Brussels, 3 euros 50. (Wrong, it's 2.50)
You're a bit hungry in the European parliament. How much is a baguette? Nick: I'd probably go for 3.50 again. (Correct)
GRANT'S VERDICT: Nick's a nice fella but in politics now, people want you to be one thing or another — he's in the middle. I mean, again, he's very affable and you wouldn't fall out with him. But he's harmless. A typical Liberal: Don't upset anyone.
Would I vote for him? Nah.
To watch Nick's interview, go to thesun.co.uk/politics
The Sun Says - Page 6
ON EUROPE If we pullout, unemployment would rise-and that's not patriotic
Document THESUN0020140519ea5j0006u
