{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"892"}
____
  
NEWS
David Cameron ready to take on Nigel Farage in live debate
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
692 words
4 May 2014
12:17
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Prime Minister could take on Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader in a televised debate that will also include Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Green party
David Cameron is ready to take on Nigel Farage in a live televised debate before the election.
The Prime Minister plans to take part in three leaders’ debates with his political rivals.
In a plan drawn up by his aides Mr Cameron would be willing to appear in television debates in a 2-3-5 format, The Sunday Times reported.
One head-to-head with Ed Miliband the Labour leader - as the other potential prime minister - a second, which would also include Liberal Democrat leader, Nick Clegg and a third with Mr Farage and the Green party leader Natalie Bennett.
One of the debates would be held during the campaign, with the other beforehand, the newspaper reported.
Grant Shapps, the Conservative Party Chairman said that “all options are on the table” for the format of the debates and did not rule out the possibility of Mr Farage taking part.
Speaking on Sky’s Murnaghan Mr Shapps said that leader debates were a “good innovation” but that negotiations would not happen until the end of the year, after the Scottish referendum in September.
Mr Shapps said: “What I am very clear about we think they are a good innovation. I don’t want to see them dominate the campaign itself, which was a genuine problem with people out in the country not getting to see some people coming to their region because it was all basically taken over by the debate, prep for the debate, the post-debate analysis which took ever the election
“But we are very clear that the debates should take place, that they are a good idea – negotiations on exact details, who should be involved, all of that will be this autumn.
Usually these debates are about which person is likely, or has a potential to be, Prime Minister in this country after a general election.
He added: “All options are on the table right now.”
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader said that he would be willing to debate Mr Farage. However, pointing to Nick Clegg’s unsuccessful performance in head to head debates with Mr Farage on Europe and immigration, he would not commit to a head to head with the Ukip leader.
Mr Miliband told The Andrew Marr Show: “It is up the broadcasters who they invite, whether they invite Nigel [Farage]. My main desire is that the debates go ahead, I think the Prime Minster doesn’t own these debates, the British people own these debates and he can’t wriggle out of them. Asked by Nigel Farage if he would debate him directed Mr Miliband added he was “happy” to have debates about “all the main issues that we face”.
Last month the Labour leader said the previous format of three debates between the three main party leaders over three weeks should be a "starting point" but that he was open to moves such as a less formal setting and greater voter participation in any repeat of the 2010 confrontations.
He used a Radio Times article to call for immediate negotiations, accusing his main rival of being the "single biggest obstacle" to them going ahead and suggesting the Tories were keen to deny his cash-strapped party vital publicity.
Britain's first such debates, between Mr Cameron, Gordon Brown and Mr Clegg, were staged on the BBC, ITV and Sky News in 2010 after prolonged negotiations between the parties and the TV companies, which resulted in very strict rules on the style of questioning and the division of time for leaders' answers.
Mr Cameron has since complained that they "took all the life out" of the campaign amid constant speculation over whether the practice would be revived, and if so in what form.
Mr Farage repeated his challenge to the Conservative leader in response to claims he was "chicken" for ruling out a run at Parliament in the Newark by-election.
Document TELUK00020140504ea54001jl
