{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1803"}
____
  
News
The poster girl who says she backs Ukip is revealed as Farage's aide
Billy Kenber   
694 words
23 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip faced embarrassment yesterday when it emerged that a woman described in its European election manifesto as an ordinary "voter from Devon" was Nigel Farage's personal assistant.
Lizzy Vaid appears in a full-page photograph saying why she supports Ukip. She is also to appear in a party political broadcast, and featured in an earlier leaflet aimed at voters in a by-election. However, the party did not reveal that rather than a grassroots supporter, she was actually a paid employee at its London headquarters.
In a television interview, Mr Farage, the Ukip leader, said: "The fact Lizzy Vaid is half-Indian and works for us is, as far as we are concerned, a non-issue."
The disclosure came as Mr Farage said the British political system would experience "nothing short of an earthquake" if his party won next month's elections to the European parliament. It will be the biggest test of popular support until next year's general election.
Hailing Ukip for delivering a "straightforward" message that immigration should be about "quality not quantity", Mr Farage unveiled one of four posters that are being put on billboards around the country.
They were paid for by Paul Sykes, a Yorkshire businessman, who said there was "no limit" to how much he was prepared to spend to ensure that Ukip triumphed on May 22 and beyond.
They were created by Family, a small Edinburgh-based communications agency that worked on the Conservatives' ill-fated 2001 general election campaign and on the recent No2AV campaign, where billboards included a photograph of a soldier and the message "He needs bulletproof vests NOT an alternative voting system".
For the Tories' 2001 election campaign, Family created posters with photographs of empty hospital corridors and the words "You paid the tax — so where is your operation?"
Unusually, Mr Sykes, 70, who said he had already spent £1.5 million on the advertising campaign, did not donate the money directly to Ukip. Instead, he paid the agency directly, retaining control over the images and slogans used.
Mr Sykes, whose wealth has been estimated at £650 million, is not a member of Ukip and has said that his interest is solely in securing a referendum so that Britain can leave Europe.
Ian Wright, of Family, who came up with the designs, said the agency had been working on the campaign with Mr Sykes and Mr Farage since the beginning of the year.
The posters, which include the message "26 million people in Europe are looking for work — and whose jobs are they after?", have been branded racist by a Labour MP.
Mr Sykes denied this, saying that they were simply a "public awareness campaign" to demonstrate the effects of Brussels and that they were linked to concerns about "open borders".
Describing himself as a "tyre fitter from Barnsley", he said: "Do I look like a racist? We've got Pakistanis standing in the election, you know, and Indians."
He said he would take a decision on whether to bankroll Ukip's 2015 general election campaign after next month's vote. "The clock's still ticking," he said.
"All I'm paying for is an awareness campaign to make people aware that we have no borders, we're no longer selfgoverning. We need to start getting these powers back before it's too late."
He said that he viewed next month's elections as a referendum on whether the public wanted Britain to remain a member of the EU.
"If the majority of the British people vote to leave the EU, how can any party then deny that?" he asked. "It is a referendum as far as that is concerned."
Ukip is expected to double its share of the vote in the European elections, taking 27 per cent, to leave the Conservative party in third place for the first time in any national vote, according to a YouGov poll for The Sun. Only 12 per cent of respondents said they would vote for Mr Farage's party in a general election.
Thunderer, page 24
Document T000000020140423ea4n000ay
