{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3707"}
____
  
News
We could live with 50,000 migrants a year, says Ukip MEP
Michael Savage   
790 words
22 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
8
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip is "very comfortable" with allowing 50,000 new immigrants to settle in Britain every year, one of its leading figures has said.
Roger Helmer MEP, the party's candidate in the Newark by-election, made the claim as he hit back at accusations that Ukip was pandering to racism in its bid to win today's European elections.
In a frenetic final day of campaigning, Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, conceded that cracks had opened in his party's campaign following the scrutiny prompted by its surge in the polls.
He was speaking after a farcical Ukip "carnival" in Croydon on Tuesday. The event had been designed to gloss over accusations that Ukip candidates held racist views and Mr Farage's own assertion that he would be "concerned" to have a Romanian neighbour. However, it descended into chaos as protesters rowed with activists, a steel band stopped playing and Mr Farage decided that it was too dangerous to attend.
Speaking in Newark yesterday, Mr Helmer attempted to reassure voters that Ukip was not against ethnic minorities. He said that Lithuanians should be brought in to work on British farms, but then sent home.
"We're against 300,000 net immigration a year," he said. "We would be very comfortable with 50,000 net immigration a year, especially if we were able to select people with the sort of skills that industry needs. We get a reaction from some farmers saying, 'You want to cut immigration — we need seasonal workers'. Fine — let's have Lithuanians for four months on a work permit and let them go home after the four months. We don't have a problem with that."
David Cameron was also out campaigning with Boris Johnson in Newark yesterday, where a crucial by-election will be fought between Ukip and the Tories on June 5. The prime minister was confronted by a voter over the government's decision in 2010 to increase VAT to 20 per cent. He conceded that he could not promise to reduce the tax should the Tories win the next election.
"We'll set out all our promises in our manifesto. I can't make that promise because we really had to deal with the mess we were left with by Labour," Mr Cameron said.The voter, Steve Buxton, who runs a picture-framing business, said he had voted for the Tories in 2010 but would back Ukip in the by-election.
During a tour of Newark market, Mr Cameron appeared to make light of speculation that Mr Johnson was likely to succeed him as Tory leader. He bought a £1 slab of rocky road cake from a stall to share with his former Eton and Oxford counterpart. "Boris, that's a gift — you know you want it," Mr Cameron said. "We will break bread."
Mr Cameron was also confronted by Brian Boby, a retired coal miner, over the closure of the Newark accident and emergency unit. Mr Boby said he would switch his support from Labour to Ukip.
Labour is also braced for Ukip to eat into its traditional vote. Yesterday a former party activist and donor said that he was defecting to Ukip. Ian Wallace was part of the Labour Finance and Industry Group, which has donated hundreds of thousands of pounds to the party.
Ed Miliband had another difficult day on the stump yesterday after being mocked for pictures showing him eating a bacon sandwich awkwardly. The pictures emerged the day after he was pilloried for suggesting that he spent £70 to £80 a week on family groceries and conceded during a regional radio interview that he didn't know the name of a local Labour leader.
Speaking on Today on BBC Radio 4 yesterday, Mr Farage said Ukip's "carnival of colour" on Tuesday may have been a mistake but insisted that his party was connecting with the public.
"We all make mistakes and things don't always go to plan," he said. "And of course we have been in the lead. We have never been in that position before. We hit the front three weeks ago. When you are out in front and everyone is firing every missile they have, sometimes a few cracks begin to show." Police are investigating a Ukip leaflet amid concerns that it implied that Asian candidates were attempting to rig a vote. The leaflet contains a mock list of ways to win the election, including stealing votes and to "count on the white folk not voting". It was distributed in Oldham by Joe Fitzpatrick, a former Labour councillor, and has been condemned by party headquarters. Leading article, page 28
Document T000000020140522ea5m000c5
