{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"51"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Everyone now agrees: Miliband isn't working
DAN HODGES   
949 words
25 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
20
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
As Labour slides in the polls, the party leader has to face up to a very unpalatable truth
On Sunday morning, Labour MP John Mann finally broke cover and articulated in public what many of his colleagues had been saying privately for months. Ed Miliband isn't working. "He needs to speak the language of voters in Bassetlaw not academics in Hampstead. It's talking clear, simple language that people understand. It's all too clever at the moment."
A few hours later a letter appeared in the Guardian from those self same Hampstead academics. They didn't think Ed Miliband was working either. "The country needs not just a change of government but a transformative change in direction," they warned, in their clever, but rather abstract way. "If Labour plays the next election safe, hoping to win on the basis of Tory unpopularity, it will not have earned a mandate for such change."
To most outsiders, this current crisis of confidence in Labour ranks has its origins in Ed Miliband's disastrous response – or nonresponse – to George Osborne's Budget. And there is some truth in that. The Tories had their 2012 Budget omnishambles; last week it was Labour's turn. But in fact, the issues facing Miliband's party run much deeper, and wider. As is shown by the differing nature of the critique currently being levelled at the Labour leader.
Mann is articulating what is known in Labour circles as the "presentation problem". This is actually code for "the voters think Ed Miliband's a bit of a weirdo" problem, but politeness still has its place in the people's party. A poll published by YouGov yesterday found that 51 per cent of respondents did indeed think Miliband was "the weirdest" of the party leaders. But this is a bit of a red herring.
In truth, Ed Miliband is a perfectly grounded, perfectly nice middle–class boy from north London. What Labour MPs are hearing on the doorstep is simply evidence of his failure to introduce himself successfully to the British public. When he was first elected, Iain Duncan Smith gave Ed some helpful advice: "You have six months to define yourself, and then your opponents and the press do the job for you." Iain Duncan Smith's words were ignored and his warning has duly come to pass.
When John Mann and his colleagues ask Miliband to solve his "presentational" problem they are asking him to do the impossible. People have made up their minds about Ed Miliband; they will not be revising their opinion in the next 13 or so months before polling day.
The criticisms levelled by John Mann and his fellow Labour MPs from their "boots on the ground" perspective is, however, very different from what's being said by the Guardian letter signatories. These names represent Labour's philosophical and ideological engine room. The Fabians; the think tanks – Progress, Compass and Class; the gurus and policy analysts – Maurice Glassman, David Marquand, Charles Secrett. They are not interested in Ed Miliband speaking a language John Mann's constituents can understand. Indeed, from their perspective, the more obtuse the language, the better. For it gives Labour's offer – and themselves – a veneer of intellectual credibility.
Their letter represents the first shots in the proxy war that is about to break out over Jon Cruddas's attempts to pull together a blueprint for Labour's election manifesto. The job was initially handed to Liam Byrne, but Byrne was deemed too divisive – ie Blairite – for the role. Cruddas, something of a darling to the soft–Left, was chosen as his replacement.
But Cruddas has started to take Labour's policy development into areas the Labour leader finds uncomfortable. He is advocating a devolution of power that cuts across many of Miliband's core stakeholders. Cruddas has also been a strong advocate of the Blue Labour agenda, which threatens a number of sacred cows in areas such as welfare, immigration and Europe.
The Guardian letter writers have widely diverging views on what the Cruddas blueprint should look like – they have set Miliband the modest tasks of finding a solution to global warming and the "Empowerment of everybody", for example. But they have all been co–opted into Cruddas's thinking, and are now fearful that Miliband is preparing to "shrink the offer". Or, in other words, sit back, do nothing, and hope Nigel Farage delivers Labour a workable majority.
And here, in a nutshell, is Miliband's problem. Everyone has suddenly woken up to the fact that his strategy isn't working. But no one can agree on what the alternative should look like. His MPs want a retail offer – Labour's version of "beer and bingo". His policy wonks want wholesale reform of the British state – a huge transfer of power from national to local government. And his philosophers basically just want him to save the planet and reconstruct global capitalism by the first Monday after polling day.
Ed Miliband, meanwhile, wants all of these things. And none of them. His vision has soared as high as the total transformation of the British banking system, and as low as a ban on free coffee at Costa. He has expanded the offer, shrunk the offer, made the offer do somersaults. And yet still Labour's poll lead continues its inexorable slide downwards.
Which leaves Miliband facing an unpalatable truth. If shrinking the offer isn't working, and expanding the offer isn't working, maybe it's not the offer that's the problem.
Comment on Dan Hodges's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140325ea3p0007m
