{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"586"}
____
  
News
Why didn't MP know his rent boy lover was unlawfully in the country?
MATTHEW DRAKE ;JUSTIN PENROSE; VINCENT MOSS   
1,081 words
6 April 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
2; National
4,5
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
QUESTION TORY MUST ANSWER OVER THE SEX AND DRUGS SCANDAL
DISGRACED Mark Menzies was under pressure last night to tell exactly what he knew about the immigration status of his Brazilian rent boy.
The Tory MP, who has not been seen since we broke the story last week, has claimed he was unaware Rogerio Santos was ever in the UK unlawfully.
But Santos has insisted that the MP knew about his visa problems.
The rent boy was turned away by UK border officials THREE TIMES during his involvement with the Tory.
But on other occasions he got in past border checks to continue having paid sex with him.
Speaking at his lawyer's office, Santos, 19, claimed: "I have personal messages from Mark with him talking to me about my visa. I know how many problems I had in London and he helped me with things. Brazilians have these problems. I had this three times."
The claim comes a week after Mr Menzies, 42, quit as a ministerial aide in the wake of our story about his 18-month drug-fuelled sex romps with the teenager which ended just weeks ago.
Santos claimed the former Private Parliamentary Secretary got him to buy illegal Class B amphetamine-based methedrone for him as well as Class C GHB - known as liquid ecstasy.
Last night a House of Commons source said: "It would be astonishing if Mark Menzies did not know the immigration status of a man he had been in a relationship with for months.
"MPs deal with these cases on a daily basis. At very best he's been utterly naive."
Migration Watch UK vice-chairman Alp Mehmet said: "If you're one of those who makes the laws for the rest of us then you ought to be intelligent enough to know when something is happening that is wrong. In this case, it would be difficult for anyone in that position to argue they didn't really know what was going on."
BLOCK Brazil is fifth in the UK's top 10 of illegal immigrant nationalities because restrictions are lax.
Brazilians are allowed to enter Britain without a visa for up to six months as long they prove they have somewhere to stay and enough money to get by. They also have to prove they have a job back in Brazil. But the Sunday Mirror understands immigration officers have had their eye on Santos and believed he was likely to overstay and become an illegal immigrant.
So they put a block on his entry.
The visa revelation will put further pressure on Mr Menzies' future as MP for Fylde in Lancashire. It was already hanging in the balance following a meeting held by his Tory constituency bosses on Thursday night. A source at the Fylde Conservative Association, tasked with deciding his fate, said: "If he has engaged in criminality then we would expect him to step down as an MP."
Constituency members have already called for him to quit after failing to respond to the allegations. In February Immigration Minister Mark Harper quit after employing a Colombian cleaner in the country illegally. Last week we revealed the rent boy was shown around Parliament by Mr Menzies last June.
Santos told the Sunday Mirror: "He took me to the Houses of Parliament, for 'fun' when I was in the country illegally. I have SMS messages and photographic evidence to prove my story."
We have seen evidence of the MP ordering amounts of methedrone - which was banned in the UK in 2010.
Santos claims he met Mr Menzies on a gay escort website and the MP began paying him £250 an hour for sex.
Mr Menzies sent texts to Santos asking how much the Class B would cost if he bought it in bulk.
The Brazilian says the pair enjoyed drug-fuelled romps at the MP's taxpayerfunded flat in London where Mr Menzies was photographed naked alongside plates of methedrone.
Mr Menzies asked Santos - who has now returned to Sao Paulo - to wear "sexy underwear" during their involvement.
The Tory stepped down as PPS to International Development Minister Alan Duncan before our story broke.
DETERMINED Mr Menzies is believed to be staying with friends. He said: "I now need a period of stability to rebuild my private life and continue to focus on helping constituents with the many serious issues they face."
A source close to him said: "He is putting his private life in order, but he feels the way to do that is not through the Press. Mark is determined to carry on as an MP and he has a lot of support."
A spokesman for Mr Menzies told the Sunday Mirror yesterday: "As we said last week, many of these allegations are completely false."
Police sources said they would not investigate the drug allegations unless there is a formal complaint.
Mr Menzies has been absent from Parliament this week where he was due to take part in a debate.
The MP, who is paid £66,400 a year, has claimed for hotel rooms and first-class train tickets on his Parliamentary expenses - and ran up a £827.48 mobile bill in the first three quarters of the 2013/14 financial year. There was nothing to suggest this was improper.
The Roman Catholic politician, who is single, entered the Commons at the last General Election.
He was brought up by his mother on the west coast of Scotland. His father, who was in the Merchant Navy, died before he was born. Mr Menzies won an assisted place at an independent school before studying at Glasgow University, and he joined Marks & Spencer as a trainee in 1994.
Mr Menzies told the Commons last year that he had intended to abstain on the historic vote to legalise same-sex marriages but then voted in favour.
"I came here to abstain, but I have listened to the debate like I have listened to no other. It is now my intention not to abstain, but to support the Bill," he said.
He has repeatedly raised the issue of rehabilitation for drugs offenders since being elected. In February this year, he tabled a Commons question asking the Ministry of Justice to "take steps to introduce the HM Prison Kirkham drug and rehabilitation programme nationally".
matthew.drake@sundaymirror.co.uk COMMENT PAGE 14
Document SMIRR00020140406ea46000f9
