{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1168"}
____
  
Features
'We partied with The Cure and Van Morrison…but were too young to drink'
DAVE DONNELLY   
1,619 words
21 March 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Eire
4,5
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
IT's every musically-inclined teenager's dream.
The song you wrote in your bedroom after school has been heard by the right people, and all of a sudden you find yourself flying back and forth to London as major labels fight over who gets to throw money at you.
It's a dream for many but it was reality for Dublin rockers Power of Dreams, whose debut EP A Little Bit Of God in 1989 was awarded single of the week in the NME and instantly made them one of the most sought-after bands in Europe.
Not a bad day's work for a group who should have been studying for their exams. When they inked a deal with Polydor Records later that year, they were still young enough that their parents had to come with them to sign the papers.
Speaking to Something for the Weekend, frontman Craig Walker and bassist Mick Lennox reminisce about their extraordinary story — one that exemplifies the best and worst of the music industry before the money dried up.
Lennox, who was 16 when they put pen to paper with Polydor, remembers: "They gave us champagne at the signing party and we had a sing-song on the plane on the way home."
Walker, who was 17, adds: "There was so much money around in those days, it was insane. Do you remember that party we went to at Polydor, with Van Morrison and The Cure? We were still too young to drink!"
The abiding memory of both men is of just how quickly it all fell into place. They released A Little Bit Of God in October, were signed before Christmas and by April they were in a studio in London recording their debut album, Immigrants, Emigrants And Me.
The catalyst was a chance encounter with Keith Cullen, who had just started Setanta Records and happened to catch a gig of the band's in the Underground, on Dame Street in Dublin.
Walker says: "We went over to London and did one EP with Setanta, which got single of the week in all the papers like NME and Melody Maker, and all of a sudden the phone was ringing all the time. We were suddenly getting offered crazy money from labels all over the place. In those days, if you got single of the week in those papers, you were away, you were up and running.
"We actually put my parents' address on the back of the EP and the phone number, so there was f***ing labels calling constantly, and my mum was like, 'Wake up, a Geoff Travers from Rough Trade is on the phone?'"
Cracking the UK was the key for Power Of Dreams, as it had been for contemporaries like A House and the Frank And Walters, as the gigging circuit was nothing compared to the vast network it is today, and there were only a handful of radio stations they could reach out to.
Lennox says: "Besides the gigs (we were playing€, we weren't getting much. There was no record company, so we weren't getting any radio play, except for (2FM DJ Dave€ Fanning.
"Fanning was playing us, but once we made it in the UK it transferred back here pretty quickly.
"The album went to No2 over here. Radio picked up then, but I suppose it was easier back then because Irish radio played Irish bands."
Walker agrees: "U2 were the biggest band in the world and they were just getting bigger and bigger, and there was a lot of focus on Ireland and a load of bands getting signed. There were a lot of good bands too — it was a really good period.
"It was one of those things where there were a lot of great bands at the same time. I don't know when the policy changed. It was less Americanised. Radio here has become a lot more like American radio, very formatted and things are very rigid, and they stick to playlists. It was a bit more free and easy then."
Though they were yet to have a hit single in the UK, the label had high hopes for Power Of Dreams and sent them straight out on tour with goth rock legends The Mission — "the worst thing we could possibly have done" says Walker, describing them as "beer monsters".
Lennox recalls: "It was animal. They were playing arenas. We played an ice rink in the Czech Republic, in front of 12,000 people, and they were so poor they had to pay The Mission in tractors and stuff."
Japan was a whole other culture shock entirely.
Walker says: "It was total Beatlemania. We'd been doing all these interviews for Japanese radio, phone interviews, but we'd no idea about Japan and then we got out there and it was nuts — 200 people waiting for us in the hotel when we arrived.
"It was like Blade Runner. Tokyo is like Blade Runner."
Polydor had invested heavily in the band between recording budgets, tour support, plush accommodation and even more champagne, but the first album failed to yield a hit single and label heads began to get antsy.
Walker says: "Nobody writes on the road. It's a cliché but it's totally true.
"After 18 months, I think they gave us eight weeks to come up with a record, they said 'we need a record on this date'. You could feel the pressure then.
"I remember we were in the studio mixing the first single from the second album, and the A&R guy came down and he wasn't happy with the single. He said 'you gotta get top 40, boys, we gotta have a hit single.'
"Then it became about getting a hit single and as soon as you're in that mode, it's game over. You're writing to try and make things happen, and you're sitting there and it's not real anymore."
The second album, 2 Hell With Common Sense, failed to yield the coveted hit, but Polydor were prepared to persevere and offered the band an extension on their deal, albeit at dramatically reduced terms.
They said no and went it alone as an indie outfit, releasing two moderately successful albums before quitting in 1994. Their last show was in front of a sold-out Budokan in Japan while still in their early twenties.
THE reformed Power Of Dreams play Whelan's in Dublin on March 27 and Roisin Dubh in Galway on March 29.
GIG LISTINGS
Friday, March 21
Clonakilty: The Vincent(s€, De Barra's, 10.30pm, FREE €
Cork: Johnny Dulan, Triskel Christchurch, 8pm, €20 Fuaim 2014 w/ Julie Feeney, Cork Opera House, 8pm, €25
Dublin: Prefuse 73, Sugar Club, 9pm, €17.50 TANKSCSAPDA, Button Factory, 8pm, €25 Daithí, Button Factory, 11pm, €12 Rackhouse Pilfer, Whelan's, 8pm, €10 Don Baker, Upstairs @ Whelan's, 8pm, €15 Catscars, The Workman's Club, 8pm, €10 Heaven's Basement, Voodoo Lounge, 7pm, €15 Ugly Duckling, Twisted Pepper, 8pm, €14 Killface, Fibber Magee's, 9pm, €3
Galway: John Spillane, Róisín Dubh, 9pm, €16 Nicole Maguire, Upstairs @ Róisín Dubh, 9pm, €10
Limerick: Going 90, Upstairs @ Dolan's, 8pm, €5
Tullamore: Declan O'Rourke, Hugh Lynch's, 8pm, €22.50
Saturday, March 22
Cork: John Gallagher Trio, Triskel Christchurch, 8pm, €15 Fuaim 2014 w/ Cork Gamelan Ensemble, Cork Opera House, 8pm, €25
Dublin: God Is An Astronaut, Whelan's, 8pm, €20 Nicole Maguire, Upstairs @ Whelan's, 8pm, €10 Pelicans, Grand Social, 8pm, Donations Saint John the Gambler, The Workman's Club, 8pm, €5 Friends of Emmett, Sugar Club, 8pm, €12 Shit Robot, The Button Factory, 11pm, €12 Paolo Nutini, Olympia Theatre, 7.30pm, SOLD OUT Breach, The Academy, 7pm, SOLD OUT
Dundalk: Sails, The Spirit Store, 8pm, €5
Galway: Rackhouse Pilfer, Monroe's, 10pm, €5
Kilkenny: Declan O'Rourke, Set Theatre, 8pm, €20
Portlaoise: Sal Vitro, Kavanagh's, 9pm, €8.80
Sunday, March 23
Cork: The Answer, Cyprus Avenue, 9pm, €15 Niall McCabe Band, Coughlan's, 9pm, FREE The Crayon Set, Crane Lane Theatre, 11.30pm, FREE
Dublin: DOOM, The Sugar Club, 11pm, €30 Mary Coughlan, Whelan's, 8pm, €18.50 Simon O'Rourke, Upstairs @ Whelan's, 8pm, €14.50 Peter Mulvey, The Workman's Club, 8.30pm, €10 Saucy Sundays, The Grand Social, 5pm, FREE Franz Ferdinand, Olympia Theatre, 7.30pm, SOLD OUT
Monday, March 24
Cork: The Answer, Róisín Dubh, 8pm, €12
Dublin: Stu Larsen, The Workman's Club, 8pm, €9 Niall McCabe Band, Upstairs @ Whelan's, 8pm, €5 The Wanted, The O2, 6.30pm, €33.50 One Republic, Olympia Theatre, 7.30pm, SOLD OUT
Tuesday, March 25
Cork: Niall McCabe Band, Crane Lane Theatre, 11.30pm, FREE
Dublin: Darkside, The Button Factory, 7.30pm, SOLD OUT One Republic, Olympia Theatre, 7.30pm, SOLD OUT
Killarney: UB40, INEC, 8pm, €33.50
Wednesday, March 26
Cork: Crag Road, Cyprus Avenue, 8pm, €10
Dublin: Andy Cairns, Whelan's, 8pm, €20 Earl Sweatshirt, The Academy, 7pm, €30
Galway: The Dead Heavies, Róisín Dubh, 9pm, FREE Brigid Power Ryce, Cellar, 9.30pm, FREE
Limerick: The Answer, Dolan's Warehouse, 8pm, €15
Thursday, March 27
Cork: NOD, Cyprus Avenue, 9pm, FREE
Dublin: Power of Dreams, Whelan's, 8pm, €15 Marc O'Reilly, Upstairs @ Whelan's, 8pm, €10 New Natives, The Grand Social, 8pm, €7 Neon Wolf, The Workman's Club, 8pm, €5 UB40, The Academy, 7pm, SOLD OUT
Dundalk: Rackhouse Pilfer, The Spirit Store, 8pm, €10
Galway: Tvvins, Róisín Dubh, 11.30pm, FREE
'There was so much money it was insane'
Document THESUN0020140321ea3l0005j
