{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1166"}
____
  
News
Try one of our workers before an immigrant, Duncan Smith tells firms
Christopher Hope   
432 words
21 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
9
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
EMPLOYMENT
BRITISH companies should "try one of our workers" before hiring an immigrant, Iain Duncan Smith has said.
The Work and Pensions Secretary said he was encouraged that more jobs appeared to be going to British workers after being surprised by the number of migrant workers used to construct the stadiums for the London 2012 Olympics.
He told The House magazine: "I was in a Jobcentre at the time of the Olympics in my area of Waltham Forest. We were in the Olympic boroughs and there's a big debate about how much work actually went to those boroughs.
"I was talking to a plumber and a carpenter – trained, qualified individuals – and I asked them about the Olympic sites. And they said, 'They're all, or mostly, people coming in from Eastern Europe who undercut us because they all hot–bed in these areas and then they're gone. I can't compete with them on this because I've got a house, I've got kids, I've got commitments, there's only so far I can go on salary, otherwise it's worse for me than being on benefits'. Now more jobs are going to British workers than went originally. So that is the beginning of a change, but I'm very keen to thrash that out, so try one of our unemployed people first before you go anywhere else."
Mr Duncan Smith defended comments by James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, who had claimed a "wealthy metropolitan elite" had benefited from "an easy supply of cheap labour", at the expense of "ordinary, hard–working people". Mr Duncan Smith said: "He was saying the benefits of this, such as they are, tended to be in this group but not down at the bottom end, where they've tended to see the problem.
"He's right in that, by the way. That is the issue. People that I deal with every day, they feel very squeezed by people who come in, undercut them in price."
Mr Duncan Smith also addressed claims made in a recent book that he is regarded by George Osborne, the Chancellor, as "not clever enough".
He said: "I don't mind really, it doesn't bother me at all. I never really care what people say or think. Everyone has their axe to grind. People grind them away.
"I'm content to see what history's judgment of me will be, not what my contemporaries think of me. Politics is a silly game."
Document DT00000020140321ea3l0006t
