{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"502"}
____
  
News
Tory MPs say their party now the natural home of workers as 'Miliband sips lattes'
Georgia Graham   
305 words
9 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
2
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
TORY MPS have declared that the Conservatives are the true party of workers.
David Amess, Mark Prisk and Mark Harper, a former immigration minister, are among signatories to a letter in today's Daily Telegraph which says that their party is the natural home of working people.
The MPs also mocked Ed Miliband, saying he has broken Labour's links to the working class and "is more suited to sipping lattes in a North London coffee shop than uniting the country".
It comes as Tory ministers and MPs from working–class backgrounds publish a series of essays, in a collection called Reform, explaining why the Conservative Party attracted them.
Earlier this year, Grant Shapps, the Conservatives' chairman, attracted criticism for claiming that his party was the "workers party" fighting for a "classless society".
Last month, a line on a poster issued by the Conservatives after the Budget read "cutting the bingo tax and beer duty to help hardworking people do more of the things they enjoy" was criticised as condescending and patronising.
Today's letter says that while Labour was once "rooted" in working–class communities, today that "couldn't be further from the truth" but that turning to the UK Independence Party is not the answer.
The Conservatives, the letter says, extended the franchise to working–class voters, gave the right to picket to trade unionists and demolished the slums.
It reads: "The Conservative Party is the natural home of working people. Today's party is the party for everybody in society, from every walk of life.
"Social class doesn't matter, but using power to help working–class people matters a lot. And that's what Conservatives have done and are doing."
Letters: Page 19
Document DT00000020140409ea490006l
