{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2594"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Why not start HS2 from both ends at once?
PHILIP JOHNSTON   
1,000 words
18 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
23
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The railway line is essential – and there's no practical reason for favouring the South
Which is it, then: an unaffordable white elephant; or an ambitious programme to rebalance the nation's economy? Sir David Higgins, the boss of HS2, was brought in to make the case for what will be the first major, long–distance railway line to be built in this country since 1899. But his review, published yesterday, is unlikely to settle the bitter arguments over its route, its cost and its efficacy.
Sir David's appointment in January was an admission that the scheme was in serious political trouble. A former head of Network Rail, who had delivered the Olympic Games on time (which was never negotiable) and on budget (which was much higher than originally planned), he was asked by David Cameron to see if it was possible to shave a few billion pounds from the £50 billion projected cost of HS2 to make it easier to sell in Tory heartlands.
In fact, Sir David has done little to adjust the cost. He says the phase one budget of £21.4 billion, plus £3 billion for trains, was about right for getting the link from London to Birmingham. After that, a further £21.2 billion has been earmarked for the further links north. One of his tweaks involves extending the line to a new regional transport hub at Crewe by 2027, six years earlier than planned. This would more quickly demonstrate the benefits to the region.
Sir David chose to launch his review in Manchester in order to reinforce his central message that this exercise isn't about knocking a few minutes off journey times, but is a serious attempt to regenerate those parts of the country eclipsed by London's spectacular growth in recent years. A key figure in the report showed that only six England–based FTSE–100 companies are located north of a line from Birmingham to Cambridge. There are nearly 70 in London and the South East.
No other country in Europe is as topsyturvy as ours and it is to the capital's advantage that this is addressed. It is the reason why property prices are insane in London and commercial rents are among the highest in the world. Pressure on transport and housing is becoming intolerable, exacerbated by immigrants who also want to come to the South East to work.
Will a new railway line make any difference? Given the ludicrous time it takes us to build anything in this country, probably not in the short term. But it might if work on HS2 were to begin in the North at the same time as it starts in the South. One disappointment of Sir David's review is that it does not consider this option – which he was urged to do by the Commons transport select committee a few weeks ago.
The Department of Transport says there are practical and legal obstacles to building from both ends towards the middle, but I can't imagine what they are. Indeed, the idea of the track inching its way north from the South East into the northern heart of darkness exemplifies the very problem that the project is intended to resolve.
Another omission is any consideration of alternative routes to mitigate the impact on the countryside north of London. The precise route that HS2 will follow was set in stone far too early in this process and a number of proposed alternatives merited at least some consideration. But whatever route it takes there will inevitably be people living in the way who object; and it is no consolation to them to be told that we need to look at the bigger picture.
Benjamin Disraeli once wrote of a country split into two nations – the rich and the poor. Now the great divide is between London and the rest of the country, a gulf that seems greater than ever. The capital is developing into a country within a country, with an economic, cultural and political life separate from the rest of the nation. This is the real backdrop to the HS2 debate – and the aim is not to diminish London but to enable others to get a slice of the action. For that they need better transport links: greater "connectivity" both within their immediate region as well as with the rest of the UK and Europe. This matters because it can encourage economic activity and increase productivity, though it is impossible to give an accurate assessment at this stage what that impact will be.
What is certain is the West Coast Main Line is becoming overloaded and capacity problems will eventually harm the economy by causing overcrowding and stifling growth in rail freight. Putting aside HS2, and what it represents, does anyone have a realistic alternative for reshaping the national economy and boosting growth in the North and the Midlands? If they do, we have yet to hear it.
Surely we still possess enough entrepreneurial gumption as a nation to embark on an infrastructure project of this magnitude, the first mainline railway to be built north of London in 120 years? Our Victorian forebears would be astonished to discover that it is expected to take the best part of 15 years to complete and there will be little change from £50 billion to get it running. Brunel took six years to build the 152 miles of the Great Western Railway from London to Bridgwater.
So, will HS2 become the Concorde of the 2030s, a magnificent engineering achievement but one that could never pay its way, testament to the folie de grandeur of 1960s modernists? Or will we praise our current crop of politicians for having had the strategic vision – and the courage – to see it through? That's assuming, of course, that it gets built at all.
Comment on Philip Johnston's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140318ea3i00044
