{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2926"}
____
  
News
Students? They're an ignorant bunch, says Nobel Prize winner
Keith Perry   
536 words
31 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
9
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
SIR ANDRE GEIM, a Nobel Prize–winning physicist and professor at a Russell Group university, might have been expected to sympathise with undergraduates following in his footsteps.
However, Sir Andre, praised for his pioneering work with the material graphene, has disclosed that he dislikes students, describing them as "absolutely ignorant".
The Russian born Regius Professor of Physics at Manchester University said he only became interested in his young charges after they had completed two or three years of a PhD.
He told Kirsty Young on Radio 4's Desert Island Discs: "I don't like students very much. They come absolutely ignorant and they are not grown up yet as interesting people.
"But sometimes over two or three years of their PhD they grow exponentially fast, pick up experiences and then they become real persons and after that we become, not like a professor and a student, we become like colleagues and that is a really enjoyable experience." Last night a Manchester University students' union spokesman said he was inclined to agree with the professor, although "he probably shouldn't have said it".
The spokesman added: "I think it is a very funny comment and probably true. At first, a lot of students are more interested in getting drunk than studying."
Sir Andre, 55, said he also believed that students should be exempt from the new immigration laws.
The professor, who is also director of the Manchester Centre for Mesoscience and Nanotechnology, said: "As a nation we have to be pragmatic rather than populistic.
"We should try to draw from the resources outside this country, try to bring the brightest minds to compete in the future world and the future of the country is where the brains are.
"So if you tap into foreign talent it is very appropriate."
Born in the Soviet Union, his early years were spent in Sochi with his grandmother, a meteorologist who had a small weather station on the beach. He described her as "the closest friend he ever had" until he was 28 or 30. He studied at Moscow and earned a PhD. In 1990 he took up posts at the universities of Nottingham, Bath and Copenhagen.
He said that at Nottingham he could spend his time on research rather than "swimming through Soviet treacle".
He was made a Knight Bachelor for services to science with his work on graphene with his Manchester University collaborator Sir Konstantin Novoselov.
Sir Andre was also awarded the Copley medal by the Royal Society and the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2010.
Graphene is sheets of carbon just one atom thick — a million times smaller than the thickest human hair.
"It is the thinnest known material in the universe, and the strongest ever measured," Sir Andre wrote in a 2009 issue of the journal Science.
It was discovered in 2004 and is now regarded as a "super material" with the potential to revolutionise the automotive, aerospace and electronics industries.
Sir Andre described his research as being like a detective. He said: "You compete in this kind of Sherlock Holmes experience trying to get very little information and then guess the answer."
Document DT00000020140331ea3v0003l
