{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"402"}
____
  
News
BBC has been too pro-Europe, says Humphrys
Anita Singh   
496 words
11 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
10
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE BBC has not been "sufficiently sceptical" of the European Union or immigration, according to John Humphrys, who said staff had let liberal bias shape the corporation's news coverage.
The presenter of Radio 4's Today programme said that the BBC had "bought into the European ideal".
Critics have long accused the corporation of failing to acknowledge public concerns about immigration or Britain's membership of the EU. Humphrys is the first current affairs presenter to admit such bias exists, although he said the situation had improved.
"We weren't sufficiently sceptical - that's the most accurate phrase - of the pro-European case. We bought into the European ideal," he said.
"We weren't sufficiently sceptical about the pro-immigration argument. We didn't look at the potential negatives with suffi-cient rigour. I think we're out of that now. I think we have changed."
In an interview with Radio Times, Humphrys claimed that the bias was "understandable".
"The BBC has tended over the years to be broadly liberal as opposed to broadly conservative for all sorts of perfectly understandable reasons.
"The sort of people we've recruited - the best and brightest - tended to come from universities and backgrounds where they're more likely to hold broadly liberal views than conservative." Humphrys appears unconcerned by a BBC diktat banning high-profile stars from criticising the corporation publicly.
Danny Cohen, the BBC's director of television, complained last year about "those who work for the BBC and are well rewarded for it [but] are quick to attack or criticise the organisation in public rather than deal with issues internally".
Humphrys used the interview to complain about unnecessary layers of management at the BBC. "There are too many of them," he said. "Over the years we've been grotesquely over-managed, there's no question. They're now getting a grip on it. A lot have gone. I think more need to go." He also predicted that the next Today presenter would be a woman, following on from Mishal Husain, the programme's most recent signing.
Last year, Humphrys was criticised by the BBC Trust over a television documentary he made in which he questioned whether benefits claimants were living in an "age of entitlement".
The trust said he had breached impartiality guidelines by failing to provide statistics to back up claims that there was "a healthy supply of jobs" in Britain.
Humphrys also defended his sometimes adversarial interviewing technique in the interview.
Interrupting a politician is "vital - not just allowable or defensible. Otherwise you get party political broadcasts," he said.
"You don't set out to have a row but when the row develops, you don't necessarily want to recoil from it. It's sometimes good radio. Sometimes it gets in the way and sometimes it can be illuminating… The idea all the public ever wants to hear are reasoned discussions is nonsense."
Document DT00000020140311ea3b0005a
