{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"322"}
____
  
NEWS
Filipino blackmail gang 'smashed' almost a year after Scottish teen takes his own life
By Auslan Cramb Scottish Correspondent   
647 words
2 May 2014
17:55
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Dozens of arrests in Philippines as Daniel Perry's mother says the manner of his death was a 'parent's worst nightmare'
A teenager who took his own life was the victim of a Filipino blackmail gang that has been smashed by an international police operation.
Daniel Perry, 17, jumped from the Forth Road Bridge after becoming the victim of the sexual blackmail, or “sextortion”, racket.
Victims are befriended online and tricked into making explicit webcam recordings before being told the footage will be sent to friends and relatives unless payment is made.
Last July, Daniel, an apprentice mechanic from Dunfermline, became one of thousands of victims of the practice around the world.
He thought he was chatting to a teenage girl in the US before members of the gang attempted to blackmail him.
Shortly before killing himself, he asked them: "What can I do to stop you showing this to my family?"
He was told to pay funds into a named bank account or he would be “better off dead”. He replied with one word, "bye", and an hour later he took his own life.
The teenager was still alive when rescued by a lifeboat crew, but died shortly afterwards.
Inquiries by Scottish detectives revealed an electronic online trail leading to the Philippines and links to organised crime there.
Interpol said it had now smashed the operation after setting up a task force involving police from the US, Hong Kong, Singapore, Australia and Scotland.
Over the past few days, police in the capital Manila have arrested a total of 58 people. The scam was used to extort amounts ranging from $500 (£297) to $15,000 (£8,908) from the victims.
Daniel's mother Nicola said the manner of her son’s death was “every parent's worse nightmare”, adding: “After being targeted by complete strangers online, he was left so traumatised by his ordeal that he chose to take his own life.
"Whoever was at the other end of that computer did not know Daniel. They didn't care that he was a loving and caring person with his whole life ahead of him. To them, he was just another faceless victim to exploit for cash.
"Losing Daniel has left us all devastated and we are still trying to come to terms with what has happened. I would like to thank the police officers who have supported our family during this extremely distressing time and for keeping us up to date with the progress of their investigation.
"If we are to make sure that no other parent or family member loses a loved one in the way that we have lost Daniel then people must take care when talking to others online and not share intimate pictures or personal information that could be used against them.”
Police Scotland worked on the case with a number of international agencies, including Interpol, Homeland Security Investigations, US Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the Philippines National Police.
Assistant Chief Constable Malcolm Graham said: "I hope that the efforts of law enforcement and our partners in Scotland and globally helps to provide some reassurance to Daniel's family and the wider public that we are determined to tackle this type of criminality."
Allan Purisima, national police chief of the Philippines, told a press conference in Manila: “The modus operandi of this group is to create an online account on social networking sites with the purpose of locating and attracting prospective clients, especially old male individuals abroad.
"Whilst they created this account they would pose as Asian attractive females. After getting acquainted with the victims... they'll invite and further entice their would-be victims to use video-call and engage in cybersex and this will be recorded, unknown to the victim."
Document TELUK00020140502ea52002xp
