{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1332"}
____
  
Finance
To deal with more immigration, build fewer houses in the South East
By Andrew Lilico   
879 words
1 March 2014
08:02
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Despite the Conservative Party's pledge to reduce net immigration into the UK to the tens of thousands, in the latest data net immigration has soared to 212,000, up 60,000 in a year. The commonest objection to large amounts of net immigration is the "we're full" one – the thought being that Britain is a crowded island already with decaying infrastructure and the last thing it needs is even more pressure to absorb extra cars on the road, passengers on the trains, children in the schools or sick in the hospitals.
It is normal in such arguments to talk about the economic benefits of migration or the enriching of our cultures from those coming from abroad or the freedom of allowing people to move around the world, and compare it with the infrastructure challenges mentioned or the cultural challenges of absorbing large numbers of foreigners or the impact on low-paid British workers.
What is much less often pointed out is that the "we're full" argument applies only to a small portion of the UK. We can illustrate the point by contrasting the population history of different regions. The population of Englandwas 33 million in 1911, 39 million in 1951, and 53 million in 2011 – a rise of about 60 pc in a century. When we note that the rise is focused upon the South East, Birmingham and Greater Manchester, the sense of people in some parts of the country that the growth in population is overwhelming them can be understood.
But, by contrast, Scotland’s population in 1911 was 4.8m and by 2001 was still just 5.0m (lower, in fact than in 1951). Even more extreme is the case of Northern Ireland, where the population was 1.65m in 1841, and only 1.69m in 2001.
For England as a whole the population density is 4 persons per hectare; in Greater Manchester it is 5; and in the South-East 4.5. But in Northern Ireland the population density is only 1.3 and in Scotland only 0.7 – barely a sixth of the population density of England.
Thus, much of the UK is not remotely full and has not experienced any material rise in population that makes immigrants difficult to absorb. Indeed, many regions (especially Scotland, Northern Ireland and parts of North-East and South-West England), would benefit significantly from having more population, not only for the familiar reasons of cultural excitement and diversity and work ethic that immigrants bring, but for the more brute reason that it would be good to have more persons.
More on immigration
• EU migrants: sovereignty really matters
• Ukip should pay attention to Switzerland
• UK natives are running a larger deficit than EU migrants
The challenge, of course, is how to get more population to live in the regions where population is low instead of where it is high. London, the South East and Greater Manchester are more densely populated because they are where the wealth and jobs and business opportunities are (and, incidentally, vice versa). One option might be to grant immigrants leave to live and work in the UK provided they live and work in the lower-population density regions. Other countries make such "regional passporting" schemes work, so presumably the UK could as well.
But there is another kind of option here worth mentioning. We could simply refuse to grant permission to build more houses or more factories or more offices in the higher population-density regions. Over the past two decades, for all the complaints about planning restrictions, the surpluses of dwellings over households in London and the South East has risen – we've built properties faster than the population of households has risen. We could, instead, build fewer houses. That wouldn't immediately prevent the population in these regions from growing, because existing properties could be used with more dwellers. But it would result in property prices in London and the South East rising even faster, relative to the rest of the population, than they have done recently. The consequence would be, eventually, that it would become economically unattractive to live and work in the high-population density regions. That would drive more population and more business activity into lower-population-density regions.
We can think of this as the Market's version of regional policy. Many commentators note the failures of central government regional policies to stimulate adequate activity outside London and the South-East. But if we simply refused to allow extra dwellings or offices to be built there, the price mechanism would chase activity elsewhere.
Then we could welcome increased immigration as the good-news-story it would be. Extra immigrants into Northern Ireland, Scotland, and the South West and North East of England would address one of the key objectives of failed regional policies for decades. And all delivered via the price mechanism. Fancy that.
More by Andrew Lilico
• We can adapt to climate change, or mitigate it. Not both
• Scotland , the pound and the euro
•  Meritocracy, tradition, and the myth of talent 
Listen to our weekly podcast:
listen to 窶聾hy did the 1970s become a haven for evil?窶  on Audioboo
Document TELUK00020140301ea31002jr
