{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1667"}
____
  
Nigel Farage is staring down the barrel of his favourite gun
By Matthew d’Ancona   
1,259 words
19 April 2014
19:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Ukip leader is starting to resemble the very politicians he lives to destroy, and his astonishingly easy ride in the media may be coming to an end
''It’s written into the Tory share price,” according to one Cabinet minister. “At least, I hope it is.” This senior Coalition figure was referring to Ukip ’s prospects in the European elections on May 22 and his point was this: the Conservatives have long been expected to finish behind Nigel Farage’s party in the contest. Such an outcome will be deeply unpleasant for the Tories but will not affect the outcome of the general election. At least, he hopes not.
The latest ICM poll suggests that Ukip is indeed on course to beat David Cameron’s party next month: five points clear of the Conservatives and only three behind Labour. You may have read that Ed Miliband has hired David Axelrod, the campaigning genius who steered Barack Obama to victory in 2008 and 2012. It will be intriguing to see what Axelrod makes of Britain’s answer to the “Tea Party”, and its position in the political firmament. Though Ukip takes votes from all parties, 45 per cent of its supporters backed the Conservatives at the last election. If I were Axelrod, I would be reminded of Ross Perot, the Independent candidate who took 18.9 per cent of the popular vote in the 1992 presidential race, and helped to deny George Bush Sr a second term.
Farage alone cannot win the general election for Miliband any more than Perot was the sole author of Bill Clinton’s presidency. Cameron’s chances of remaining in Downing Street after May 7 2015, depend upon the speed of the recovery, how palpable it is to voters, the fiscal credibility of Labour (or lack of it), and the capacity of senior Conservatives to persuade a sufficiency of voters that they are more than the political wing of the already affluent.
In this kaleidoscopic array of forces, the depth and significance of an “organic split” on the Right – between Conservatives and Kippers, Cameroons and Farageists – may be wildly exaggerated. But that is precisely what a digitalised culture does: alongside its many marvels – which are legion - it seizes upon division, loathing and other pathologies and amplifies them. These are the new rules, and Farage understands them as well as any politician in Britain.
All that he has to do to keep playing is to be convincingly different. The Ukip brand depends not upon exit from the European Union – a possibility under both the Conservatives and Labour – nor even upon its ferocious stance on immigration. Farage’s claim to our attention depends entirely upon his status as an outsider throwing stones at the glass house of “the political class” or “the Establishment” or “the elite”.
This is why he is much more rattled by recent stories about his allowances than he was by (say) Cameron’s long-awaited speech in January 2013 that promised an In/Out referendum before the end of 2017. The allegations concern Farage’s use of EU funds to subsidise his constituency office in Lyminster, West Sussex. The Ukip leader spent about £15,500 a year of his MEP’s allowance on the property, even though it was reportedly donated rent-free to the party.
Thus Farage was reduced last week to explaining on the airwaves what the money was spent on. “Running machines,” he told Sky News, “running banks of computers; running photocopiers; doing things that use a lot more electricity than many household chores.” He accused The Times, which broke the story, of being the “establishment newspaper” (a description I doubt he used when he had dinner last year with its owner, Rupert Murdoch). Ukip then published a ludicrous inventory of Times staff and their connections – familial or social – with the Conservative Party, which looked as desperate as it plainly was.
Often effective on the attack, Farage has not yet learnt how to handle criticism, or to control the burst capillaries of self-righteousness. He also finds himself precisely where he does not want to be: the object of the sort of inquiries he wishes upon his opponents. Only 11 days ago, he was raking in political capital like poker chips from the Maria Miller expenses affair, insisting that her resignation as Culture Secretary was not enough and that constituency electorates should be granted the right to recall their MPs. “Yet again,” he declared, “this is the political class looking after its own and letting down the electorate.”
Now he stares down the barrel of his favourite gun. The Electoral Commission, which regulates party finance and electoral ethics, has written to Ukip demanding “clarification” of the funding of his constituency office. He also faces potential investigation by the European Parliament’s anti-fraud office, OLAF.
Who knows? These investigations may clear him of all wrongdoing. But he has aggressively encouraged us to assume the worst of all politicians, to take their collective guilt for granted, and to regard their very membership of the “elite” or “political class” or “establishment” as damning in itself. Now he is feeling the rough edge of those same assumptions, the kangaroo court whose only jurisprudence is: “They’re all the same”.
What Farage faces in this instance is not the spectre of sleaze but a much more lethal charge: that he is just like the rest of them, just another beige politician. For years, with increasing success, he has cultivated the image of a David taking on the lumbering Goliaths of the post-crash political landscape. He is the Purple Pimpernel, the Reactionary Robin Hood.
In an age of austerity and economic anxiety, his message of fear and mutual suspicion – his claim that much of Britain has become “unrecognisable” and whole areas have been “taken over” by immigrants – has found an audience. He plays with fire more cunningly and irresponsibly than any politician I can remember, inviting us to applaud his often-reckless rhetoric as bold honesty. Like all men of his fibre, he warns of “extremism” but insists that his only purpose is to prevent it.
To say that Farage is a creature of his times is not intended as a compliment. The late American writer, David Foster Wallace, wrote of the perils of “institutionalised irony”. Satire, irreverence and scepticism are the lifeblood of a democracy. But when the sneer is all that a political system has left, it is in trouble. I am not saying that Farage is entirely wrong about the political class. But his combination of saloon-bar scaremongering and fantasy politics – his wish to turn the clock back economically, socially and culturally – is part of the problem, not the solution.
In a little over a month, the European elections may mark Farage’s finest hour. But his cover is at risk of being blown. He is starting to resemble the very politicians he lives to destroy, deeply resentful that his astonishingly easy ride in the media may be coming to an end, outraged that he should have to take to the airwaves to explain how he spends public money.
Behind the anger, you could see the self-pity. And you could see something else, too. It reminded me of the closing lines of Animal Farm: “The creatures outside looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again; but already it was impossible to say which was which.”
Document TELUK00020140419ea4j004eg
