{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"903"}
____
  
Features
Big brain, big mouth, big Tory future on hold
ROSIE KINCHEN   
1,529 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
5
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Fiercely intellectual, 'the black Boris' has been tipped for high office but as a leading figure of the new Tory right unafraid to oppose Cameron he knows he has been 'too voluble' NEWS REVIEW INTERVIEW
Kwasi Kwarteng has an extraordinary laugh; a great booming sound that fills Portcullis House in Westminster and makes the cafeteria table vibrate. He unleashes it when he does not want to answer a question — which is frequently — eyeing me from behind thick black-framed spectacles, throwing his head back and emitting great guffaws before talking about something else entirely.
The 38-year-old Conservative MP for Spelthorne in Surrey has been called "the Black Boris" but reminds me of a self-satisfied Victorian professor. Kwarteng was one of the stars of the 2010 intake of Tory MPs, a former financial analyst with an impeccable academic track record. He has spent his time in parliament carving a name for himself as one of the leading figures in a new Tory right-wing vanguard — a group of young heirs to Margaret Thatcher whose views often oppose David Cameron's vision of compassionate Conservatism.
To say that Kwarteng is intellectually confident is an understatement, but he lacks Boris's selfassurance. He has been known to record interviews to check them for accuracy and keeps crying, "How do you know that? That's never been in print", to questions relating to his non-political past.
We are here to talk about his new book, War and Gold, an economic history that explains how our financial systems and institutions have been shaped by war and the need for easy capital — all the way back to the Spanish conquistadors. The idea came to him at the time of the financial crash. "I was thinking, wouldn't it be good to write a book about what was clearly the financial event of the generation, if not a lifetime" and decided that "if you're trained as a historian, the first question you ask is how did we get where we are".
The book explains how governments have always suspended the gold standard and printed money as a way of funding wars. It also lays out Kwarteng's theories for reducing debt — including "a gold standard based on a fixed exchange rate of yuan [China's currency] to a prescribed quantity of gold".
Even if this worked does he believe the cycle of boom and bust can ever stop? "I think it can; it stopped for much of the 19th century. Britain went back on the gold standard in 1821; we were on the gold standard until 1914. There was no reason why, if it hadn't been for the First World War, it would have stopped."
This is the third book Kwarteng has published in the four years since he was elected. He claims this is down to "ruthless" efficiency and an excellent "secretary" but actually Kwarteng is just aggressively intellectual; the sort of man who reads Thomas Piketty's bestselling economics book, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, "in the original French" and becomes giddy about the National Archives.
Perhaps it is because of this that his political career has not quite taken off. In the early days of the coalition he was named as a potential first black Conservative minister. "People touted me but it didn't happen," he says. "I clearly upset some higher-ups, I don't know why, probably too voluble."
It may just be that he lacks the common touch. Trying to talk about anything other than economic history feels like petting a spitting cat. "You could ask me that," he snaps at one point. "Ostensibly you are interviewing me about the book."
He has carved a niche for himself as an exciting political thinker. Kwarteng describes himself as a Eurosceptic and a free market Conservative. Along with other "ones to watch" from the 2010 intake, including Dominic Raab and Liz Truss, he has published two collaborative books, After the Coalition and Britannia Unchained, proposing a new direction for the Conservative party; advocating free market economics, a smaller state and a more globally competitive Britain. Would he like to see new blood in the party leadership? "It will come," Kwarteng says. "Sajid Javid, Liz Truss; these people are excellent and with time these guys will be at the top of the party."
Like others in this group he was heavily influenced by Thatcher. He "vividly" remembers when he was aged 15 that she left Downing Street and a friend who had "posters of her all over his walls" ran out screaming the news. "I couldn't remember any other prime minister, I would have been four when she was elected." He has been "thinking about various aspects" of Thatcher's style and "the challenges she faced". She was, he says, "incomparable and in my mind a very, very strong prime minister".
He talks a lot about the need for bold political opinion: "I think Conservatives want clear, well defined positions and perhaps the coalition has meant that the hard simplicity they wanted has been blunted or obscured," he says.
He has also pointed out that the public are sick of politicians trying to be something they are not. Is this, I suggest, why Nigel Farage is in such a strong position going into the European elections. "Yes," he agrees. "He likes his beer, his cigarettes, his crazy coats. He has that image, which I'm sure he has cultivated but at the moment it is working well for him." Later he almost goes further: "Someone said to me — and I'm not saying I agree with it — that the two major politicians in this country at the moment are Farage and [Alex] Salmond."
Kwarteng may not look like a typical Tory, but his upbringing fits the current party mould exactly. His parents are Ghanaian — his mother was a barrister who became head of chambers at Lincoln's Inn and he describes his father as a "centre left" economist.
Kwarteng was an only child and an extremely bright one. Aged eight he boarded at Colet Court in Barnes, southwest London, the feeder school to St Paul's that has been hit by historic sex abuse allegations. He looks uncomfortable when I bring it up but says one of the men implicated, who died three years ago, "was deputy headmaster and was promoted to headmaster in my last term".
He describes the school as a "very funny place" where most of the parents lived in London and sent their children to the boarding house he attended "as a lifestyle choice". He remembers that at the time "there were always jokes and dim things in the background".
Kwarteng went to Eton "on a full scholarship". Did his parents push him academically? "I think all children of immigrants have a slight pressure to do well but then you internalise that; I wanted to do well at studies, I quite liked winning prizes." He was "aware" of his race and "having a funny name" and there was "some teasing" but once "you found a skill, people just let you get on with it". For him it was academia.
Kwarteng is said to have ended his Cambridge University entrance interview with a nervous young don with the words: "Don't worry, sir, you did a good job." He squirms and says "there may be some truth" in the story. He stayed out of politics at Trinity College, where he studied history and was friends with Tristram Hunt, now the shadow education secretary. After his PhD he applied for two academic fellowships at Cambridge, which he did not get, and then took a job at JP Morgan.
He believes banker bashing is "insane" and "the City of London is an integral part of our economy".
But he becomes vague about the seven years he spent working as an analyst there — when City salaries were at their highest — before becoming an MP.
He worked for a time at Odey Asset Management and is "friends" with Crispin Odey, the fund manager who paid himself £28m in 2008 for anticipating the credit crunch. He owns a flat in Bayswater, west London, that he bought "from savings" and says dismissively "it's just a tiny little thing". He clams up when I ask whether he is in a relationship with the Tory MP Amber Rudd. The two are said to have been a couple for more than a year.
Does he mind the "Black Boris" label? "Anything people remember me by is fine," he says with a smile. Except, it seems, his Boris-type gaffe: he said "f***" on University Challenge and landed up on page 3 of The Sun, smirking beneath a pair of breasts and the headline "Rudeiversity Challenge". It may have happened in 1995 but he howls like a wounded badger when I bring it up.
"It was the softest thing in the world but it's been blown up into some four-letter rant," he cries, head in hands.
Perhaps there is a bit of Boris in him after all.
Document ST00000020140504ea54000ma
