{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"2905"}
____
  
News
He asked me to buy the methedrone ...Mark had many drugs
MATTHEW DRAKE; VINCENT MOSS   
991 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; National
4,5
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
Rent boy claims Tory MP paid him for sex & drugs
EXCLUSIVE
A BRAZILIAN rent boy today claims Tory Mark Menzies paid him for sex after they met on a gay escort website - and then asked him to supply illegal drugs.
Rogerio Santos claimed Mr Menzies, 42, paid for his services 18 months ago, before showing him around Parliament.
The 19-year-old then claims the MP asked him to supply him with illegal methedrone.
His allegations led to Mr Menzies dramatically quitting last night as a Parliamentary Private Secretary with the Department for International Development.
He said: "I have decided to resign as a PPS after a series of allegations were made against me in a Sunday newspaper".
We were contacted by Santos in a series of emails last week in which he openly admitted being a rent boy.
He told us: "I have been having sex with a Conservative MP for money. Mark also asked me to buy methedrone. I have personal messages of him talking to me about drugs." Santos claimed he overstayed his student visa, was in the country illegally and made other claims about Mr Menzies - although it is understood the MP was unaware of Santos's immigration status.
The unmarried MP, who was parliamentary private secretary to International Development Minister Alan Duncan until 7pm yesterday, has repeatedly asked Commons questions about the Government's work on rehabilitation for drugs offenders.
But texts on Santos' phone, which he showed to the Sunday Mirror, reveal messages asking the teenager for full details about the quality of methedrone available and how much it would cost.
MESSAGES
Methedrone was banned in the UK in 2010 and is a Class B drug dubbed "poor man's cocaine".
Street slang often confuses methedrone with mephedrone - another illegal amphetamine-based drug.
A series of messages seen by the Sunday Mirror show the 42-year-old MP asking for the price of the drug .
Santos, who lives in a squalid apartment block in Sao Paulo, told how he was taken around Parliament by Mr Menzies - although there is no suggestion that Mr Menzies broke any rules in taking him to Westminster Palace.
He emailed us on Tuesday last week making his series of allegations, saying: "We met very regularly over the last 18 months. He took me to the Houses of Parliament. Recently, he has been asking me to buy drugs.
"I have SMS messages and photographic evidence.
"When we went to his office in Westminster I was not introduced to anyone but I still have the visitor's permit."
A series of pictures on Santos' phone and seen by the Sunday Mirror show the MP - elected to Parliament four years ago as one of David Cameron's "A-List" of young candidates - next to a plate of white powder at his luxury London home.
Santos showed off a Parliamentary visitor's pass issued at 2.35pm on June 26 last year as he went to Mr Menzies' Westminster office. He said: "Mark got me the security pass to visit Westminster and I was interviewed by police at the gates before."
He added in an email: "I have a photo of Mark and a photo he took of me inside Westminster where he is visible in the reflection.
Describing pictures he took on his mobile, Santos claimed: "There is a plate of methedrone. He asked me if I could buy methedrone. He have many drugs, a lot of drugs."
Former Marks & Spencer graduate trainee Mr Menzies has repeatedly raised the issue of rehabilitation for drugs offenders since being elected as MP for Fylde in Lancashire in 2010.
In February this year, he tabled a Commons question asking the Ministry of Justice to "take steps to introduce the HM Prison Kirkham Drug and Rehabilitation programme nationally".
Mr Menzies' website features a June 2011 article telling readers about his support for drug rehabilitation programmes after a visit to the Pierpoint Addiction Treatment Centre in St Annes, Lancashire.
HUMBLE
He is quoted as saying: "It was truly fascinating to visit with Pierpoint. I feel supporting full recoveryled programmes can be off tremendous benefit to society."
Mr Menzies has also spoken passionately about issues of conscience in Commons' debates.
He backed gay marriage - which came into force yesterday - telling MPs in February 2013: "I am a Catholic and religious freedoms are very important to me, as is my religion, but so too are equality and tolerance."
Scotsman Mr Menzies rose from humble beginnings in the small town of Ardrossan on the North Ayrshire coast. He was raised by his mother after his merchant navy father died a month before his birth.
He became an active member of the Tory Party in 1982, and began a career in retail after leaving Glasgow University in 1994 with an honours degree in economic and social history.
He joined Marks & Spencer later that year and went on to become an Asda executive. He has served as PPS to former Energy Minister Charles Hendry and ex-Housing Minister Mark Prisk before taking up his current role as aide to Tory MP Alan Duncan.
He spent yesterday at his £144,000 constituency apartment in St Annes, near the beach.
The Sunday Mirror yesterday presented Mr Menzies with a series of claims and questions.
At 7pm, the Prime Minister's official spokesman issued a statement from the MP confirming that he was standing down from his unpaid role as PPS.
Mr Menzies said: "A number of these allegations are not true and I look forward to setting the record straight in due course."
It is believed he will continue to represent his constituency, which he holds with a majority of 13,000.
matthew.drake@sundaymirror.co.uk
We met regularly over the last 18 months. He got me security pass ROGERIO SANTOS, Sao Paulo, Brazil
Document SMIRR00020140330ea3u000cp
