{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1806"}
____
  
FINANCE
A free European market can give Britain the talent it needs
By Michael Hayman Enterprise columnist   
1,046 words
23 April 2014
20:41
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Britain needs talent, says Michael Hayman, and he doesn't mean plate spinning, beat boxing or street dancing
Don’t let the siren cries of the anti-immigration lobby talk us out of the benefits of a free European market. If you talk to the Capital’s tech entrepreneurs one thing quickly becomes clear: their companies are crying out for talent, and better access to the world’s brightest and best.
"Government needs to do more to reduce the cost, complexity and time taken to push through visa applications,” is the view of Unruly founder Sarah Wood, whose Tech City headquartered company is fast developing into a world-beater, with offices in 12 countries.
This week I interviewed Deputy London Mayor Kit Malthouse at the Guildhall and he told me that, “'Attracting talent is a key challenge facing London's tech ecosystem. London survives on the flow of capital and people but more must be done to make sure the flow of talent is improved.”
The event, focusing on unlocking the potential of London’s tech start-ups, was noteworthy for the announcement by Tech City CEO Gerard Grech of 200 new visas, which the organisation can grant to exceptional global talent in support of London tech firms.
It builds on the existing Entrepreneur Visa scheme, which has made important strides since being launched in 2008, but is still a narrow funnel for talent. Successful entrepreneur visa applications remained in three figures last year, and over half of applicants were turned away last year according to a recent report from migration advisers Migreat.
Many would argue that we have an oversupply of labour, with 2.2 million still unemployed. But that does not equate to a surplus of talent, and it’s not only tech companies that are losing out. Our firms need thousands and not hundreds of talented migrants to thrive at a time when many have their eyes on rapid expansion. Right now Britain is on the cusp of a skills drought and if we are not careful commercial conditions could become a good deal more arid as a result.
This is a situation that can be averted because it is self inflicted. We need to open the door to global talent, not close it. Despite our own self imposed limitations Britain remains a magnet for those seeking new opportunities, a jobs board for the world’s talented. And that is translating into solid business returns: the UK remains head and shoulders above any EU state as Europe’s top destination for inward investment, a position it has held for eleven years.
People want to come here. Consider this extraordinary fact. There are now nearly as many Chinese as domestic students on full-time postgraduate courses at English universities (23pc compared to 26pc). They come here to be schooled and we ship them home. Why not patriate these talents here?
As a trading nation the free movement of capital and labour is not just a lifeline but our very bloodline. It is etched into our DNA and our very way of life. Risk that and you risk everything.
But take a look at the opening salvos of the European elections, launched this week, and you see many playing fast and loose with this reputation and that’s not good for business. Ukip was first off the mark claiming that 26 million unemployed Europeans are waiting to parachute in and steal British jobs.
But I think it’s a mistake to conflate skepticism about the European Union with immigration. Let’s face it if the European Union was a start-up you would be highly unlikely to create the institution it has become today. A testament to many of the worst traits of big government, it appears as a cumbersome, wasteful and bureaucratic throwback to a bygone corporatist era where big is always best.
However, the commercial opportunities afforded by the free movement of people and capital is one of its strengths not weaknesses. Last month, research from the Centre for Entrepreneurs think-tank and fintech pioneer DueDil showed that one in seven UK companies have been founded by migrants.
“Immigrant entrepreneurs disproportionately contribute to the enterprise economy and create jobs,” is the view of the Centre’s chairman Luke Johnson (pictured below). “[They] punch above their weight in terms of economic importance.”
Migration is also something very powerful at the heart of British culture and history. Who among us cannot trace our origins to other countries and peoples? How many who have found their way here have not seen Britain as a refuge of possibility. Perhaps the then-immigrant Sigmund Freud captured it best: “lovely, free, magnanimous England,” he said of the country where he found refuge from the Nazis at the age of 82 in 1938.
To maintain that status it will not suffice for the UK to be part of the European pack, with a lukewarm or even hostile attitude towards newcomers. Instead we should be the trailblazers, world leaders in welcoming new talent to make its fortune. This small island, without the benefits of a major geographical hinterland, sits as the world’s sixth most successful global economy and that has been built on our ability to martial talent as much as resources.
And the future of talent rests on making it a lot easier not more difficult for those who want to work or build businesses to get here. It will not be an easy journey. Experience shows that the talented of tomorrow are not necessarily the talented of today. But while it’s a hard job picking winners, freedom of movement is likely to make Britain richer not poorer.
But that is made more difficult by a contradiction at the heart of government. Namely a Home Office that wants to cut overall immigration and other parts of government that want to rapidly up the ability of the nation to headhunt overseas talent.
A reputation for success is built upon being seen as open to the world not closed to it. As things stands, there is not a fiercely urgent approach to bringing the best talent to these shores. That needs to change.
Document TELUK00020140423ea4n00264
