{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"55"}
____
  
NEWS
Tories make ethnic minority voters feel like they are a mistake, MP says
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
556 words
25 March 2014
14:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Conservative MP Mark Field calls on party to drop migration target and soften rhetoric, as growing numbers of ethnic minority voters shun Tories
The Conservatives risk electoral defeat because hostile rhetoric on immigration is driving away ethnic minority voters, one of the party’s MPs has warned.
Polish-born voters now back Labour over the Conservative Party by a margin of three-to-one because of the Tories’ plans to bring down immigration. The party makes non-white voters feel like they are a “mistake”, Mark Field, the MP for Westminster and the City, said.
He today launched a new campaign, Conservatives for Managed Migration, in order to promote “calm and rational debate” around immigration.
The Conservative policy of cutting net migration to under 100,000 is deterring talented students and investors, and erodes trusts in politicians because it cannot be delivered, Mr Field said.
The pledge was part of a “hysterical reaction” to immigration levels in the last decade, with party leaders engaging in a “Dutch auction” of increasingly tough policies.
The unsuccessful campaigns of 2001 and 2005 were fought on an anti-immigration platform, he added.
“The relentless focus on immigration by the Conservative Party appears too often to outsiders to border on the near obsessive. The implicit message to the electorate is that my party is fundamentally hostile to those who were not born here; indeed, that the presence of settled migrant communities is somehow a historical mistake.
“This is in spite of the fact that many immigrants to Britain demonstrate just the sort of values to family and enterprise that should make them natural Tory voters.
“The harsh truth that my party must face is that the number of immigrants on the electoral roll gets markedly bigger, year on year. What really is the Conservative message to these voters?”
He continued: “One of the most alarming statistics that I’ve read in recent weeks is that Labour Party are outpolling the Tories by almost three-to-one amongst Polish nationals who are voting here in the EU elections in May. It’s hard to believe that this is unrelated to the perceived hostility towards both immigrants and the European Union.”
Voters will see through insincere attempts to sound like Ukip on immigration, Mr Field said.
Some MPs have privately expressed their support to the campaign but are unable to do in public because they face a challenge from Ukip in their constituencies at the next election, he added.
How do Britain’s ethnic minorities vote?
Interactive chart: How did ethnic minorities vote in 2010?
Labour has cornered the votes of ethnic minority communities, according to the self-reported vote shares in the Ethnic Minority British Election Study. Some 31 per cent of white voters said they supported Gordon Brown at the 2010 election, against 61 per cent of people of Indian descent, 60 per cent of Pakistanis, 78 of people black Caribbean voters and 87 per cent of black African voters.
Yet people from ethnic minority communities are more fiscally conservative.
Interactive chart: Ethnic minority voters support tax cuts
There’s an opportunity for the Conservatives. Ethnic minority voters are more likely to support tax cuts over big state spending, the study found.
Document TELUK00020140325ea3p0035z
