{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1604"}
____
Guardian Comment and Debate Pages
Comment: Forget tactics. Stand up and rally against the Ukip vision: Britain is a step closer to leaving Europe this week. It is high time all who fear an exit spoke out against the liars
Polly Toynbee   
1,172 words
28 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
39
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Britain inched a step closer to a European exit this week. Simply by giving the UK Independence party a mighty national platform raises the credibility of the "outs". Nick Clegg, dead in the polls, had everything to gain from his strong stand on "in" - virtually his last unsullied point of principle. Yet in the process he gifted Nigel Farage, and the act of voting Ukip, an aura of respectability.
But the Ukip ship had already sailed and was well afloat with the political wind behind it, say the Clegg team. The field was being ceded to aggressive sceptics, so it was high time to tackle the European argument head-on. They are right: with backs to the wall there is nothing left to do but fight, Labour and the Liberal Democrats against the rest. For both parties the political decision against a referendum was, as ever, a blend of high principle and low tactics; Ed Miliband and Douglas Alexander's unequivocal stance as "We are the party of In" was absolutely essential.
Imagine the panic of Labour arriving in power only to spend two years preparing for a referendum they would likely lose. After losing the election, the Tories would have lost their few remaining Euro marbles, elected a fanatic Euro-out leader and deployed an armoury of press and plutocratic donors to hurl at the referendum. The heft of Labour and the Lib Dems would be weak; big business and the Confederation of British Industry unlikely to ride to their rescue despite the colossal damage they would face, keener to support the Conservatives than pursue the genuine interests of their companies. Britain would probably vote "out" and Miliband would resign rather than lead the country to a destiny of rapid decline.
Taking this stand shows Labour expects to win the election. Had they buckled, they risked losing more support for cynical opportunism than they would have gained - adamant "outs" will never vote Labour. Immigration is the driver of the strongest anti-EU feelings and no amount of facts will overcome raw emotion on that. The long-term hope is that concern for jobs and prosperity outweighs migration angst.
The most uncomfortable charge is that Labour and the Lib Dems don't trust the people with a vote; a "We know better" Westminster elite that Farage pokes at so skillfully. Clegg's most awkward moments in the debate were in justifying why his party, fervid for electoral reform and democratic accountability, refuses to let the people decide.
Labour and the Lib Dems need to answer that robustly: we will not lead the country into the abyss. If you want out you have a clear choice at the election, there's no democratic deficit there. Vote Ukip, vote Tory sceptic if out is what you want - but we will try to persuade you against it, even if it means we lose some votes. Representative democracy is about choosing the party you think will do best for Britain, and this time the in/out choice couldn't be more straightforward. Of course, that won't satisfy those most ardent for a referendum, but they wouldn't vote Labour or Lib Dem anyway.
There are other undercurrents here: Labour needs Ukip to cut into the Tory vote in vital seats; Labour needs to give no comfort to the Lib Dems by suggesting they are acceptable, to stop angry anti-Clegg defectors drifting back to him. Clegg and his top team make a serious error with their fatuous "the mess Labour left" attacks, when they need to woo back votes lost to Labour.
But it's time to forget tactics; high principle can earn them both more votes. They need a united front on Europe. It's high time all those who fear Britain heading for the exit stood up and rallied to the cause - the CBI, chambers of commerce, every individual and every interest or campaigning group which would lose out. Where is the money flowing into pro-EU supporters, such as the well-informed Centre for European Reform? The British Influence campaign needs louder voices to counter the anti-Euro myths that pour out weekly. Latest YouGov polls put "in" 6% ahead of "out", but the tide could turn either way as more Conservative leadership contenders jump the shark: Gove and Hammond recently plunged for "out" so as not to be outdone by Boris.
Across the channel, far from British craziness, vital issues are debated that our voters never hear about. In Spain, protesters were out in force demanding a swing away from President Barroso's austerity politics. Europe's neo-liberal leaning needs a social democratic push back. TTIP, the US-EU trade deal, puts at risk much of the hard-earned regulation that keeps EU food safe, water clean, cattle free of hormones, and working conditions fair. At risk is a levelling down of standards for a single market with America, instead of an evening up.
Britain needs to push on for a genuine single market in services, where British advantage is being held back. Tax havens are being tackled in Europe, but Britain is holding that back while tax cheating through a spurious patent box that should be stopped. Climate change needs EU action. The Farage vision was spelled out clearly this week: a bonfire of all environment, climate, work and safety rules, along with the Human Rights Act. So it matters who represents us in EU parliament this May.
All these issues touch every household, yet all people hear are Euro lies pumped out by a Euro-rabid press. Forget Leveson and a press code for truth and honesty. "Gardeners with rhododendrons could be criminalised by EU"; "Enjoy yogurt at school? Hard cheese, says EU"; "EU migrants can avoid tax in UK"; or "EU threatens the future of British jam" - all these and hundreds more untrue. You can do what the Sun, Mail, Express, Telegraph and Times deliberately don't - check the European Commission website for the story-killing facts.
Cameron digs his own grave over Europe by feeding his unquenchable backbenchers' frenzy. His red lines outlined this month were risibly minor, now he realises any renegotiation must be small enough not to reopen treaties - no country's referendum would pass in the current climate.
Almost friendless in Europe, he has alienated natural allies. Can he hold his nerve against pressure to write impossible red lines into his manifesto that would remove the UK if he won? Labour and the Lib Dems can draw strength from their certainty, but the Tories will be in turmoil if they fare badly in May. These debates do enhance Ukip's status, but they also make it entirely impossible for Cameron to duck TV debates in 2015.
polly.toynbee@theguardian.com
Document GRDN000020140327ea3s0006b
