{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"910"}
____
  
Features; Review
WOULD A VOTE FOR THIS MAN RUIN BRITAIN?
Iain Martin   
1,777 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
23
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
One year before the general election, Tories fear that a surge in popularity for Ukip could end up handing power to Ed Miliband, says Iain Martin
With the Tories uncertain how to handle the Ukip surge, on the campaign trail last week, David Cameron tried a little humour. On Friday he mocked the propensity of Nigel Farage's party to get into scrapes that would doom other parties: "I don't need to discredit Ukip. They have done a good enough job of that over the last few weeks."
If Mr Cameron hoped that his joke would suggest insouciance and boundless prime ministerial selfconfidence, it is Ukip that is laughing all the way to the European elections.
Not only do the recent suggestions of racism and financial chicanery seem to have bounced off Ukip, the publicity seems only to have boosted the party's rebellious reputation. The renegades, riding a wave of popular discontent with the mainstream parties, have even charged into the lead in opinion polls ahead of the "Euros" later this month.
Then, last week, the former Tory MP Patrick Mercer presented Ukip leader Nigel Farage with another golden opportunity. Following a parliamentary inquiry into revelations that he had agreed to take cash for asking questions in the Commons, Mr Mercer announced that he would stand down and trigger an awkward by-election for the Conservatives.
In Newark, the Tories are defending a majority of more than 16,000 votes, which theoretically should make the seat safe. However, in the current febrile atmosphere, with voters looking for ways to kick the established parties, and with Mr Farage on the rampage, anything is possible.
At least the Tories will not have to face Mr Farage himself as a candidate on June 5. Fearing the consequences if he gambled and failed to win Ukip its first Commons seat, he announced that the party would choose a candidate with a local connection instead. That way Mr Farage still gets his fun without risking personal defeat. After the Euros on May 22, he can dedicate himself to campaigning for his party's Newark candidate and mining the anti-Tory publicity like mad. Mr Farage suspected that if he stood himself and lost, it would be reported as the bursting of the bubble.
But once Newark is over, what impact will the Ukip surge have on the general election taking place a year this week?
The dawning realisation is that when the European elections and the by-election are out of the way, the Ukip advance threatens a large number of Conservative seats at the general election. Although it remains unlikely that Ukip will win many - or even any - Westminster seats next year, it looks set to do tremendous damage to the Tories merely by taking sufficient numbers of votes in individual seats and letting Labour through. This could easily give Ed Miliband a majority, or at least make Labour the largest party in a hung parliament.
Tory MPs in marginal seats, with small majorities, are looking with nervousness at the rise of Ukip. It has been received wisdom that Mr Farage's party will slip back when voters concentrate on the general election and the choice between David Cameron and Ed Miliband. But what if Ukip has reached such a level of support that, even if it does subside somewhat, it will settle eventually at a level high enough in 2015 to gift the election to Labour?
This way, almost by accident, thanks to Tory electoral failure and the rise of Ukip, Britain could end up getting a very Left-wing government led by the unpopular Mr Miliband.
One Tory MP said: "Ironically, just when people are saying that there is no difference between the parties, there is actually quite a big difference this time. Miliband has a pretty extreme agenda."
Mr Miliband is certainly less friendly to business than his predecessors Gordon Brown and Tony Blair were when they were fighting for power in the mid-Nineties. The Tories point out that Labour under Mr Miliband is already committed to reinstating the 50p tax band and freezing energy prices. The party is also open to the possibility of further wealth taxes. And last week, Mr Miliband unveiled plans aimed at dealing with alleged market failure, pledging to place new restrictions on the private housing market for renting.
Despite little evidence that rents are soaring, as Labour claims, the party will create limits to prevent what it deems "excessive increases" and create the right to longer tenancies.
The restrictions could persuade some landlords of a smaller number of properties to sell up. Reducing the supply of properties for rent, or concentrating control in the hands of fewer landlords, will tend to increase prices.
Tory headquarters accused Labour of adopting measures like those favoured by the Left-wing Marxist Venezuelan government. Even if that was an extreme characterisation, Mr Miliband seems incapable of seeing an area of private activity without intervening with a fiddly piece of statist micromanagement. It was a glimpse of the approach the Tories say Mr Miliband will adopt if he becomes Prime Minister.
"If he gets in, you can kiss goodbye to the recovery. People need to understand he'll tax and regulate it out of existence," says a Tory aide.
The prospect of defeat and the likely socialist predilections of a Labour government are increasingly preoccupying Tory ministers and MPs. And as is often the case ahead of a close-fought general election, attention centres on the most vulnerable seats as MPs start to ask if they will have a job after the electoral storm.
In the top 25 Tory-held seats most at risk, there are plenty in which even a small increase in the Ukip vote could hand Labour victory.
Even before Mr Farage's party began to increase its support, the challenge facing the Tories at the next election is enormous. The unreformed boundaries mean Labour starts with an advantage, and considerable numbers of those who voted Liberal Democrat in 2010 have since returned to the Labour fold. Now the Conservatives have to worry about Ukip as well.
Bedford, which the Tories narrowly took from Labour in 2010, illustrates the dilemma. Richard Fuller won with a majority of 1,353 and Ukip came fourth with just 1,136 votes (2.5 per cent of the vote). If Labour take votes from the Lib Dems and Ukip merely doubles its 2010 vote, it will be all but impossible for the Tories to hold on.
Enfield North in London is another such seat. Nick de Bois has a majority over Labour of 1,692 and Ukip came fifth behind the British National Party last time. Even a relatively small boost for Ukip could help to dislodge the Tories and turn the seat Labour again.
Nationally, Mr Farage is performing in polls at levels that suggest the party could more than double its share of the vote in target seats. Even in the 2010 election, Ukip managed to get 3.1 per cent of the vote, despite Mr Farage not being leader and the party attracting little attention. It is now consistently polling above 12 per cent in opinion polls.
Says a Tory MP: "Ukip is not going to get 3 per cent of the vote next time. In the end, it will be more like 7 per cent or 8 per cent. We are stuffed if that happens."
Prof John Curtice, one of Britain's leading psephologists, called it "almost inconceivable" that Ukip could sink back to 3.1 per cent of the national vote.
"Given how high Ukip support has been and for how long, it is difficult to see how the genie can go all the way back in the bottle."
Part of the difficulty for the Tories may be that some of the new Ukip voters they need to woo back are not convinced that they or their children are benefiting personally from the economic recovery, he adds.
So far, the Tories have struggled in their attempts to convince such voters that Mr Cameron understands their concerns. Mr Farage - with his populist position on restricting immigration - is ideally positioned to win the support of those who feel left behind.
"It's about personality, too. They don't see any difference between Cameron and Miliband," says a Tory rebel.
Another Tory MP was more sanguine. "There isn't much we can do about this Ukip thing for the European elections. It has to blow itself out and then we see where we get to after Newark. After that, it is a choice between us and Ed Miliband."
A veteran Labour MP agreed that Ukip will slide: "They'll easily get over 30 per cent of the vote in the Euro elections and then they'll be back at 5 per cent this time next year. I think we're looking at a small outright Tory majority."
The Tories must pray he is right. On Friday, the Prime Minister travelled to North Staffordshire ostensibly to launch the Tories' local election campaign. He highlighted the economic recovery, although the main target of his remarks was Ukip and the voters who are defecting. He repeated his pledge of a renegotiation of the terms of membership of the EU and then an in-out referendum if he wins the general election.
"To those people who say you won't deliver on that renegotiation or on that referendum, I say: judge me by my record as prime minister. Others talk about acting in the national interest or about standing up to Europe, I do it, time and again. People said I would never veto a European treaty. In 2011, that's exactly what I did. People said my attempts to cut the European budget would fail. I secured that cut.
"I have a track record of delivery. Believe me, whatever it takes, I will deliver this inout referendum. Labour won't. Ukip can't. I will."
Unsurprisingly, Ukip rejects this analysis. The party is being carried along by a populist surge of discontent and its leading figures are enjoying the discomfort of the established parties. They think it can sweep them all the way to a position where the UK gets out of the EU.
Unless Mr Cameron's message cuts through to Ukip supporters, and the Tories can secure their allegiance, electoral victory may well belong to the most Left-wing Labour leader in more than 30 years.
"If Miliband gets in, you can kiss goodbye to recovery. Hell tax it out of existence
Document STEL000020140504ea540005a
