{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"422"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Attacks on Ukip prove it is a real force in politics
Chris Roycroft-Davis   
985 words
11 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
ONE of the US's greatest presidents Franklin D Roosevelt had straightforward advice for voters: "Judge me by the enemies I have made." How sound that principle appears today as our three main parties turn the heat up on Ukip, for the more they criticise Nigel Farage the more they expose their fear of the damage his party can cause. The more your enemies attack you the more credibility they hand you.
That said it's easy to see why woeful Nick Clegg felt obliged to wade into Ukip because it's possible they could win a third of the votes in May's European elections and that would sink the struggling Lib Dems.
Unwittingly Clegg put his finger on the problem when he said: "The politics of blame has found an acceptable face, it wears a big smile and looks like someone you could have a pint with down the pub." That sums up Farage perfectly: he's an amiable chap who doesn't take himself too seriously.
Who would you be more likely to vote for: someone you would be comfortable having a pint with or a two-faced political huckster like Clegg who would look down his nose at you as he sipped a chilled glass of sancerre? CLEGG accuses Ukip of spreading "anger and bile" with its "ungenerous and backward-looking" politics, meaning its unbending stance on immigration and its contempt for the EU. The Lib Dem leader is too full of his own self-importance to appreciate that the majority of people, regardless of which party they vote for, feel exactly the same way as Ukip.
In Clegg's world ordinary people like you and me can't be trusted to form opinions on important issues because our views are bound to be wrong.
It's not just the Lib Dems who are missing the point. The Conservatives have popped their heads over the parapet after seven years of near silence since David Cameron foolishly branded Ukip members as "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists".
On Question Time recently defence minister Anna Soubry tore into fellow guest Nigel Farage and accused him of "putting fear into people's hearts over immigration". He's big enough to take care of himself of course so let's confine ourselves to considering the wisdom of her tactic. Is Ukip putting fear into our hearts or is it merely voicing a fear that is already there? And by publicising Ukip's views are the Conservatives making a rod for their own back? Unless you live in Harlow in Essex you may not have heard of Tory MP Robert Halfon but his words carry some weight because he is a close ally of Chancellor George Osborne and Conservative Party chairman Grant Shapps. Halfon raised eyebrows when he said some Ukip members were "literally akin to the Nazis".
He made the hole deeper by adding that Ukip was doing the Tories a favour by cleansing such people from the party. That was a bit like drawing a road map for the hundreds of thousands of disaffected Tories who no longer believe their party speaks for them.
Finally Labour: Red Ed and the brothers have been more cautious in their approach to Ukip and with good reason as we will see.
But in last month's by-election in the solid Labour seat of Wythenshawe in south Manchester the party created an attack team to fight off the Ukip threat. Shadow Foreign Secretary Douglas Alexander was unwise enough to reveal this fact and couple it with a personal dig at Farage saying: "He's seen as the man down the pub rather than the leader of a party. Labour will be holding Ukip candidates and MEPs to account for what they have said and what they believe."
At least we know where Clegg got his "man down the pub" line from but what does Labour think it will achieve by holding Ukip to account for what it believes? If you had to summarise what Ukip believes it would be this: say no to immigration, the EU and all politicians in Westminster.
Since most people would agree with at least two out of three (if not all three) Labour's on a hiding to nothing.
IT IS a common view that Ukip is the far Right of the Tory party in exile. That could not be further from the truth as is revealed in a fascinating book out this week titled Revolt On The Right, which examines the rise of the anti-EU party. The book reveals that academics have found that eight of the 10 seats where Ukip has the most chance of winning in the 2015 General Election are presently held by Labour.
The book's authors Matthew Goodwin and Robert Ford say: "Ukip is not a second home for disgruntled Tories in the shires. It is a first home for disaffected working-class Britons of all political backgrounds who have lost faith in a political system that ceased to represent them long ago."
Not everything is rosy in the Ukip garden of course. Millions of pounds in donations promised by northern entrepreneur Paul Sykes have yet to turn up in the coffers. Details are emerging of an offer of an electoral pact made six years ago by the BNP. And questions remain about whether Ukip has a credible manifesto and whether all its candidates are up to the job.
For all that the party has become a real force in politics and the broadcasting regulator has instructed the TV companies that Ukip must be given "due weight" in the run-up to all elections.
How bloody would a four-way debate between Cameron, Miliband, Farage and Clegg be? Seconds out, round one.
'The other parties are living in fear'
Document THEEXP0020140311ea3b0003e
