{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2820"}
____
  
News
Ukip on verge of 'one of biggest political shocks'
Christopher Hope   
407 words
28 February 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE UK Independence Party's 20–year political journey will culminate at May's elections in "the biggest political shock in modern British history", Nigel Farage claims.
The Ukip leader said that the European and local elections were "the moment we have been waiting for" which he hoped would create an unstoppable momentum to carry the party through to next year's general election.
In an interview with The Daily Telegraph on the eve of Ukip's spring conference in Torquay today, he said: "We are on the verge of perhaps causing in three months' time the biggest political shock that has been seen in modern British history.
He added: "These are the stakes. This is how high it is. We will use these elections to tell the British political class where to go. I am going to tell them don't get mad, get even. Vote Ukip and let's cause an earthquake in British politics on May 22.
"This is the moment we in Ukip have been waiting for. We have spent 20 years, often very chequered years, on a huge big dipper. And this is, this is it."
Mr Farage said he would be wrapping Ukip in the Union flag: "We are unashamedly the patriotic party. This is the moment Ukip has waited for.
"If we get this right in the next threeand–a–half months we will create a momentum that is unstoppable going into 2015."
Ukip will fight 2,500 of the 4,200 council seats being contested in May, an increase on the 1,700 it fought last year.
Immigration would be the dominant issue of the campaign, Mr Farage said, and would decide who wins in May.
He dismissed claims from the Office of Budget Responsibility that large–scale immigration would be good for the economy. He said: "Even if huge mass immigration and a population that spirals upwards of 80 million means that we are all marginally better off, I don't want it. There are some things that are more important than money."
Mr Farage also moved to paint Ukip as the working–class party. He said: "The biggest level of support we have in this country is ordinary decent people, in a sense the sort of people who used to vote for Thatcher in 1979.
"In class terms we have become the working–class party."
Document DT00000020140228ea2s00071
