{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"252"}
____
  
News
Political meddling could threaten recovery, says CBI
Kathryn Hopkins   
575 words
12 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A cocktail of political risks could undermine the burgeoning economic recovery, Britain's biggest business lobby group has warned, as it sounded the alarm over the housing market.
The CBI, which represents tens of thousands of businesses across the country, argued that political positioning, including an unrealistic immigration target, unjustified interventions into specific markets and flirting with leaving the European Union must not be allowed to stifle investment.
John Cridland, the director-general of the CBI, said: "The UK now has more stable economic foundations, and political risks must not jeopardise this. Politicians must be wary of the risk of headline-grabbing policies that weaken investment, opportunity and jobs." The lobby group urged whichever political party won the next general election to stick with what was working from this parliament and not create "unnecessary uncertainty".
This included setting a market framework to encourage long-term investment and allowing the independent competition authority and economic regulators to do their job, free from political interference.
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, has already pledged to intervene in the energy markets if he comes to power next year. Last week he suggested that he could bring a number of railway lines back into public ownership.
Other key actions, according to the CBI, would include scrapping the coalition's "unhelpful" immigration target, committing to the recommendations of the Davies commission on aviation capacity and making a renewed push on housing supply to meet the urgent need for homes.
Katja Hall, chief policy director at the CBI, said: "We're a year away from the general election and politicians must stick with what's working. That means the new government, of whatever colour, keeping the deficit reduction strategy on track. It must also tackle the UK's economic challenges and not duck the tough decisions, such as reforming public services."
The warning comes as the economic backdrop brightens, with the CBI pushing its UK growth forecast for this year and next up to 3 per cent and 2.7 per cent, from 2.6 per cent and 2.5 per cent respectively.
While the recovery in 2013 was largely driven by consumer spending, the CBI said that there were encouraging signs of growth becoming broader based. It expects business investment growth of 8.3 per cent this year and 9.1 per cent next year. Unemployment is also forecast to tumble to 6.2 per cent by the end of 2015, far below the 7 per cent threshold that the Bank of England set for raising interest rates.
On the back of the improved growth outlook, the CBI now expects the Bank to lift interest rates from their record low of 0.5 per cent to 0.75 per cent in the first three months of next year, instead of the third quarter.
The CBI raised concerns over house price inflation, which it predicts will top 8 per cent this year. Mr Cridland warned of the risks of unsustainable house price inflation. "Housing has come back under the spotlight as annual house price inflation figures have reached double digits on some measures. While housing transactions are still running almost 30 per cent below their last peak in 2006, they are picking up steadily," he cautioned.
Last week the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development told the government and the Bank to consider scaling back its controversial Help to Buy scheme.
Document T000000020140512ea5c000al
