{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3406"}
____
  
Getting to the core of modern mobility
By Myrianthe Ewington, Forum for Expatriate Management    
1,174 words
16 May 2014
11:21
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Firms face the difficult task of controlling costs while offering adequate incentives for their expatriate staff
How expatriates are sent overseas is changing. Where once most employers used to have a standard long-term assignment policy, a short-term assignment policy and perhaps a permanent transfer policy we are now seeing the emergence of new practices and therefore new policies.
There has been the introduction of the commuter policy, the lump sum policy, employee-initiated or developmental assignment policy and rotational assignment policy. Even the traditional long-term assignment policy is taking on alternative forms.
So what has brought about all this change? When talking to global mobility managers there are many reasons for updating the international assignment policies and bringing in new ones.
As ever, and especially in light of the recent recession, there is the constant spotlight on costs. It is well known that, as a ballpark figure, assignments can cost up to three times base salary per year for an assignee, which can go up to as much as five times base salary for an assignee with partner and dependants. Organisations want to ensure that while assignees are no worse off than had they stayed in the home location, they should not be making a large financial gain.
Secondly, ease of administration is another reason to ensure policies are reviewed, are consistent and most accurately reflect the assignment need. Assignee administration is time-consuming, complex and provides a higher workload when compared with an average employee. Therefore whether an organisation has five assignees or 5,000, individually agreed, bespoke assignment packages can cause no end of headaches for the global mobility team. It can lead to higher administrative errors, incorrect salary payments and a general feeling of disparity among assignees that can lead to further negotiations that are rarely productive and can be costly.
Thirdly, global mobility functions are working towards transparency when it comes to their international assignment policy. By introducing this, the aim is, again, to cut the number of individual assignment negotiations and clearly set expectations from the start. It is well known that assignees share and discuss the one thing they all have in common – their relocation experience and, most of all, their assignment package. Having a consistent and transparent policy can help to ensure the assignees are positively engaged with the organisation as well as acting as advocates within the business and for future assignees.
Fourthly, some organisations have grown through mergers and acquisitions and have very different business needs. This has led to calls from the business for increased flexibility within policies, such as not all areas of the business offering the same levels of support to assignees.
Finally, there is a new generation of assignees that view their careers as borderless. They see an international assignment as part of their career plan and as an opportunity to develop new skills, enhance their personal development and further their careers.
To meet this shift, one solution is to offer a "core-flex" policy that provides a basic set of fixed or mandatory elements (the core) as well as some optional (flexible) benefits. These flexible benefits are designed to tie in with the assignee's personal requirements, the need for the business to send that person on assignment or the budget constraints of the business.
Core elements tend to include tax assistance, immigration, medical assistance, travel, household goods shipment, transportation to the host location and a relocation allowance.
Flex components tend to include pre-assignment visits, temporary living, housing allowance, car allowance, partner support, schooling, home leave, hardship allowance, language training and cross-cultural training.
The advantage of a core-flex policy is that it allows the business to cut back on levels of support that the business feels are unnecessary while still providing essential levels of support.
It can be creative in encouraging employees to go on a business-driven assignment as well as allowing the employees to go on assignment from a career development perspective. The core benefits help minimise the disruption caused. When so many organisations now expect their senior leadership to have assignment experience, it can be a really useful tool.
The primary disadvantage is that high levels of customisation can become administratively difficult and can lead to a perception of disparity.
It is clear that a successful core-flex policy needs specific guidelines and has to provide an educational process to business leaders so they understand what they are giving or not giving their assignees and the impact this may have.
It is important to consider where the decision process lies when developing the core-flex policy. The employee may think they know what they need for an assignment. However, from painful personal experience most global mobility managers will be able to tell you that the assignee "doesn't know what they don't know". Also if all the flexible benefits are left in the hands of the business manager they may not fully understand the implications this may have for the assignee. Therefore it is important that the business works closely with the global mobility team to ensure the assignee is getting at least the basic assistance they will need.
Recent surveys show that organisations are becoming more creative in balancing cost control while encouraging international experience and are introducing this policy as a way of recruiting new talent, meeting specific business objectives and using it as an essential tool for retaining talent through career development.
All these issues and many more are addressed this year at the Totally Expat Show run by the Forum for Expatriate Management in London. It is being held on May 19, 2014, at the Business Design Centre, Islington. This innovative event is designed with the corporate human resources professional in mind: it offers free entry to all such individuals, a select exhibition of respected suppliers and free fantastic educational seminars, with many based on case studies of real programmes.
For details on joining the Forum for Expatriate Management, as well as registering for the Totally Expat Show, visit totallyexpat.com.
The entry process for the 2014 Expatriate Management & Mobility Awards (EMMAs) is now open.
Celebrating excellence in global mobility, the EMMAs are the only global awards that truly recognise the industry leaders, business successes and rising stars. Last year, we received more than 500 nominations from global mobility professionals around the world. One thing that stood out from all the nominations, whether they were from corporate HR professionals or service providers, was the abiding dedication to client service. The EMMAs provide the chance to recognise that dedication.
It is free to enter so if you, a colleague, your team, client or vendor enjoyed an exceptional year, celebrate by entering now and enjoy some well deserved recognition. You can enter at totallyexpat.com/emmas2014.
The EMMAs 2014 awards will be presented at the Lancaster London opposite Hyde Park on November 7, 2014. This prestigious gala dinner and ball will be unmissable.
Document TELUK00020140516ea5g001ry
