{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2281"}
____
  
A big anti-EU vote could make things worse for Britain
By Mats Persson   
928 words
21 May 2014
07:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The centre-Right and socialist MEPs may gang up to freeze out those they see as extreme to vote for 'even more Europe’
Ahead of tomorrow’s European elections, all eyes are on Ukip. But David Cameron’s biggest EU challenge begins when voting ends. Politics in Europe have rarely looked messier. The think tank  Open Europe, of which I am director, has estimated that anti-establishment or anti-EU parties could get 31 per cent of the seats in the next European Parliament (EP) – a substantial increase. Across Europe, parties with policies ranging from anti-immigration to downright bizarre will breathe down the necks of mainstream politicians.
In Greece, SYRIZA (anti-austerity politics on steroids) is likely to win. The neo-Nazi Golden Dawn, which has advocated planting mines on Greece’s border to keep immigrants out, could get 8 to 10 per cent of the votes. In France, Denmark and Netherlands, anti-immigration parties could also win. Even Germany could see a fascist MEP elected.
These groups cannot be explained by reference to a conventional political spectrum – many are actually socialists in nationalist clothing – and their rise also depends on factors beyond “Europe”. Still, added to the fact that many people won’t bother to vote, these elections are likely to be another damning indictment of the EU status quo.
Paradoxically, the net effect might be to make the next EP even more integrationist. First, the anti-establishment parties will by no means form a cohesive bloc. Second, with a larger anti-EU contingent, the two major groups – the socialists and the centre-Right European People’s Party (EPP) – will have a strong incentive to gang up to freeze out those they see as extreme.
Strangely, these two groups already vote the same way two thirds of the time in the EP, with a heavy bias towards “more Europe”. The great risk is that a motley crew of anti-EU nationalists and trigger-happy federalists crowd out the reformers in the middle – including free traders – offering voters an artificially polarised choice between “more Europe” or “no Europe”. This would be a sad irony, as polls show that voters across Europe prefer sweeping reform when it is on offer.
Why should British people care? Because the EP, for better or worse, is now a powerful institution: it regulates how many hours you work, your online activities, who the UK trades with and how the EU spends your money. Under “co-decision”, MEPs could (if they wanted to) veto roughly half the reforms Cameron wants to achieve before that 2017 in/out referendum. This includes tightening benefit rules for EU migrants, making it easier for UK businesses to access the EU market and signing trade deals with the US and emerging markets. In fact, an anti-reform EP could surpass Paris as Cameron’s biggest obstacle to successful renegotiation.
There is a massive second challenge for No 10: the next president of the executive arm, the European Commission, who will be selected shortly after the elections. In the EU sausage machine, the commission is largely in charge of what goes in. Bizarrely, because of the Lisbon Treaty, no one knows who ultimately decides who becomes the president, although the EP claims that it, somehow, has the democratic right to determine the appointment.
The three main candidates the EP has proposed make José Manuel Barroso, the current president, look like a raving Eurosceptic: for the socialists, Martin Schulz, who thinks it’s “possible and necessary” to have a United States of Europe; the liberals’ Guy Verhofstadt, who has likened Cameron to a “mad man threatening to blow himself up”; and, for the EPP, the uninspiring Jean-Claude Juncker, for 18 years the prime minister of Luxembourg, infamous for saying important EU decisions should be taken “in dark secret rooms”. “When it becomes serious, you have to lie,” as he put it.
So the fresh faces of European democracy are all 55-plus men owing their careers to the dated notion of “ever closer union” that led to the big gap between voters and Brussels in the first place. Even in Germany, only 17 per cent of voters can identify their compatriot Martin Schulz as a lead candidate, according to a recent poll. In the UK, none of the parties, save the Greens, back any of the candidates, with Labour stopping just short of declaring Schulz a persona non grata in the UK. If one of these men bagged the job, it would massively complicate the EU reform agenda and serve as a running recruitment campaign for Ukip. Many will wonder whether the UK can be part of a club that puts someone like that in charge.
So what should Britain’s Government do? Well, it can’t veto the presidential appointment so should dig in to get enough allies on board to vote for a more sensible candidate. There’s a chance Angela Merkel (her socialist coalition partners notwithstanding) may parachute in a compromise candidate at the last minute.
Crucially, Britain must not give up on the EP – there are still many hard-working MEPs and the election results will force many to pause to think. The key is to redouble efforts to get national capitals to sign up to sweeping reforms, including strengthening the link between EU decisions and national parliaments.
More of the EP’s top-down brand of trans-national democracy would be a gift to anti-EU parties across the continent.
Document TELUK00020140521ea5l000jh
