{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3378"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Immigration: Media director tries to pull plug while Farage is on air
Patrick Wintour Political editor   
493 words
17 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
11
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Online video
Watch the key moments from Nigel Farage's
LBC interview theguardian.com/politics
Ukip's communications director, Patrick O'Flynn, tried to cut short a live radio interview with Nigel Farage yesterday in which the Ukip leader claimed that people knew why Romanians would not make good neighbours.
During the interview Farage had difficulty explaining what made him uncomfortable about hearing foreign languages on British trains, when his wife's first language was German. He said he "did not suppose his wife spoke German on trains" and added that he did not object to his own children speaking German "because they can speak English".
When it was suggested by the LBC interviewer, James O'Brien, that some of the people Farage had heard might also be bilingual, he said he "had got the distinct feeling English was not their language of choice".
He was then forced to qualify his claims that there were primary schools in the East End of London at which most people did not speak English. He conceded such surveys showed English was not the children's first language, explaining: "They come from homes where English is most definitely not the first language, and in too many cases is not their language at all."
Farage was pressed on his suggestion that he would feel concerned if Romanians moved in next door. "If you lived in London I think you would be," he said.
O'Brien asked: "What about if a group of German children did? What's the difference?"
"You know what the difference is," Farage replied. "We want an immigration policy that can control not just quantity, but quality as well." He said Metropolitan police figures showed Romanians were responsible for eye-wateringly high crime figures in London.
Farage said the purpose of his remarks about England becoming a foreign land had been to show how people felt uncomfortable about the pace of change.
David Cameron, commenting on the LBC interview, said Farage had said some pretty unpleasant things and many people felt that voting for Ukip "would send out a pretty terrible message about Britain". Ukip was offering the politics of anger and not answer, the prime minister said.
O'Flynn tried to bring the interview to a close when O'Brien accused Farage of "a reverse ferret" over an offer to have his European parliamentary allowances independently audited, an offer he had made on the BBC Today programme.
When it was pointed out that other MEPs - including those from the Labour party - had had their expenses independently audited, O'Flynn intervened, surprising even Farage, who waved him away.
O'Flynn said he intervened because the interview had overrun the agreed time and Farage had other appointments.
Nigel Farage, left, on LBC Radio. James O'Brien accused him of a 'reverse ferret' on having his expenses audited
Document GRDN000020140516ea5h000c4
