{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3569"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
Labour's running scared from the EU referendum
Macer Hall   
690 words
22 February 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
35
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
INSIDE POLITICS
NEXT weekend Ed Miliband will get together with union bosses for a Labour Party conference that is shaping up to be a rather a docile gathering. Expectations of a historic confrontation over the party's future fizzled out when Len McCluskey of the powerful Unite public sector union and the rest of the brothers accepted the Labour leader's proposed changes to the party's rulebook with little more than a bit of griping.
Once again Mr Miliband has opted for a fudge rather than the fight that could have been a defining moment for his leadership.
Yet while civil war with his union paymasters has been avoided I understand that he is facing a revolt within his Shadow Cabinet that is threatening to be far more damaging.
Labour sources say a majority of the Labour leader's team are now convinced he is making a monumental blunder by refusing to match Prime Minister David Cameron's pledge of an in–out referendum on Britain's membership of the European Union.
And many in Labour despair that Miliband and Shadow Foreign Secretary Douglas Alexander do not appear to want to even address the issue of our relationship with Brussels that is increasingly dominating the political agenda.
Miliband recently gave the Parliamentary Labour Party a pep talk about strategy for the year ahead but failed to make any mention of the referendum debate. "The word Europe did not cross his lips once during the entire presentation," one Labour MP told me.
THE Labour leader is instinctively deeply uncomfortable with the idea of referendums and fears that giving in to demands for one about Europe could come back to haunt him.
Despite Labour's relatively slender opinion poll lead he dreams that the electoral arithmetic can put him into 10 Downing Street at the next election and genuinely fears he could end up being prime minister of a country that votes to quit the EU.
"Miliband's nightmare is a waferthin Labour majority, a resurgent Tory Party led by a new Euro–sceptic leader – Boris Johnson for example – and a referendum within 18 months," one source close to a leading Labour donor told me.
The conclusion the Labour leader's inner circle drew from Labour's thumping margin of victory in last week's Wythenshawe and Sale East by–election is that Nigel Farage's UK Independence Party is stealing plenty of Tory votes but is not a threat to Labour.
"The Tory–Ukip share of the vote was the same in the by–election as at the general election. There is no sign of Ukip taking Labour voters," said a senior Labour source.
Many party insiders believe that smacks of dangerous complacency given that the poll was held in Labour's heartlands and followed the death of local MP Paul Goggins who was hugely popular in the constituency.
Ukip have made no secret of their desire to attract blue–collar voters who traditionally backed Labour but feel betrayed by the last government on immigration and welfare. Some shadow ministers privately admit that the anti–Brussels party is gaining ground in Labour territory.
MILIBAND is set to make a final decision about how to respond to Cameron's referendum pledge after votes are counted in May's elections for the European Parliament. But with the polls suggesting Labour could turn in a creditable performance that result could well simply reinforce his conviction that a referendum on EU membership is best avoided.
However it is unlikely to allay the concerns within the Shadow Cabinet. Some frontbenchers are worried that Labour is going into the euro election campaign without a clear position on the referendum question and are mystified about what the party's manifesto for the Euro elections will say on the crucial issue.
Even more importantly they are desperately worried about the signal that Miliband's refusal to back an EU referendum sends to the electorate. His opposition to giving voters a say about the country's future could well be taken as a sign of contempt.
Document THEEXP0020140222ea2m0002s
