{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"503"}
____
  
News
Migrants must wait three months before getting benefits
Steven Swinford   
340 words
9 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
10
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MIGRANTS will be barred from claiming child benefit and child tax credit until they have been in Britain for at least three months, ministers have announced.
At present, European Union migrants can start claiming welfare payments almost as soon as they arrive, leading to concerns about "benefit tourism". From July, however, they will have to prove that they have been in Britain for three months before they are able to claim.
Ministers will also "call time" today on the routine use of interpreters by migrants claiming benefits, which costs the taxpayer £3million a year.
Under the reforms, migrants will have to prove that they can speak good English or face being stripped of Jobseeker's Allowance.
The changes are likely to bring Britain into further con–flict with the European Commission, which is already suing Britain for requiring EU migrants to pass a test it claims is unlawful before they can claim benefits. Nicky Morgan, economic secretary to the Treasury, said: "These changes send a strong message that our welfare system is not open to abuse and will deter those who think that they can move to the UK primarily to claim benefits.
"Making work pay is part of a long–term plan to ensure that Britain's growing economy and dynamic jobs market deliver for those who work hard and play by the rules."
The Conservatives are aware that their success in deterring "benefit tourists" will be critical to their election hopes. David Cameron, the Prime Minister, has led calls for the reforms after pressure from Eurosceptic backbenchers.
Most immigrants earn roughly the same as similarly skilled British workers, with some earning up to 26 per cent more, according to a study.
Non–white immigrants earned, on average, between 16.5 per cent and 21.8 per cent less than native British people, but white immigrants could earn up to 26.5 per cent more than Britons, the research by Sara Lemos, of the University of Leicester, found.
Document DT00000020140409ea490006d
