{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2081"}
____
  
News
Migrants 'to cost UK its First World status'
Tim Shipman   
878 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
11
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
An influx of workers from Europe is turning Britain into the West's low-wage capital, UKIP's Nigel Farage tells Tim Shipman
BRITAIN will no longer be a "first world country" for millions of ordinary workers unless the UK gets control of its borders, Nigel Farage declared as he vowed to put immigration at the top of the agenda for the last week of the European election campaign.
Launching his final push for victory in Thursday's vote, the UKIP leader said economic turmoil in the eurozone meant "the potential for a large migratory wave" from southern Europe to Britain had "never been greater".
Farage risked fresh controversy yesterday by repeating his claim that people had a right to object to Romanians as neighbours because they were more likely to be criminals.
He told The Sunday Times immigration had benefited "big corporates" and "the rich", who had hired cheap foreign workers and domestic staff. But he said: "This country is becoming the lowwage capital of the western world. We face the prospect where millions of British families, unless we take a grip on our borders, will effectively not be living in a first world country any more."
Farage rejected figures released last week showing that Romanian and Bulgarian migration to the UK dropped in the first three months of the year after restrictions were lifted, saying "the fact that everyone hasn't come on day one doesn't mean a thing". He said UKIP's plan for an Australian-style points system to attract "people who've got skills or trades" would limit net migration to between 10,000 and 40,000, against 212,000 last year — more than double David Cameron's stated target.
"There is no point in Cameron or [Ed] Miliband or [Nick] Clegg talking about ambitions for net migration. The only way we can control it is to divorce ourselves from political union: 485m people have got EU passports — they effectively have a British passport. As many of them as want to come, can come."
Farage has claimed UKIP will cause "an earthquake" by winning on Thursday. But after polls showing the party streaking ahead, UKIP is neck and neck with Labour. Today's YouGov poll puts UKIP on 26%, a point behind Labour and three clear of the Tories. Among those certain to vote, UKIP has a slender lead.
Will he win? Farage bites his lip: "It's going to be tight." Does he regret predicting victory? "Of course not."
Farage has faced a bruising week. A woman of Asian descent resigned from UKIP's youth wing, accusing the party of descending into "racist populism". UKIP candidates have been exposed for racist and homophobic views. His spin doctor, Patrick O'Flynn, intervened to stop an interview with LBC radio on Friday, in part, because Farage was running late for his interview with The Sunday Times. But not before he was branded racist for suggesting people "know" which foreigners make good neighbours.
In a statement yesterday he defended his suspicion of Romanians. "Police figures are clear that there is a high level of criminality within the Romanian community in Britain," he said. Farage admitted "most" Romanians were not criminals but added: "Any normal and fair-minded person would have a perfect right to be concerned if a group of Romanian people suddenly moved in next door."
In his interview with this newspaper Farage vowed to expel the "idiots" from the party. He blamed the "political establishment" for the negative coverage. "Over the last few weeks the ability to debate the EU has been absent. For them to have been held up as representative of our party isn't the case."
He also dismissed fears that leaving the EU would lead to economic disaster. "The UK is the EU's greatest export market. They sell us more than we sell them. We buy getting on for a million more cars than we sell. We buy 20m bottles of champagne every year."
Farage gave a strong hint he will pick a constituency in Kent to contest next year, although Eastleigh, where UKIP ran the Liberal Democrats close in a by-election, remains an option. Farage would consider overtures from Eurosceptic Tories. He said the option of joint Conservative-UKIP tickets "might be a good one".
Last week he confessed he would prop up a minority Cameron government if it meant a referendum and UKIP MPs held the balance of power. He claimed to have no interest in a cabinet job. But it "would be tempting" if he was offered minister for Europe. "I might make an exception for that. I'd like to go and see the next commission president to negotiate our withdrawal."
Marching west to kill EU from within, page 33 @shippersunbound
26% Labour UKIP Conservative Other Lib Dem 27% 23% 9% 15% How will you vote in the European elections? Is UKIP a racist party? Why UKIP supporters are voting for the party Yes 41% No 40% Don't know 19% Opposition to EU membership Unhappy with main parties Immigration To put pressure on main parties Source: YouGov questioned 1,892 adults on May 15-16 39% 22% 14% 14%
Document ST00000020140518ea5i00115
