{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2238"}
____
  
News Front Page
Clegg wants aid pledge made law
Marie Woolf ; Nicky Harley   
478 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
NICK CLEGG wants to enshrine in law Britain's commitment to devote 7p of every £10 of national income to providing foreign aid.
The deputy prime minister is pressing for a bill in the next session of parliament to make the provision of 0.7% of gross national income to the international development budget legally binding.
The proposal, which the Liberal Democrat leader is discussing with David Cameron and George Osborne, the chancellor, will infuriate Conservative backbenchers who oppose the ring-fencing of the budget of the Department for International Development (DfID) when there are cuts across Whitehall.
While Cameron supports maintaining Britain's commitment to a UN aid target, he is wary of making it law, as it would cut the government's freedom to decide spending.
However, Lib Dem sources said any refusal by Cameron to back a bill would raise questions over his commitment to international aid funding.
Last year DfID met the 0.7% pledge but some Tories want its budget curbed or funds redirected to British projects. Meanwhile, despite enthusiasm from Osborne, the Tories have not been pushing their coalition partners to include a bill on an EU referendum in the Queen's Speech in June.
In an effort to portray himself as the defender of Britain's membership of the EU before May's European elections, Clegg yesterday attacked both Labour and the Tories on Europe and accused them of "panic" over immigration.
Answering questions at the Lib Dem spring conference, Clegg appeared to criticise a speech last week by James Brokenshire, the Tory immigration minister, who suggested a wealthy metropolitan elite had benefited from cheap foreign labour. "Over the last 24 to 48 hours we have seen in many respects some of the most ugly sides of the immigration debate," said Clegg.
He accused Labour of failing to stand up against xenophobia and of "losing the courage of their convictions".
In his keynote speech today, Clegg will launch a broadside at UKIP, which he will accuse of "ungenerous, backwards-looking politics".
In a thinly veiled reference to the UKIP leader Nigel Farage, Clegg will say: "The politics of blame has found an acceptable face: it wears a big smile and looks like someone you could have a pint with down the pub."
He will accuse his coalition partners of "flirting with exit" from the EU and Labour of sitting on the fence. "Do you want Britain in Europe or out? That's the real question in May. One party wants out. Another is flirting with exit. The other lot don't have the courage of their convictions on this — they're saying nothing at all," he will say.
He will back EU reform but say Britain cannot demand changes in Brussels with "one foot out of the door".
Document ST00000020140309ea39000rj
