{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2532"}
____
  
News
Middle classes are fuelling migration, claims minister
David Barrett   
387 words
6 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
12
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A "WEALTHY metropolitan elite" of middle–class households has helped fuel mass immigration to Britain by demanding cheap labour and services, a minister will say today.
James Brokenshire, the new Conservative immigration minister, will accuse better–off families and big businesses of benefiting from the recent arrival of foreign workers in Britain. By contrast, "ordinary, hard–working people" have not felt the economic benefits of immigration, the minister will say.
His remarks come as the coalition split over immigration grows ever wider. Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat Business Secretary, will argue today Britain needs migrants because they are some of the most dynamic and imaginative workers in the economy In his first major speech since taking on the immigration brief last month, Mr Brokenshire will attempt to align the Conservative party with working class voters who pollsters say are most unhappy about immigration, and most tempted to vote for the UK Independence Party.
"For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services – but not to the ordinary, hard–working people of this country," he will say in a speech to a London think–tank.
The minister's remarks about middleclass beneficiaries of immigration may be controversial not least since his predecessor, Mark Harper, was forced to resign after employing an illegal immigrant to clean his London flat.
Some economists and business leaders have said that Britain needs a steady supply of immigrant workers to fill skills gaps and boost economic growth.
Mr Brokenshire will reject the economic argument for immigration, saying that the costs and benefits of foreign labour are not being fairly shared.
"In the past year net migration from the EU has doubled – and this figure is – frankly – just too high," he will say.
The minister will also pledge a further crackdown on immigrants who "pretend to be students, but who are really lowskilled workers attempting to sneak into the country by the backdoor".
The Tories have promised to reduce net immigration to the UK to under 100,000, but the annual total remains above 250,000. That has drawn suggestions the Tory target is impossible, but Mr Brokenshire will insist the aim remains.
Document DT00000020140306ea36000an
