{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1573"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Farage was in his element at his chance to shine
Michael Deacon   
990 words
27 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
1,4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Sketch
A debate to suit both sides as Nick Clegg fought to regain popularity and the Ukip leader basked in publicity
Here it was Clegg facing gutsy outsider
NIGEL FARAGE shone. I don't mean his debating skills. I mean his skin. It glistened as if he had just run a half–marathon in diving boots. A sign of righteous conviction? Or nerves? For the UK Independence Party leader, more than anyone else, this was a big night. The first of two debates, broadcast live on radio and TV, on the subject he likes to talk about most: the UK's membership of the European Union. He was up against Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem leader, Deputy Prime Minister and earnest defender of the EU. The presenter, Nick Ferrari of LBC, addressed viewers and listeners at home. "You've waited decades for this debate!" he barked, with just the gentlest hint of hyperbole.
The fight had originally been picked by Mr Clegg, and Mr Farage had accepted with relish. The arrangement suited both of them. For Mr Clegg, whose personal popularity has plummeted since the early days of the Coalition, the debate represented a chance to win back both the public (by showing them that there are at least some principles he will stoutly stand up for) and Lib Dem voters.
For Mr Farage, it meant publicity – a substance he feasts on like a mosquito does blood – and a chance to reprise his favourite role, that of the bold underdog, the representative of the ordinary man and woman in the street, standing up fearlessly to the privileged establishment. No matter that he, like Mr Clegg, is the public schooleducated son of a financier; Mr Farage has proved time and again that you can play any part in the world, provided you do so with total confidence.
At the start, Mr Ferrari tossed a coin – "a good old English pound!" – for the right to speak first. Mr Farage won, and invited his opponent to "open the batting". Mr Clegg stared down the lens. "This is about you," he said earnestly, with those familiar big sad eyes. "This is about your job… About who we are…"
Now for Mr Farage's opening speech. He asked the audience to imagine that the EU was a brand new club we were being invited to join: would they happily vote to pay £55million a day, open our borders unconditionally to people from other EU countries, and surrender our ability to make our own laws? It was time to stop listening to the main parties, who represented "a tired status quo, defending a crumbling EU".
David Cameron and Ed Miliband had been invited to take part in the debate too, but both declined, perhaps wisely.
First, because their involvement would, by boosting viewing figures, have ensured all the more publicity for Mr Farage, a rival of whom both are itchily wary. Second, because their own positions on the EU are much less clear than either Mr Clegg's (strongly in favour) or Mr Farage's (strongly opposed), and the contrast might have made them look evasive and weak.
Questions were taken from the studio audience, with the two leaders given a minute each to answer. They were asked about immigration, benefits, the prospect of an EU referendum. Occasionally Mr Ferrari chipped in too – for example, when he flourished a leaflet the Lib Dems published years ago, in which Mr Clegg pledged to offer an EU referendum. Whatever happened to that? "If everyone could read the small print," began Mr Clegg, with a mirthless little laugh, "which I suspect you can't…"
Four long years ago, when Mr Clegg took part in the televised leaders' debates with Mr Cameron and Gordon Brown, viewers, at least initially, seemed impressed by him. In all likelihood, however, this was mostly because he was neither of the other two. Messrs Cameron and Brown were the old order; Mr Clegg was the new broom.
Now, in the EU debate, his role was quite different. This time, it was Mr Clegg's turn to defend the status quo, while his opponent could act the gutsy outsider.
The Lib Dem leader stuck to two themes: first, the UK needs to stay in the EU for the sake of jobs and our "clout" (his word of the day); second, that many criticisms of the EU, in particular to do with immigration, are mere scaremongering. "Let's not scare people with things that are not true," said the man who confidently stated, several times, that three million British jobs would be lost if we quit the EU.
"You've never run your own company and you've never had a job in the real world!" shouted Mr Farage. "Trade is not created by politicians and bureaucrats, it's created by consumers!"
As public speakers, both men have their weaknesses. Mr Clegg can seem huffily defensive, as though he's just been told that he's not seeing his friends until he's tidied his room. Mr Farage suffers from an unpredictable temper.
Mr Clegg won a round of applause for mocking Ukip forecasts that millions of Bulgarians and Romanians would move to Britain this year. "Two million have left already – they've gone to Italy and Spain!" replied Mr Farage, a little wildly.
So who won? Possibly they both did.
Mr Clegg spoke with far more selfassurance than when being barracked in the Commons; Mr Farage held his own.
Both will have satisfied their respective followers. Whether they will have won any new ones is another question.
Round two follows next week, on BBC Two. Will either of them have anything different left to say? A nation holds its breath.
Editorial Comment: Page 23
MATT 'The morning – after pill is not for people who regret listening to the Farage – Clegg debate'
Document DT00000020140327ea3r0006i
