{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"568"}
____
  
News
Illegal immigrants at Games to be targeted
Stephen Wilkie   
342 words
7 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
6
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
A SPECIALIST immigration hit squad has been set up to tackle foreigners who attempt to stay in Britain illegally after travelling to the Commonwealth Games.
In the coming months, 6,500 athletes from 71 countries plus thousands of their support staff will arrive in Scotland for the country's biggest ever sporting extravaganza.
Although normal visa requirements will be relaxed to make it easier for athletes to complete, all visitors will be expected to leave within a month of the Games ending.
There will be extra immigration officials at airports after previous sporting events were targeted by asylum seekers.
Nearly 80 people - including Mandembo Kebika Cedric from the Democratic Republic of Congo's judo team - sought permission to stay following London 2012.
At the Manchester Commonwealth Games in 2002, around 20 members of one West African team simply went "missing".
And immigration lawyer, Stuart McWilliams, an associate at solicitors Morton Fraser, warned that Glasgow is likely to fall victim too. He said: "It's certainly possible when you have as many athletes in the Commonwealth Games as we are expecting, as well as coaches, that some will claim asylum.
"It wouldn't be unheard of. There are lots of reasons for it. You could have people coming from regimes they disagree with. Equally, you could have somebody who is coming from a country where there are laws relating to homosexuality."
General secretary of the ISU union for borders, immigration and customs, Lucy Moreton said the number of immigration officials at Scottish airports was likely to increase with relief staff being drafted in and the creation of a 'contingency pool' made up of retired officers.
She added: "There are always those who stay behind for all sorts of reasons - because they fancy it, because they need to claim asylum, because they are economic migrants."
Immigration and security minister James Brokenshire said: "We will ensure that those who come to the UK do so legally and leave at the end of the stipulated period."
Document THEEXP0020140407ea470007q
