{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"151"}
____
  
News
The margin of Nigel Farage's win was game-changing
By Daniel Hannan   
478 words
3 April 2014
12:15
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The betting was always on Farage to walk off with the big-buckled belt and, sure enough, he battered the other fellow almost senseless. YouGov declared him champ by 68 to 27 per cent, ICM by 69 to 31 per cent. That's as big a margin as you realistically get in politics. True, Clegg was unpopular before the debate began – and, indeed, he spent an hour reminding us of why he is so unpopular, with his faux-populist one liners, his smirk, his failure to hide his impatience with the rest of the country for not being as broadminded as he is. Still, numbers on such a scale change things.
Clegg, remember, was defending the position taken by every party represented in the House of Commons and by every newspaper except the Daily Express.Yet he lost by more than two to one. More than two to one, for Heaven's sake.
Euro-enthusiasts will no doubt be trying to console themselves with the thought that it was a clash between two politicians, not the In/Out referendum itself. But why should that campaign play out significantly differently? What we saw over the two televised clashes is what we usually see when the EU is debated. Euro-enthusiasts almost always argue as Clegg did, calling their opponents names, flaunting their supposed expertise, implying that anyone who disagrees with them is a bigot. It didn't work for Clegg, and it won't work during the referendum.
Consider just one example. Clegg made much of the fact that the EU is abolishing roaming charges for mobile phones. No more shocking bills when we upload our holiday snaps to Instagram or Tweet from Tuscany. Except that, in order to make up the shortfall, the phone companies will need to charge more than they otherwise would in their general tariffs. In other words, the EU is obliging non-travellers to subsidise travellers. Teenagers on housing estates in Sheffield will end up paying higher bills so that Cleggie can have cheaper roaming when he's in Brussels or Spain.
It's hardly surprising that EU officials, MEPs and multi-national business executives favour the measure: it will benefit them enormously. Human nature being what it is, this makes them imagine that everyone else wants price regulation as much as they do. They genuinely can't see why taxing the majority to subsidise the minority is unpopular.
What goes for mobile phones goes for business regulation in general, where Brussels rules favour multi-nationals over small firms. Indeed, it goes for almost all EU directives, on everything from structural funds to open-door immigration. The EU is, in practice, a racket, rewarding corporates, rent-seekers, politicians and bureaucrats at the expense of everyone else. Bring on the referendum!
Document TELUK00020140403ea43000ma
