{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3539"}
____
  
News
School hit by visa ban in cheating link
Mark Tighe   
765 words
20 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Eden College faced accusations of preparing students for questions moments before they sat English language exams, writes Mark Tighe
EDEN COLLEGE, one of four international schools to have their visa powers suspended by immigration officials following a Sunday Times investigation, was suspected of helping students to cheat on its exams last year.
Correspondence obtained by this newspaper shows a "spot audit" last July by the Australian Institute of Business (AIB) — which had more than 300 students registered on business courses at Eden in Dublin — found the school appeared to have given students a tutorial on how to answer exam questions immediately before the exam started.
Batt O'Keeffe, a former education minister, was president of the college at the time. O'Keeffe did not respond to queries last week. He is not suspected of having any involvement in the exam cheating scheme.
O'Keeffe announced his resignation from the school earlier this month after an undercover Sunday Times reporter found Eden College agents were offering to boost the attendance records of students so they could keep their visas while working.
Eden College is owned by Fakir Hossain, a Bangladeshi businessman based in Dublin. Hossain also owns Eden College International in London, the subject of a recent investigation by the BBC's Panorama programme, which revealed that students were allowed to cheat on English language tests.
In a letter sent by AIB on July 23, 2013 to Hossain, George Brown, AIB's director of teaching and learning, said its auditor had attended Eden College on July 18 following an anonymous tip-off that "Eden was printing exams off and providing tutoring to students immediately before exams were due to be held".
He said its auditor was not permitted to access the floor where the exam was being held for half an hour after she arrived, in contravention of AIB policy.
When she did get access, AIB's auditor found revision notes located outside the exam room which aligned "exactly" with the six questions on the strategic management exam. Brown said the document "confirms" the allegations it had received.
After the spot check, AIB said Eden would no longer be permitted to invigilate exams without paying for AIB-approved external supervision. It said in future its supervisor would bring exams on a USB stick. The suspected cheating on the exam paper was discovered after AIB had complained about the poor results Eden students received in exams in August 2012. In five courses with a combined 230 students the pass rates ranged from 11% to 32%. After contacting some students, AIB said many found it "difficult to balance their family and work commitments with their studies". "This is of major concern to us as the students are in [Ireland] as a result of student visas granted to them on the basis that they were to study our course," an AIB executive told Hossain.
Last October AIB discovered lecturers that did not work for Eden were falsely being listed as course facilitators. In one case Allan Searles, a business lecturer who applied for a job at Eden but who never worked there, was found to be listed as running four courses. Searles's signature on a form was signed by an Eden staff member.
A second lecturer, Tim Hayes, was listed as being the facilitator in charge of marking 30 assignments. When contacted by AIB he said while he did some work for Eden he had not marked any assignments.
In a letter to Hossain, Brown said AIB's management had decided to terminate its relationship with Eden due to a "number of significant noncompliances" and "what appears to be severe fraud".
The relationship between the two was terminated last November. Documents that were obtained from the Department of Justice show it placed Eden College on a regime of "enhanced monitoring and reporting" for two years from January 2012 after it discovered it was registering students for courses whose accreditation was about to lapse.
In a statement, Hossain said Eden strictly adhered to exam invigilation protocols. In relation to the "exam briefing" discovered by AIB, he said students were given class exercises and tutorials "without any knowledge or access to examination content".
He said the signing of Searles's name was "an administrative error". He said at no time did Eden represent that Searles had taught any modules at the college. He said Eden's declaration that Hayes was the primary facilitator of a course was "an error".
AIB DISCOVERED LECTURERS WERE BEING FALSELY LISTED AS COURSE FACILITATORS
Document ST00000020140420ea4k00087
