{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3753"}
____
  
NEWS
We should celebrate that we are a multi-cultural nation, says Michael Gove
By Christopher Hope Senior Political Correspondent   
652 words
28 April 2014
23:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Britons should celebrate the fact that their country is a “multi-cultural nation”, senior Conservatives have said.
Britons should celebrate the fact that their country is a “multi-cultural nation”, senior Conservatives have said.
The comments have emerged after new research said that the Tories had to do more to attract black and ethnic minority voters if they wanted to win next year’s general election.
The description multi-cultural is often used by rightwing critics to criticise community groups who do not mix with their neighbours.
However, Michael Gove, the Education secretary and a Tory moderniser, issued the call for the Conservatives to reclaim the term at the Asian Business Awards dinner earlier this month.
He told the 500-strong black tie dinner at a hotel in central London earlier this month that Britain was a “stronger country” because of its history of immigration.
He said: “The answer to our problems is not to denigrate success but to celebrate it; the answer to our problems is not to chip away at wealth creators with new taxes and new burdens, but to do everything possible to liberate them to create more jobs and opportunities for all.
“And the answer to how we make our country strong in the future is that we welcome talent from whenever it comes and we celebrate the fact that we are stronger together as a United Kingdom, as a multi-cultural nation than we could ever be if we looked back to the past.”
The comments from Mr Gove, who is close to Prime Minister David Cameron, were backed by other senior Tories.
Alok Sharma MP, the Conservatives’ vice chairman for black and minority ethnic issues told The Daily Telegraph that people would regard to Mr Gove’s remarks “positively”.
He said: “Britain is a multi-cultural nation and many will regard Michael Gove’s comments positively.
“The vast majority of people from ethnic minorities regard a multi-cultural nation as one in which communities are integrated into the mainstream of British society and adhere to British values, whilst being able to respect their own cultural heritage.”
Is multi-culturalism a force for good in modern day Britain?
Research from Demos last week suggested that number of middle–class ethnic minority voters could help tip the election in favour of David Cameron.
The report by Trevor Phillips, a former head of the equalities watchdog, and Richard Webber, a university professor of geography, concluded that “upwardly mobile” ethnic minority voters were more likely to turn Conservative.
The study said that Labour risked losing some of its traditional support from black and Asian voters as many move to the suburbs.
It suggested that second or third generation immigrants could lose their "reflex" support for Labour, and those moving to traditionally white middle–class areas would be less likely to vote Labour.
David Green, from the right of centre thinktank Civitas, said Mr Gove had confused "multi-ethnicity" with "multi-culturalism".
He said: "Michael Gove has confused a multi-cultural society with a multi-ethnic society. We have become a multi-ethnic society, but we beensuccessful because our dominant culture of freedom and democracy allows space for different lifestyles.
"The vital point is that alternative lifestyles must be compatible with a free, democratic and tolerant society.
"Multiculturalism is the name for the condition in which antagonistic cultures co-exist in the same country.
"Mr Gove should have known from his experience of dealing with alleged sectarianism in Birmingham’s schools that not all cultures are compatible with a free society.
"Muslims who are opposed to extreme interpretations of Islam will not thank him for confusing the issue.
"There is good diversity and bad diversity, as the people of Ukraine can testify. Sectarianism is diversity that threatens freedom, democracy and toleration."
Document TELUK00020140428ea4s005pl
