{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1422"}
____
  
News
The invitation to Boris shows that the Tories are panicking
By Benedict Brogan   
1,344 words
3 March 2014
20:47
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Asking London’s Mayor to stand as an MP suggests the party is preparing for defeat
'Be careful what you wish for" is a rule that applies to politics as to so much else. Over the weekend, George Osborne let it be known that he would like Boris Johnson to stand for Parliament in 2015, and join the Tory effort to secure an outright majority. David Cameron expressed much the same view to his party a few conferences ago – but the Chancellor has reportedly gone a step further and given the “Back Boris" project official sanction, by making a personal appeal to the London mayor. The coast is now clear, it seems, for his Westminster comeback.
The prospect of the blond bombshell returning to the Commons has titillated Tories for years, without anyone, let alone Boris, knowing quite how it would happen. Yesterday, Mr Johnson responded to the latest flurry of speculation by keeping his options open. In public, he refuses to rise to the bait, save to rule out a by-election before polling day. In private, his resolve is hardening. The likelihood grows that he will acknowledge the permission granted him by the leadership and seek a seat, despite it opening him to accusations of being a part-time MP and part-time mayor.
Westminster loves a whodunit, so plenty of effort has been expended in recent days trying to work out how we came to learn that the Chancellor, helped by Michael Gove, is trying to lure Boris into a Commons return. Did the Prime Minister let it slip at a recent meeting with the editor of the newspaper that published the report? Or was the source (as those in Downing Street maintain) Mr Osborne’s ambitious sidekick, Matthew Hancock? And was the story even true? After all, the Mayor’s camp furiously insists that no such conversation between Mayor and Chancellor has taken place – though they have no doubts that Mr Osborne was behind the story.
Then there’s the matter of motive. The Chancellor is said to want Mr Johnson embedded in the campaign effort for the greater good of the party. There is even talk of appointing him chairman, to ensure that his political magic can be deployed to maximum effect. He certainly has the qualifications: last night, at the invitation of Grant Shapps, the Tory co-chairman, Boris addressed London MPs and candidates with his usual blend of optimism and common sense.
Most MPs and ministers I have spoken to, however, share Mr Johnson’s view that the Chancellor is up to mischief. Hold your enemies closer, the saying goes – and Mr Osborne and Mr Gove are putting the squeeze on Boris. This theory has it that by drawing him into the campaign, they can implicate him in its success or failure. And if he is blamed for a defeat, even if only partly, he will be a less formidable obstacle in the inevitable leadership contest.
This may sound paranoid – why shouldn’t a party try to make use of its best electoral asset? But it is not the only straw in the wind. The Prime Minister’s loyalists have in the past derided the threat posed by Mr Johnson, pointing out that he is not an MP and therefore not in a position to do anything other than snipe from the sidelines. Recently, though, the Mayor’s friends have noticed a change of tack, with active efforts being made – by No 11, if not No 10 – to keep him out of any future leadership race. Sympathetic MPs have been leaned on by the Chancellor’s camp. And Boris was particularly troubled to learn that at a recent dinner with Rupert Murdoch, Mr Gove argued at length that he was not suited to be prime minister. Boris complains that while he is doing his utmost to stay out of trouble, his friends have turned on him. He is aggrieved and frustrated that Mr Osborne and Mr Gove have teamed up to thwart him.
Riveting as it is, this scorpion’s dance at the top of the Conservative Party is not just about personal rivalry. For the past six months or so, the Tories had adopted a jaunty, optimistic air. They could see a way to confound the polls and win the next election outright – or at least to return as the largest single party, with a strong claim to form the next government. They believed the electorate would recognise that a growing economy should not be entrusted to an unimpressive Labour Party, and that Mr Cameron should be allowed to complete the work he started in 2010, either in coalition with the Liberal Democrats, or even alone.
Yet if the manoeuvring to succeed Mr Cameron is under way, it suggests that those involved are losing hope. Indeed, Cabinet ministers I spoke to yesterday expressed alarm that some senior colleagues appear to have given up on victory in 2015 just when, in the words of one, “the tide is turning". At a time when every effort should be focused on what happens before election day, the party’s attention is being distracted by what might happen afterwards.
Nearly three years ago in this space, I suggested that – under such circumstances – we were heading for a deadly struggle for the succession between Mr Johnson and Mr Osborne. That prediction is now coming true. Bolstered by remarkable economic success, the Chancellor has re-established himself as a contender. Previously, it was said that his fate was entirely dependent on the Prime Minister’s: if one went down, so did the other. Now, Mr Osborne believes that even if the Tories lose, he can make a case for leading the party in opposition.
Most MPs, I should point out, say this is a delusional view. If the voters reject Mr Cameron, they are by implication rejecting those closest to him, who guided Tory strategy in opposition and coalition alike. There are also other contenders to take the crown: Theresa May, or someone from the 2010 intake if the Cameron/Osborne/Johnson generation is deemed to have failed altogether.
But there is one further point to make about the manoeuvrings at the top of the party, and it is arguably the most important. By giving the green light to Mr Johnson to return to the Commons, and take part in the election campaign – and whatever follows – the Tory high command has, perhaps unwittingly, opened a debate about life after defeat that it simply cannot afford to have. For it has legitimised a conversation about the kind of Conservative Party that will emerge in opposition.
The likelihood of Mr Johnson’s return means the party must confront a choice: is it optimistic, centrist, open to immigration and to Europe, generous in its instincts to the vulnerable and the poor? Or is it committed to reuniting the Right on an agenda that opposes immigration, and favours European withdrawal and sharp reductions in the role of the state in welfare? “This is the most fundamental question we face," one senior Conservative has told me. “If we are not successful, then that is precisely the discussion we must have, before we think about who should lead us."
That is a worthwhile debate to have, and probably an inevitable one. But until a few days ago, the Tory party was able to preserve the fiction that it is wholly focused on defeating Labour and seeing off Ukip. With a convincing leader and a compelling story to tell, it would save the existential agonising for after it had won back power.
Worrying about Boris, and inviting us to wonder what happens next, is the clearest sign that the high command is beginning to panic. Instead of straining every sinew for victory, it risks allowing a successful term to collapse into factionalism. The sad truth is that by making their preparations for defeat so public, these warring Tories will only make that defeat more likely.
Document TELUK00020140304ea33000jk
