{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3578"}
____
  
FINANCE
'Why does the Government think food production is not important? Outgoing National Farmers' Union president Peter Kendall says government is making a mistake and should treat farms like vital businesses; PETER KENDALL CV
By Andrew Cave   
1,627 words
22 February 2014
21:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Farming may appear to be in crisis as a result of Britain’s floods but, after eight years as president of the National Farmers’ Union of England and Wales, Peter Kendall feels the industry is in a much better position than when he arrived.
His fourth and final two-year term will finish on Wednesday, when the union’s 55,000 members are due to vote on his successor at their annual conference.
So how does the current farming landscape differ from eight years ago? Kendall hardly knows where to start.
“The mood of the industry was pretty depressed," he recalls. “We were at the height of the first round of payments from the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 2004 and the computers were all imploding.
“The Government had imposed a system on English farmers that was completely different from almost all the rest of Europe and the rest of the UK, arrogantly declaring that we were going to show Europe how to do CAP reform.
“In that first year, we had to do emergency single-farm payments because the computers weren’t fit for purpose and we had delivered an over-complicated reform.
“Commodity prices were depressed and the message to the farming industry was that food production was almost an inconvenient by-product of environmental management. The attitude was that we didn’t need farmers."
Kendall, who farms with his brother on Bedfordshire’s border with Hertfordshire and Cambridgeshire, stood in the first contested NFU election against a sitting president, saying that he wanted to shake things up.
“I felt that the industry wanted someone who was prepared to be very visible and give a very public lead to an industry championing the importance of British agriculture," he says.
“Our first campaign was 'Why Farming Matters’. In 2014 it seems absurd that we ever had to make that case, but our first principle was to try to re-establish the view that productive farming is important and that the UK has an important role to play."
British farming has been helped by three major global agricultural price spikes in the past six years. Kendall also sees great improvement in government support, with the UK’s agricultural technology strategy committed to making the nation a world leader in agricultural science and technology.
“What a change of heart that is," he says. “We’ve now got a government that realises that if you want to build a knowledge-based economy with a world population growing by 17m-18m every year and working towards a total of 9.5bn, our agricultural science base ought to be central."
The past governmental ambivalence or even downright hostility to productive farming was due, Kendall thinks, to the £20bn combined cost to the Exchequer of the BSE and foot and mouth disease crises.
“There was a view that farming was both an economic risk to the economy and an environmental risk as well," he says. “I believe that the conclusion was reached that the smaller Britain’s agricultural industry was, the less risk there would be to the economy and the environment.
“That was the depressing state of mind that we tried to set about changing among farmers and also among the wider public."
Other crises have followed. In 2007, the NFU had to deal with bird flu, another outbreak of foot and mouth disease and blue tongue disease among cattle. More recently, there was last year’s horse-meat scandal and a crisis in the dairy industry in 2012, when Dairy Crest cut the price of milk by 2p, taking UK dairy prices to near the bottom of the league table of the 27 European Union states.
That was an “absolute disgrace," says Kendall, whose approach to all the crises has been that the NFU has to be “relentlessly positive".
“We’ve tried to get away from the notion that we’re whingeing farmers, grumpy old men leaning on a five-bar gate chewing straw and telling everybody how unfair life is.
“This is an exciting, innovative industry that’s central to the big global challenges of food security and climate change," he says.
Kendall is proud of the relationships fostered with Britain’s supermarket groups. Philip Clarke, chief executive of Tesco, has spoken at the NFU’s conference, while the Co-operative Group has moved towards ensuring that meat in its ready meals is 100pc British and Sainsbury’s has made commitments to moving towards all-British beef.
Kendall is also proud of defeating Whitehall mandarins who wanted 7pc of agricultural land to be “set aside", or left out of production.
Now he says the major UK food retailers are clamouring to support British meat, with the red tractor insignia verifying where meat is sourced from. Meanwhile, British dairy prices are at a record high, ranking in the top third of EU nations.
Kendall says a voluntary code on dairy prices, introduced after lobbying by the NFU, means British dairy farmers are “probably more confident than they’ve been for 10 or 15 years".
There’s much more to do, however, with Kendall believing that the floods show that governmental attitudes still tend towards regarding farmland as an environmental habitat, as opposed to being productive land.
That means, he claims, that irrigation ditches are regarded by some as primarily for wildlife, with farmers’ fields seen as flood barriers.
He complains of poorly-maintained ditches and compares Britain unfavourably with Holland, where he says flood concerns come first and irrigation ditches are well-kept.
“I completely understand that people’s safety and houses have to come first," he says, “but climate change magnifies enormously the challenge of food security globally.
“We seem to have had 'once in 100 years’ weather events about three times during my time as president.
“For me, the pendulum has swung too far to 'environment first’ and farming not being important.
“I’m not saying farmland shouldn’t act as a buffer, but what it shouldn’t do is act as water storage and be undervalued.
“For farmers, when it is all over your fields and you can’t get it away, you get pretty depressed.
“We need to get land back into production. Once land has been under water for three to four weeks, everything is killed, including wildlife."
Despite the damage wreaked by the floods, however, Kendall believes that, as it stands today, the bad weather will not have anywhere near as bad an impact as the wet autumn of 2012.
That saw wheat planting fall 30pc, delivering a 2013 harvest of 12m tonnes – the lowest since 1978 and well down on the recent average of 16m tonnes.
The 2012 British wheat harvest of 13m tonnes was also “diabolical", says Kendall, citing a lack of summer sunshine.
“Yes, there’s a lot of flooding around at the moment," he says, “but in terms of gross output, I don’t think it will have an impact similar to those.
“At the moment I would expect Britain to have a more normal wheat harvest this year. We could do 16m tonnes again. About 80pc of the nation’s wheat is grown in a 50-mile radius of Cambridge and that area has not been badly affected.
“But for those farmers in Somerset, it’s catastrophic because it is the second year on the trot.
“For some, it will probably be ruinous. For others around the country, if it’s for only a few weeks around the Thames, for example, you hope they are resilient enough to see their way through it."
There are other worries in the world of farming, with Kendall particularly concerned that tighter immigration rules are damaging farmers’ ability to harvest their crops.
“We wouldn’t harvest our fruit and vegetables without migrant workers," he says. “We don’t want farming to get massively disadvantaged in the debate about immigration."
He also wants planning rules relaxed for agricultural buildings and says he is “bitterly disappointed" that the Treasury does not allow depreciation of new farm buildings and reservoirs against tax – something that was removed in 2007.
“There’s a really unhelpful mindset in the Treasury that says: 'Don’t farmers get enough help already?’ " he complains. “What I want is for them to treat farms like businesses.
“Why don’t they get that we produce the raw materials for the biggest manufacturing sector in the economy?
“Food manufacturing has 3.7m jobs in the UK and if we don’t produce the raw materials here, the processing will go overseas as well.
'We’ve had 20 years of government not thinking that food production is important.
“Farmers don’t believe that enough is being done but we see the words of the Prime Minister and the media coverage of the past few weeks as an opportunity to realign the pendulum a little bit."
As for Kendall, where will his own career pendulum swing after Wednesday?
He claims not to have figured that out yet, though he has ruled out progressing from eight years in government lobbying to a career in politics.
Back to the land, then? “The thought of that is making my brother nervous," he laughs.
English and Welsh farmers might just reassure him.
Age 53
Family Married with three children. Lives on his farm in Bedfordshire
Favourite book Farmer’s Glory, by A G Street
Not many people know that... Kendall is to cycle 1,000 miles to raise funds for Farm Africa this summer, but has only just bought a bike
Document TELUK00020140223ea2m000sg
