{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3471"}
____
  
News
Migrants 'care for their elderly better than us'
Louise Sassoon   
337 words
22 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
3s1; National
8
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
BRITISH families should follow the example of Asian and African immigrants and take better care of elderly relatives instead of forcing them into care homes, it was claimed last night.
Liberal Democrat justice minister Simon Hughes said too many pensioners were being "neglected" by their families and were enduring a "much less happy ending" to their lives than they should.
Last year a study showed that 800,000 elderly people in England were chronically lonely and there is growing fear that Britain is facing a care crisis as the number of over-75s is predicted to soar from 4.2 million to 6.3 million in the next 20 years.
Mr Hughes said that the example set by Asian and African families where the elderly often live with their children and are at the heart of family life, was the way forward.
He said: "Our society has often left too many people who are the responsibility of the public services on their own in later life, even though they have family alive and other people you would have thought would care. We have gone through a period where the sense of a wider family responsibility has been much less important than it has in the past.
"I think we need to learn from other communities, of which the Asian and African communities are noticeable. They understand the obligation to look after your family to the end.
"If we had a society in which we collectively take responsibility for our families I think we would see fewer people dependent on the state."
Meanwhile, research yesterday by the Left-leaning Demos think-tank suggests the emergence of a significant black and Asian middle class could break Labour's traditional stranglehold on the ethnic minority vote.
The report, co-written by former Labour politician and equalities tsar Trevor Phillips, suggests "upwardly mobile" ethnic minority voters are more likely to vote Tory as they prosper and move to the suburbs.
Document THEEXP0020140422ea4m0006c
