{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3833"}
____
  
News
Tackling 'weirdness' of Miliband is first task for Labour's US strategist
David Taylor   
1,416 words
26 April 2014
The Times
T
1; National
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Axelrod worked wonders for Obama — now he is over here and hoping to win again, reports David Taylor
Ed Miliband's new American election guru will focus mercilessly on the Labour leader's weaknesses as one of his first acts as he tries to replicate the success of the Obama campaigns, according to US analysts.
David Axelrod, hired for his expertise in crafting a sharp message and developing an election strategy, will place Mr Miliband at the core of a compelling personal and political narrative.
First, however, he is likely to take a leaf out of the Obama campaign playbook and confront Mr Miliband's image problem: voter perception that the Labour leader is a "weird" north Londoner who stole the Labour leadership from his brother.
At the outset of Barack Obama's first presidential run, Mr Axelrod created mock advertisements attacking his own candidate. He then played them to focus groups, using their reactions to ready his own response for the inevitable Republican attacks.
David Cameron should also prepare for an aggressive onslaught from a man who honed his skills on advertising campaigns in the tough world of Chicago politics and has admitted that he occasionally reaches for the "bloody dagger". The recruitment of Mr Axelrod and a team from his former Chicago firm AKPD means that for the first time each of the three main parties is going into next year's general election with a foreign strategic mastermind.
Ed Rollins, who was Ronald Reagan's campaign director in the 1984 presidential race, cites Mr Axelrod as a formidable opponent, once naming him in a list of "Guys I never want to see lobbing grenades against me again".
The pair clashed in congressional races in the 80s and Mr Rollins recognised him as "a superb messaging guy" with the ability to see the big picture.
He said that Tory opponents should look at the methodology of Mr Axelrod to see some of the strategies he was likely to stick to: his obsession with the power of narrative, turning the candidate's biography into a compelling story; and anticipating what is coming at his campaign and having a counter-plan ready.
"You figure out what the strengths are and you compensate for the weaknesses. The most important thing is don't delude yourself, don't think those things aren't going to be raised and raised effectively by the other side," Mr Rollins said.
Some who have worked closely with Mr Axelrod bill him as an idealist with a romantic view about the nobility of politics — his formative moment came as a five-year-old when he sat on a post box and saw JFK move a crowd in New York.
Joe McLean, a founding member of the Obama leadership team when he ran for the Senate, said: "He can be very tough in campaigns, but he's a real straight arrow."
According to a poll this month, 41 per cent think Ed Miliband is "weird" or "very weird", but Mr McLean said: "Every character trait that can be perceived as a negative also has a positive side — the fact that he is awkward looking can be turned into an everyman familiarity. Nobody is better than David in looking at the raw material and finding the right way to showcase the strengths of the individual and the rightness of the cause and the policy."
Mr Axelrod admits that he is not above contributing to what he calls the atmosphere of cynicism. "I try to fight that," he said in 2008. "I can't say I'm totally blameless. Everyone in this business has a hand on that bloody dagger."
An opponent in a Senate race complained that an Axelrod advert left him looking like Hitlerafter film of a passionate speech was slowed down to exaggerate his facial expressions. "He definitely can throw a punch or use a knife when needed," one senior American journalist said.
With party campaign spending in Britain limited to £18.9 million, he is likely to point Labour towards the Obama campaign's use of social media — posting 1,800 films on YouTube and using social media to draw millions of viewers to his story.
Mr Axelrod brings stability, Tommy Vietor, a former Obama White House aide, said. "He is exceptionally good at making sure in a fast-moving campaign with hundreds of people, that the core of what that campaign is doing or saying every single day is rooted in a message that comes from the candidate, that is authentic and that doesn't get distracted by the silly issue of the day."
He completes the set of foreign strategists for the three main parties — Lynton Crosby, the Australian, for the Tories, who also have another former Obama man in Jim Messina, while Nick Clegg has hired the South African Ray Coetzee as a strategy director.
All of the parties are looking for some magic to reach disillusioned voters. But Mr Vietor joked: "Remember, any political genius is about plus or minus 3 per cent away from being an idiot."
Mr Axelrod will arrive in Britain on May 14 for two days of strategy meetings withMr Miliband and the AKPD team that created the most talkedabout political advert of last year. The advert called Dante helped Bill de Blasio, a left-wing outsider, overturn a 25-point gap to win the New York mayoral race. . Dante featured a teenager with a huge Afro hairstyle, who says: "Bill de Blasio will be a mayor for every New Yorker, no matter where they live or what they look like — and I'd say that even if he weren't my dad."
It was a game changer. But after usurping his brother David for the Labour leadership, Ed Miliband might find enlisting his family to be the hardest task of all
Leading article, page 24 Foreign hands on the British party machines david axelrod (Labour) age 59 nationality American style Idealistic. Always wants his candidates to be better than they are. Removes the clutter from a campaign's message and tries to tell a compelling story voters don't want to put down.
memorable lines "In the face of impossible odds, people who love their country can change it."
Barack Obama's first crescendo as he announced he was running for president. "Yes We Can." The campaign slogan that went around the world.
trophy cabinet Turned Mr Obama from local activist to the first black President. Won a Senate race, derailed the Clinton machine in the Democratic run-off, and then hammered the Republicans. Twice.
blunder Blamed for muddled messages from the White House in Mr Obama's early days. Billed himself as "the poster child for the President's obesity programme", as he piled into a five-inch thick sandwich during a New York Times inter view.
ryan coetzee (Lib Dem) age 41 nationality South African style Retail. Coetzee focuses on a small number of issues that play well with Lib Dem and "soft Conservative" voters, such as childcare.
memorable lines "He who must be obeyed." The Lib Dem peer Lord Greaves's description of the party's risen saviour and "his hundreds of spreadsheet pages purporting to tell us what our target 20 per cent of the electorate think about everything from the immigration of Bulgarians to funding for tiddlywinks tournaments in Tooting".
trophy cabinet Boosting South Africa's main opposition party, the Democratic Alliance's share of the vote from under 2 per cent to over 16 per cent in Just five years.
blunder Nick Clegg struggled to answer why the taxpayer should be footing the £110,000-a-year salary bill for a man who provides more political than governmental advice.
lynton crosby (Conservative) age 57 nationality Australian style: Direct. With skilful pollster Mark Textor, Crosby ferrets out "touchstone" issues, particularly those that pin opponents to unpopular positions. He is famously demanding of his candidates and loathes leakers.
memorable lines "Pass the beer nuts, mate," how he cuts short off-message politicians.
"Crap speech, mate," his texted assessment of a piece of Boris Johnson oratory he considered below-par.
trophy Back-to-back victories with John Howard's Liberal Party in Australia and Mr Johnson in mayoral contest. blunder "thinking what I'm "Are you thinking?" - sadly for Michael Howard and the Conservatives in 2005 it seemed most voters in Britain answered, "No".
Document T000000020140426ea4q000a9
