{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3674"}
____
  
Guardian Leader Pages
Comment is free: In brief: Ukip is a bubble that will soon burst - and Farage knows it
James Ball   
733 words
22 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
36
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
In newsrooms across the country, articles chronicling the march of Ukip are being prepared: whether "The irresistible rise to power", "Why the Conservatives must listen to Ukip" or "Ukip v the Westminster bubble", we're getting ready to read a lot into the European election results.
Unless you've sat out the run-up to this event in a hermetically sealed bunker, you will have spotted that Ukip is the only show in town. It's not hard to see why: what's the point in writing about the same old face-off between three uninspiring major party leaders? The problem starts when we begin to believe the hype. Ukip is a bubble so over-inflated it makes the London property market look like a solid investment.
The simple fact is this: from a UK perspective the European elections are a staggering irrelevance. Despite Ukip's oft-debunked claim that 75% of our laws are made in Brussels, the European parliament has minimal direct relevance on most issues our parties campaign on, or that voters care about, and often serves essentially as a rubber stamp. Given that both Ukip and the Conservatives sit in fringe groupings within Europe, the impact of the UK's vote on political decision making will be close to zero.
The parties know this, which is why their campaigns are essentially nonsense. The Conservatives are brazenly, and entirely falsely, presenting a vote for them as a vote for an in/out referendum; Ukip is doing much the same. Both know it is actually for MPs in Westminster to grant such a referendum - MEPs have absolutely no power to do so.
When it comes to a general election, Europe drops dramatically down voters' lists of concerns (it's usually about 16th). The UK economy, the NHS, crime and everyday issues rise to the fore - and minority party vote shares plummet.
Even this week, though, Ukip's rise is less assured than you might think. Lest we forget, Ukip came second in the 2009 European elections, securing around 16.5% of the vote (it peaked in polls ahead of election day at around 19%).
This time it is helped by the near-total implosion of the (far nastier) BNP which last time polled 6.5% and gained two MEPs. Working off a rough assumption that Ukip will pick up the BNP's anti-immigration votes, that gives it a rough base of 22%-23%. At the moment it is polling around 27% - hardly a surge.
It is entirely possible that come this weekend - five years and a million column inches later - Ukip will have surged from second place in an irrelevant election in 2009 to . . . second place in an irrelevant election in 2014, albeit with a few extra MEPs to collect lavish salaries and allowances, while turning up to vote less than any other UK party.
Minor parties often surge in Britain mid-parliament. In late 1981, the SDP-Liberal alliance polled more than 50% of the vote, but at the 1983 general election 18 months later it secured just 23 seats. A week before the 2010 general election, Cleggmania was in full swing and a nation's commentariat wondered if the party might even win more seats than Labour. As it transpired it lost five. And what of Ukip? Just 12 months after its 16.5% triumph at the 2009 European elections the party polled nationally at 3.1% and failed to secure a single seat.
Ukip is a cult political party: one man who connects well with voters trumpeting a barely coherent stance, on a single issue most voters don't care that much about. Under scrutiny the whole thing will - once again - collapse.
The one man who knows this more than any other is, of course, Nigel Farage. Faced with his party's best chance of winning a parliamentary seat in a decade - a byelection timed alongside the European elections when his salient issue dominated the press, in the wake of a Westminster corruption scandal and in a rural Tory-leaning constituency - he decided . . . not to stand.
Farage knows he's not leading a serious challenge. It's time the rest of us worked that out too.
James Ball is special projects editor at Guardian US
Document GRDN000020140522ea5m0001k
