{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3359"}
____
  
Business
Education is key to future British success
460 words
17 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
36
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
Is Britain a nation of entrepreneurs? Do we have the right environment to foster fast-growth companies? What is stopping us from creating the next Google or Facebook in the UK?
These were some of the questions addressed yesterday at the inaugural Growth Summit in London and in the report "Growth Britannia", which sets out the challenges and opportunities facing the next generation of small and medium-sized businesses.
The degree of consensus was immediately apparent, bridging the party political divide and encompassing both royalty and business.
Britain led the world in the Industrial Revolution and it can lead the world again, said Lord Young, the Prime Minister's enterprise adviser, who set up his first business in 1961.
Shadow Business Secretary Chuka Umunna, the son of a Nigerian immigrant, spoke of the "British Dream" and his belief that the UK is more entrepreneurial than the US.
Lord Bilimoria, who gave Cobra beer to Britain, said: "We have the most vibrant business culture in the world, an environment of aspiration".
And the Duke of York, who has launched a new award scheme to equip one million young people with essential digital skills, told of his faith in a new generation of entrepreneurs.
But a common theme was the shortcomings of the education system in responding to the demands of the modern business world.
Computer coding is the key to future prosperity yet one in five adults lack basic online skills; indeed, more than seven million have never been online.
It is estimated that in the current workforce there is a 750,000 shortfall of employees with basic digital know-how.
In schools, too, there are areas of concern.
Just 2pc of girls are taking A-level physics and a mere 8pc are taking mathematics.
But a wider issue highlighted by Martin McCourt, former head of Dyson, was that too many school-leavers have failed to master the basic communication skills needed in business.
Lord Young, who is compiling a report for 10 Downing Street on how the education system can better serve the needs of business, will doubtless be addressing the issue.
He believes the system is outmoded because it was designed for an era when most school-leavers ended up spending their entire careers with large corporate employers who valued conformity over originality. In today's world, where more than 95pc of firms have fewer than 10 staff, being a maverick is just as valuable.
That's certainly true and the next generation of entrepreneurs will look and sound different from those in previous generations. But the art of communication - whether in an analogue or digital world - will remain non-negotiable in businesses big and small.
Document DT00000020140517ea5h0007k
