{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2800"}
____
  
NEWS
Net migration soars over 200,000 despite David Cameron's pledge
By David Barrett Home Affairs Correspondent   
1,272 words
27 February 2014
17:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Official figures show a net flow of 212,000 migrants to Britain, up nearly 60,000 year-on-year, with a surge in arrivals from Romania and Bulgaria
Net migration has risen to its highest point since 2011 in a blow to the Government’s pledge to cut levels to the “tens of thousands" by the next general election.
The surge was partly driven by a huge increase in the number of Romanian and Bulgarian citizens coming to Britain, which jumped 166 per cent from 9,000 to 24,000 year-on-year.
The Office for National Statistics said estimates for the 12 months to the end of September revealed a net flow of 212,000 migrants to Britain, compared with 154,000 the previous year.
It now seems highly unlikely that David Cameron, the Prime Minister, and Theresa May, the Home Secretary, will be able to meet the net migration pledge.
Commentators said it was "game over" for the election promise while Nigel Farage, the UK Independence party (Ukip) leader said the figures showed "just how out of control" the government was on immigration.
The number of National Insurance numbers given to foreigners - an important indicator of immigration levels - showed a 19 per cent rise to 617,000 in 2013.
There were huge surges in the number of citizens coming to Britain to work from European Union countries which have been hardest hit by the economic crisis .
Data showed the number of Italians registering rose 66 per cent to 44,000, with other countries showing other large increases including Portugal (up 47 per cent, up to 30,000 people) and Spain (up 36 per cent to just under 52,000).
Poland also saw a large rise with 39 per cent more coming here last year, 111,000 compared with 80,000 in 2012.
Twitter: David Barrett - Ministers pledged to cut net migration to "tens of thousands" by next election. That pledge is now unlikely - even impossible - to meet
Mark Hilton, head of immigration policy at business membership organisation London First, said it was "game over" for the Government's migration target.
"What we need to be wary of is the Government trying to control future figures by further limiting the only number it has power over - non-EU migrants," he said.
"In the past this has hit both highly-skilled immigrants that we need, as well as foreign students, who are a huge economic asset - higher education is our eighth biggest export industry, valued at £8 billion."
Of the Romanian and Bulgarian immigrants, seven out of 10 said they were coming here to work and the rest to study.
The two countries joined the EU on January 1, 2007, and restrictions which had limited their citizens' access to the UK job market were lifted at the start of this year.
Against a backdrop of growing concerns of an influx of Romanians and Bulgarians to the UK, and a surge in popularity for Ukip, the Prime Minister last year unveiled a series of tough measures designed to clamp down on abuse of free movement between EU member states.
Interactive chart: Net migration, 2010-2013
Ukip's Mr Farage said: "These latest figures show just how out of control the Government is when it comes to controlling immigration in and out of the UK.
"It is utterly pointless setting immigration targets when you can't even decide who comes into this country.
"The Government's release of figures is merely for spin purposes to falsely reassure a voting public increasingly concerned with levels of migration into this country.
"But until we end the open door immigration policy with the EU and take back full control over our borders, nothing can really be done. It's all smoke and mirrors."
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of campaign group MigrationWatch UK, which has predicted the arrival of 50,000 Romanians and Bulgarians each year for the next five years, said: "The Government is succeeding in bringing down non-EU migration but they have been blown off course by a sharp increase of 66,000 migrants from the EU.
"The figures also show that net migration from Romania and Bulgaria was about 20,000 in the year to last September, even before the restrictions were lifted.
"We believe this confirms our estimate of 50,000 a year over the next five years."
The Prime Minister's official spokesman said cutting net migration to tens of thousands remained "absolutely the objective".
"We are putting in place what we believe are the right measures that go towards meeting that objective," he said.
"That is what we are going to work towards."
James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, highlighted aspects of the ONS figures which showed fewer people from outside the EU came to Britain last year.
"Our reforms have cut non-EU migration to its lowest level since 1998 and there are now 82,000 fewer people arriving annually from outside the EU than when this government came to power," he said.
"And overall figures are also well down from when we first came to government in 2010 - with nearly 70,000 fewer migrants coming to the UK.
"Numbers are down across the board in areas where we can control immigration, but arrivals from the EU have doubled in the last year.
"The Government is ensuring that our controls on accessing benefits and services, including the NHS and social housing, are among the tightest in Europe."
He added: "We cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants, so we are focusing on cutting out the abuse of free movement between EU member states and seeking to address the factors that drive European immigration to Britain.
"We are building an immigration system that is fair to British citizens and legitimate migrants, that is tough on those who abuse the system or flout the law, and that ensures people come to the UK for the right reasons - to work hard and contribute to our economy and society."
Datatable: National Insurance number registrations to foreign nationals 2013
Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said: "These figures show the Government's net migration target is in tatters, and their immigration policy is a mess.
"David Cameron promised, 'no ifs, no buts' to cut net migration to the tens of thousands, yet these figures show net migration has gone up and is now more than twice that figure.
“Only five months ago, Theresa May said that the Government had been 'so successful' they should 'get out there and shout about it.' There will be no shouting from Ministers today.
"This gap between promises and delivery, and between rhetoric and reality further undermines trust in the Government’s immigration policy."
Tim Finch, associate director for migration at centre-left think-tank the Institute for Public Policy Research, said: "The Government is pursuing a 'one club' immigration policy - to reduce the overall number of immigrants at all costs.
"These latest official figures show how, in an era of high international mobility and inter-connectedness, this is very difficult to achieve.
"Moreover, it makes little sense to try to drive down immigration across the board because some forms of migration are clearly beneficial to the UK economy, like foreign students and high skilled workers.
"So it is time to move away from an obsession with net migration and to take a more differentiated and sophisticated approach to managing migration and its impacts. Above all, the Government should focus on working harder to make sure that migrants integrate into the UK."
Document TELUK00020140324ea2r0048c
