{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1485"}
____
  
News
letters@the-sun.co.uk
454 words
14 March 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
49
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
The page where you tell Britain what you think
PEOPLE complain that jobseekers are allowed to have a holiday.
Being on benefits is a vicious depressing circle and the Jobcentre doesn't help. It's more a stick to whack you with while you're down.
And the same is true for the "Work Programme".
After a year of being whacked it is nice for one week to job-search with some different scenery.
DANIEL WRIGHT Nuneaton, Warks
ONE Direction should put their money where their mouths are.
The band, pictured, are saying fans should urge Chancellor George Osborne to continue with the overseas aid of £11billion.
We should let pop millionaires fund it instead.
DEREK SMITH Mansfield, Notts
HAVE all those who are quick to point out our fall down the world rankings for maths and other subjects visited a British school recently?
Pictures of schools in Asia show all the children are indigenous and presumably speak the same first language.
Many UK schools are very different, with numerous first languages. How can it be possible to keep up with other countries' rankings?
BRENDA EAGLES Doncaster
WHY should English people have to pay more for prescriptions.
From April we will have to fork out £8.05 — yet people in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland don't pay a penny.
EUGENE AUSTIN Coventry
I WATCHED BBC3's EDL Girls: Don't Call Me Racist in disbelief as they tried to convince viewers they were not racist. They hardly come across as a civilised group — up the pub drinking before a march then mouthing off like idiots.
MATT JOHNSON Bedford
THE reasons for youth and longterm unemployment are clear to me but not, it seems, to Cable, Clegg and Miliband.
Mass immigration and overly generous benefits are at the root of the problem.
Roll on the EU referendum.
GLENDA NICHOLLS Kenilworth, Warks
MY daughter works part-time to support herself and her son. But her benefits are being stopped as she is over the earning threshold — yet she doesn't do enough hours to qualify for working tax credits.
She got off her backside, works unsocial hours and yet they slap her in the face and tell her she is not doing enough.
LINDA GORE Oldham, Lancs
WHAT is the Government's policy on foreign fighters returning home?
Mr Cameron should stand firm.
We do not want them back here, radicalised and turning their weapons on us.
KEN BROWN Stoke-on-Trent
SO sorry to hear of Bob Crow's passing. I disagreed with many of his actions but at least Bob, pictured, was up front and put the welfare of his members first.
JOHN STACEY Reading, Berks
Document THESUN0020140314ea3e0005y
