{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"380"}
____
  
News
Even without Farage, Newark's Ukip activists believe their time has come
Michael Savage   
794 words
1 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
11
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip will select a candidate for the Newark by-election within days amid hopes that it can secure its first MP.
Nigel Farage disappointed supporters in the constituency yesterday by ruling himself out after having suggested that he would consider running. The party will interview and test a shortlist of candidates during the weekend and expects to reveal the identity of its candidate next Wednesday.
The poll remains a major headache for Downing Street. Ukip activists believe that they can snatch the seat despite the 16,000 majority secured for the Conservatives in the 2010 general election by Patrick Mercer.
The circumstances of the by-election provide the ingredients needed for an upset. An inquiry report due to be published today will say that Mr Mercer should be suspended from the Commons for six months over allegations that he asked parliamentary questions about Fiji in return for £4,000 from undercover journalists posing as lobbyists.
Mr Mercer, who resigned the Tory whip last year and announced on Tuesday that he was quitting as an MP, was filmed allegedly pledging to set up a parliamentary group supporting Fiji's request to be readmitted to the Commonwealth.
He has also apologised for being caught on camera calling an Israeli soldier a "bloody Jew".
His demise will chime with Ukip's message that the mainstream parties are in public life for themselves.
Mr Farage decided not to stand after claiming that he had no links to the east Midlands seat and did not want to "reinforce the impression that others have that Ukip is a one-man band". No date has been set for the by-election.
Roger Helmer, a local Ukip MEP and a former Tory, has been identified as a "class act" who could be the right man to win over Conservative voters. He was in Newark yesterday morning.
It is only a year since Ukip activists held the inaugural local party meeting at The Prince Rupert, a 15th-century real-ale pub in the town centre. Yet the party now sees Newark as a realistic battleground to secure its first MP.
Ian Robinson, 77, the local Ukip secretary, said the party could win without Mr Farage. "It is disappointing that Nigel is not going to run," he said. "But in all my 20 years in the party, we've never had a reception like we're getting now. Newark is not one of these shire county Conservative seats. It was marginal before Patrick Mercer won it and is not as solid as it looks."
The views of those lunching in The Prince Rupert yesterday suggested that Ukip could win wide support. "They may have a chance — this is not necessarily as safe a seat as it looks," said Ray Edwards, 68, a retired civil servant. He said he "might be tempted" to vote for Ukip. "It will depend on the candidate. There has been immigration here, so Ukip will succeed if it can nurture and capture those with concerns about it."
Even among some members of Newark's Conservative Club, support for the Tories has grown thin. John Duckett, a retired engineer, left the party when David Cameron won the leadership. He said he would vote for Ukip in the European election on May 22 but was torn about backing a Ukip candidate for Westminster.
"There is a lot of feeling that Europe is an undemocratic, corrupt, economically illiterate organisation, which you could say the metropolitan elite has used to change the country when we didn't want to be changed," he said.
"There is a feeling in the sticks that people's views have been ignored. You would need one hell of a swing [for a Ukip victory] and much will depend on the quality of their candidate. You need someone articulate."
? A Ukip donor has reiterated his claims that marital rape does not exist, love is impossible in gay relationships and women should be banned from wearing trousers.
Demetri Marchessini repeated his views, previously described as "unpalatable" by Ukip, on Channel 4 News. He gave the party a further £5,000 in December. "Once a woman accepts, she accepts," he said. "If you make love on Friday and make love Sunday, you can't say Saturday is rape." He said women wearing trousers "discouraged lovemaking". On homosexuals, he said: "There's no love only lust ... there is no such thing as fidelity in homosexual relationships. They just all go out looking for action." He added that African slaves who survived the trip to the US had a "better life in America and the Caribbean than they had in Africa". Tim Montgomerie, page 29 Leading article, page 30
Document T000000020140501ea51000ab
