{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2403"}
____
  
News
I agree with Nick. He's making a difference
Philip Collins   
859 words
15 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
18
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
By stopping the Tory Right, the Deputy Prime Minister should be applauded by all liberal voters
In Cultural Amnesia, his superb compendium of the horrors of ideology gone wrong, Clive James says one of the pithiest things ever said about the purpose of politics. Democracy, he points out, is better justified by what it prevents than what it does.
Though an untrammelled Tory government would hardly have added to the worst that has been said and done, to prevent excess is a noble democratic cause. This is all the more true when the electorate delivered a result, as it did in 2010, which offered no decisive mandate to anyone. Though Labour clearly lost the election, the Conservatives were unable to win. Hence, it would be an illegitimate reading of the result to offer the largest party the full panoply of democratic power. Moderation and dilution was what the electorate, collectively, demanded.
It is therefore a serious defence of Nick Clegg and the Liberal Democrats to commend them for things that would have happened had they not been there. It is in the nature of things that have not happened that we often do not know what they are.
The siren voices of the Tory Right though, tell the tale. They complain, as if the electorate had granted them a full victory, that the Lib Dems have prevented them from doing what Tories are born to do. The list of complaints looks to me like a prospectus of liberal triumph and a record of negative capability to be proud of. Without the Lib Dems, say the malcontents, the government would have slashed green taxes harder. It would have made more progress towards abolishing human rights legislation. It would have had an even tougher stance on immigration, and the welfare cuts would have been even more severe. Tax cuts for the wealthy would, finally, have been more generous.
In which case, all hail the Liberal Democrats. During the debate on the European Union with Nigel Farage, it struck me that Nick Clegg had a clearer and more coherent thread to his politics than any of the other leaders, indeed any other senior politician. Live on television, at prime time, he was making a liberal case for immigration, open markets and the importance of the European Union. They were hardly popular causes and, for that reason, he was deemed to have "lost" the debate. Mr Clegg was, in fact, putting exactly the case that has been urged on him by Jeremy Browne in his fine new book Race Plan. Maybe Mr Browne was growing his beard while his leader was expounding the views they share to an ungrateful nation.
This liberal conviction is evident in what the coalition has done as well as what it has not. It was notable that, in his Budget speech, George Osborne made a lot of the Liberal Democrat policy of raising the threshold at which people pay income tax to £12,500. The instinct behind this policy is the liberal desire that people should keep more of the money they earn. More money has been channelled to poorer children via the premium offered to schools in disadvantaged areas. The Green Investment Bank awaits a chancellor who believes in it but it could yet become a significant reform. The welfare state in Britain used to depart with the health visitor and not come back into view until primary school. The Liberal Democrat emphasis on childcare has come out of Mr Clegg's politically inexpedient but intellectually admirable emphasis on making social mobility an index of coalition success.
In reward for all of this the Liberal Democrats enjoy an opinion poll rating of 7 per cent. It is true that Mr Clegg's party made errors in office. It did not negotiate the coalition well. Mr Clegg should have taken a spending department and it was a mistake, learnt the hard way, in the Alternative Vote referendum and the House of Lords shambles, to visit the party's obsession with constitutional reform on an uninterested country. And the apostasy on tuition fees was calamitous politically, as the correct policy often is.
Yet for all that, Mr Clegg's position is not precarious. One of his main rivals. Vince Cable, has been diminished by office and the other, Chris Huhne, has had a spell in jail and now writes for The Guardian. It is not so long ago that the party sacked its leader for looking too old, and not long before that it sacked his predecessor for turning up to a press conference tired and emotional. That's without recalling the glory days when Jeremy Thorpe appeared in a court case involving a shot dog and a gay male model.
Do you know how Nick Clegg feels when he thinks about all that lot? He feels like Deputy Prime Minister. And as neither of the two main parties look capable of winning outright, there is every chance that Deputy Prime Minister is just where he will stay.
Despite low ratings Clegg may stay British politics' kingmaker
Document T000000020140415ea4f00029
