{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1453"}
____
  
NEWS
Lord Ashcroft: Conservatives must stop going on about Europe; The former Conservative donor says that David Cameron can take advantage of Ed Miliband's indecision over an EU referendum put must not put Europe 'front and centre' of their election campaign
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
623 words
13 March 2014
08:38
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Tories can take advantage of Labour’s failure to offer an EU referendum but only if they stop going on about Europe, the former Conservative donor Lord Ashcroft has said
Instead the party must put issues that really matter to the electorate, such as jobs and the economy, at the heart of their campaign for the next election, the Conservative grandee has argued.
Mr Miliband, the Labour leader, has faced a revolt over his decision to effectively rule out holding an in-out referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU if he become Prime Minister.
MPs and donors said the Labour leader’s policy that he will only countenance a referendum if the UK decided to hand more powers to Brussels and his refusal to match David Cameron’s pledge of a guaranteed vote in 2017 was “confusing" and a “shoddy compromise".
Lord Ashcroft said David Cameron can take advantage of this indecision and use his party’s “distinctive policy" of a promised referendum by telling Eurosceptic voters that only a Tory government will offer a guaranteed choice on Europe but that this approach will only win over those prospective Ukip voters who are motivated by Britain’s membership to the European Union.
Most voters who are still "open to persuasion", he said, care about things like the economy, jobs and public services more and putting a referendum on Europe “front and centre" of the 2015 Conservative Party campaign would simply show that the party is “out-of touch".
In his first conference speech as leader in 2006, Mr Cameron conceded that the party had alienated voters by "banging on" about Europe and tax cuts. However, despite that claim he has faced criticism for allowing the issue to dominate his time in office.
In an article for Conservative Home Mr Ashcroft said: “Used intelligently, the Conservatives’ distinctive policy can win it votes. The party can now say quite unambiguously to Eurosceptic voters that only a Tory government will guarantee the in-out referendum they want. For those UKIP voters mainly motivated by Europe and who are still open to persuasion, this is a powerful point.
“But for others (that is to say, for most people) it is not. In at least two recent elections the Conservatives have campaigned on issues selected because they enthused their supporters and set them apart from Labour – saving the pound in 2001, and immigration, immigration, immigration in 2005 – and history records the results.
“By putting the referendum pledge at the front and centre of its 2015 campaign the Conservative Party would not only be missing the chance to talk about the things most voters care about more, like the economy, jobs and public services. It would also, as far as these voters are concerned, be proving again the out-of-touchness (outness of touch?) of which it has for so long been accused."
Mr Ashcroft made his comments as a YouGov poll for the Sun showed the Ed Miliband’s decision to rule out an EU referendum did not go down well with the public.
According to the poll 50 per cent of people did not agree with his policy with just 32 per cent agreeing. Almost twice as many people thought it was a “cowardly" decision as opposed to a “bold" one.
Of those polled 43 per cent said that the Labour leader should have matched David Cameron’s promise to hold a referendum regardless of future circumstances.
Document TELUK00020140313ea3d002pg
