{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2090"}
____
  
News
My heart tells me to sulk at the EU elections but my head says vote
CAMILLA CAVENDISH   
1,298 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
25
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Here it comes, this week's big decision. Will you be voting in the European Union elections on Thursday or will you sulk? Sulking is tempting, I admit. "Don't vote, it only encourages them" feels especially apt when the ballot papers will list MEPs we've never heard of for a parliament that is obsessed with building its own power, in an EU that tells countries to vote again if they vote the wrong way. Five years ago, two-thirds of us sulked. In the rest of the continent fewer than half turned out to vote. If your area doesn't have local council elections this week you have even less incentive to show up.
Yet I feel embarrassed. I was brought up to regard voting as a sacred right. Yes, the EU's version of democracy is a sham. Yes, there is a gulf between our pencil mark on the ballot paper and what actually happens in Brussels and Strasbourg. But it's hard to feel that apathy can be a grown-up choice. UKIP, of course, offers a chance to both sulk and vote, to sulk actively rather than silently, to register your contempt at the ballot box by voting for people who despise the institution in which they roost. It's admirably ballsy in one way. Although it doesn't feel quite right to me for someone to pocket an MEP's salary and expenses, then opt out of so much while others slog away on committees.
I recently chaired a debate between a UKIP, a Green, a Labour, a Liberal Democrat and a Tory MEP. I was taken aback by the shallowness of the first two and the dedication and knowledge of the others. However much I dislike the machine, I would rather have grown-ups trying to curb its worst excesses while it still rumbles on.
I'm not against protest votes. I, along with 15% of Britons who voted, backed the Greens in the 1989 EU election. Our little band may even have helped to bolster European environmentalists. Though now, with the Greens stuck in a 1970s groove, I'd probably have more impact on EU environmental policy by voting Lib Dem.
Leave that aside. My chief concern on Thursday, like many Brits, is to see the EU reform and return power to member states. And if it's too mulish to do that, I want the option to get out. Those who want to kick the government will probably vote Labour. Those who want to spit on the whole Westminster elite will vote UKIP or Green. Those pro-EU will vote Lib Dem.
It's less clear how to have any impact on the EU itself. To help make up my mind I rang a number of respected academics. This didn't go terribly well. The first one I spoke to said sheepishly that he is hoping to avoid having to vote by going into hospital for a routine operation. If the op is cancelled, he said, he may simply have to lie to colleagues about how he voted.
Professor Vernon Bogdanor, my old politics tutor, was more helpful. If the combined total of the UKIP and Conservative vote on Thursday is more than 50%, he thinks Ed Miliband will come under sustained pressure to promise the referendum that he has so far refused to offer.
The game would change if Labour were also offering a referendum. Of the three conventional parties only the Conservatives are currently promising a vote on Europe and they can't deliver this while they are reliant on Lib Dem support. David Cameron has promised a referendum in 2017, by which time it may be clearer what kind of Europe we would be in or out of. But that referendum depends on him winning a majority in the general election.
Some people think Cameron will renege. I don't. For one thing it would be suicidal in a party that is far more Eurosceptic now than it was during Maastricht. Tony Blair got away with breaking his promise to hold a vote on the Lisbon treaty only because Labour is less Eurosceptic.
What about reform? Would a vote for UKIP strengthen or weaken Cameron's hand in his attempts to negotiate a better deal for Britain? UKIP supporters say a big vote for it will show our European partners that we are deadly serious about exit. Some Conservatives fear that a strong showing by UKIP and a poor showing by the Tories will limit Cameron's room for manoeuvre, as his backbenchers will stop him making any concessions. There's probably some truth in both positions.
For many voters, it must be said, immigration looms larger than any other issue, as UKIP shows with its posters. But again the only realistic hope of restricting benefits in the next three years is for British politicians to engage effectively.
EU-watchers believe this election is uniquely important because MEPs will be attempting to choose the new president of the EU Commission for the first time. The five presidential candidates are doing television debates and chats in an effort to "bring Europe closer to the people". The problem is that all of them are shades of grey: insiders, centralisers, variations on a theme that most Brits don't like.
To make matters worse, the individual MEP you elect may not have any impact on the presidency. If you vote Labour, your MEP will be part of the group that backs Germany's Martin Schulz, the leader of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats. But if you were to fall for the charms of Luxembourg's Jean-Claude Juncker, the head of the European People's party, you can't vote for him; the Conservative party is not in his centre-right bloc.
To be honest, the sad spectacle of has-beens rattling around in presidential battle buses leaves me praying that the heads of governments will overrule the MEPs and pick a better candidate. If we want our national parliaments to have more power, we should want the EU parliament to have less.
Should we then abstain? Alan Sked, professor of international history at the London School of Economics and the founder of UKIP, thinks so.
"UKIP has no reason at all to be in the European parliament," he said. "Its MEPs have mostly been incompetents or charlatans who play no constructive part in the parliament. Every true democrat should shame the system by staying at home and registering their disgust."
Does he think the Eurocrats will actually notice? "Yes. The whole legitimacy of the EU is now in question, especially if the percentage falls again."
This is the argument for the silent sulk. It has never worked before: I don't recall Eurocrats shuddering at the British silence in 2009. But perhaps it might this time, with polls showing unprecedented cynicism across the continent and the landscape likely to be littered with populist protest parties after Thursday.
The problem is that I still cling on to my belief that I ought to exercise my right to vote. I think the grown-up thing to do will be to vote and to cast a vote that I won't subsequently feel that I have to lie about. But if I suddenly found that I had an all-day appointment on Thursday, I can't pretend I'd be sorry to get off the hook.
camilla.cavendish@sunday-times.co.uk
YES, I FEEL EMBARRASSED. YES, THE EU'S VERSION OF DEMOCRACY IS A SHAM. BUT IT'S HARD TO FEEL THAT APATHY CAN BE A GROWN-UP CHOICE
Document ST00000020140518ea5i000m9
