{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2830"}
____
  
News
Soaring migration leaves Cameron pledge in tatters
Macer Hall   
766 words
28 February 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
4,5
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
DAVID Cameron's drive to cut immigration suffered a huge blow yesterday when official figures showed an influx of 212,000 migrants in a year.
The total was a 38 per cent increase compared with the previous 12 months and was the result of a doubling in the number of arrivals from European Union nations.
Around 24,000 also came from Romania and Bulgaria in the run-up to the relaxation of visa restrictions on its citizens from the beginning of this year.
The figures left the Prime Minister's commitment to reduce net immigration to the "tens of thousands" by next year's general election in tatters.
Pointless Tory MP Nigel Mills, who has been campaigning for measures to cut EU migration to the UK, said last night: "These numbers are going the wrong way and it is EU migration that is causing the rise.
"We are a long way off the target we set.
"We either have to take some action to deal with it or scrap the target because it is unsustainable."
Figures in the Office for National Statistics's quarterly migration report showed that a total of 532,000 migrants came to the UK during the 12-month period up to September last year. Around 320,000 people left Britain during the same period. A total of 209,000 of the newcomers who arrived in the 12-month period were citizens of EU countries.
Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: "These latest figures show just what a failure the Government has been when it comes to controlling immigration into the UK.
"It is utterly pointless setting immigration targets when you can't even decide who comes into this country.
"Until we end the open door immigration policy with the EU and take back full control over our borders nothing can really be done."
Experts confirmed that the immigration surge will mean the Government will almost certainly miss the target set by the Prime Minister and Home Secretary Theresa May.
Scott Blinder, director of the Migration Observatory think tank, said: "This is clearly challenging news for the Government.
"The key changes in this report are to EU migration - an area over which immigration policy has less direct influence. This highlights the fact that the net migration target is not something that can be delivered purely through policy but relies on other trends as well."
Mark Hilton, head of immigration policy at business organisation London First, said the figures showed it was "game over" for the Government's migration target.
Ministers admitted that a surge in EU immigration had driven up the numbers.
Immigration Minister James Brokenshire said: "Our reforms have cut non-EU migration to its lowest level since 1998 and there are now 82,000 fewer people arriving annually from outside the EU than when this Government came to power.
"And overall figures are also well down from when we first came to Government in 2010 - with nearly 70,000 fewer migrants coming to the UK.
"Numbers are down across the board in areas where we can control immigration but arrivals from the EU have doubled in the last year.
"The Government is ensuring that our controls on accessing benefits and services, including the NHS and social housing, are among the tightest in Europe.
"We cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants, so we are focusing on cutting out the abuse of free movement between EU member states and seeking to address the factors that drive European immigration to Britain. "We are building an immigration system that is fair to British citizens and legitimate migrants, that is tough on those who abuse the system or flout the law, and that ensures people come to the UK for the right reasons - to work hard and contribute to our economy and society."
Downing Street officials insisted the Government was still committed to the target.
The Prime Minister's official spokesman said: "That is absolutely the objective and we are going to very much keep working towards that.
"We are putting in place what we believe are the right measures that go towards meeting that objective."
OpiniOn: page 12
q Should Britain close its borders to migrants TODAY? Yes: 0901 792 5308 nO: 0901 792 5309 Yes text DXFRIYES to 86611 no text DXFRINO to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight.
Document THEEXP0020140228ea2s0004w
