{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2832"}
____
  
News
...AND MERKEL FAILS TO BACK HIS FIGHT FOR NEW DEAL WITH BRUSSELS
Macer Hall   
386 words
28 February 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
4
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
ANGELA Merkel begged Britain to stay in the European Union yesterday while warning there will be no "fundamental reform" of the Brussels bureaucracy.
The German Chancellor was given a red-carpet welcome on her visit to London, having talks in Downing Street with David Cameron and tea with the Queen at Buckingham Palace.
One member of the German press described her treatment as fit for "the Queen of Europe".
But in a speech to MPs and peers at Westminster, Mrs Merkel lowered expectations that she will help the Prime Minister in his push for a new EU membership deal for the UK.
She said: "Some expect my speech to pave the way for a fundamental reform of the European architecture which will satisfy all kinds of alleged or actual British wishes. I am afraid they are in for a disappointment."
She praised Britain as a "strong ally" in the effort to improve the EU, saying: "We need a strong United Kingdom with a strong voice inside the European Union."
And she also paid tribute to Britain's losses in the two world wars, declaring: "I bow my head before the victims of these horrible wars. What would have become of Europe if the people of your country had not put up such courageous resistance?" Mr Cameron and Mrs Merkel held talks over a lunch later and were pictured chatting on the sofa in his Downing Street flat.
She then also acknowledged concern about immigration caused by EU freedom of movement rules.
Mrs Merkel said: "No country in Europe will be able to withstand such an onslaught, because we have very different social security systems.
"We can only have the same level of social security if we try to generate growth and jobs, but not by having immigration into social systems.
"That is just as much of a headache for us in Germany."
Mr Cameron said: "Angela and I both want to see change in Europe and we both believe change is possible."
But Tory backbencher John Baron said: "Mrs Merkel made it clear the direction of travel is 'more Europe'. Yet we need less regulation if we are going to generate greater prosperity. The EU needs to wake up to this."
Document THEEXP0020140228ea2s00051
