{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1920"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
American lessons on benefit tourism
Frederick Forsyth   
515 words
7 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
13
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
PERSONALLY I found the smoochathon last week between David Cameron and Angela Merkel pretty heavy going. Rather like an eager puppy trying to persuade a great big rottweiler to make space in the fireside basket. Lots of friendly licking but no hint that the bigger beast was going to tolerate any change to the shape of the basket.
Except in one area. The German Chancellor agreed that she and her people had had enough of immigrants wafting in and heading straight for the generous tap of the social security system, enriched by the taxes of hardworking Germans and Merkel voters.
Now it happens that here also, whenever the polls are taken on what really gets up people's noses, whether Tory, Labour or Lib Dem voters, it is the same issue at number one. Right across the board. So… might there be a solution? The German Chancellor made plain she would not tolerate any altering of the basic law of the EU: that any citizen of the EU may travel anywhere in the EU and settle down. But I heard it suggested the day after Frau Merkel left that the law might be elastic enough to decree that social security benefits only apply to those in legal gainful employment. That is to say not tourists, not overstaying students, not family visitors. But how to prove it? The Americans are also inundated with sneak-ins wanting to settle down and get a job. They respond with the Green Card system. If you have a Green Card you can work and have access to benefits. Without one you are illegal if you try to get a job - and even if you employ such a person.
It is not up to the authorities to prove you do not have one, it is up to the immigrant to prove it by carrying the Green Card at all times. It counts as a stay-visa and a work permit.
So how do you get one? You apply before arriving (there are agencies that handle the paperwork).
If you are young, healthy, educated, qualified, in funds or with specialist knowledge some employer will offer a job and issue the required letter. If not (in America) you are on a tourist or student visa with strict limits.
INSIDE the EU we could not stop them coming (EU law) but we might be able to stop them dipping straight into the honeypot without proof of a taxliable job. At the moment no one in officialdom has a clue who they are, where they come from, when, what they do or where they live. And human rights do not prevent them lying. But a card is a card. No card? We can't send you back but you cannot dip the hand into our social security benefits.
It might work but would take a lot of steely political will. I do not see that coming out of forelocktugging Whitehall but Merkel might stand up to the European Commission and its smirking president Manuel Barroso.
Document THEEXP0020140307ea3700026
