{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1918"}
____
  
News
Lib Dems: Give more benefits to asylum seekers
Macer Hall   
513 words
7 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Eire
2
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
THE Lib Dems are to demand an urgent increase in benefits paid to asylums seekers.
A party policy document also argues that restrictions on asylum seekers taking jobs should be relaxed.
It alleges the thousands of claimants for refugee status awaiting a decision on whether or not they can stay in the UK are becoming "increasingly worse off" under the current rules.
The Lib Dem demand for more cash for migrants provoked anger last night and fuelled the growing row between the party and its Tory Coalition partners.
The document, called Making Migration Work for Britain, is to be discussed at the Lib Dems' spring conference in York this weekend.
It was drawn up by a committee of senior party members chaired by MP and former Lib Dem minister Sir Andrew Stunell.
It says the current level of benefit payments for asylum seekers "has not risen in line with inflation or other benefits since 2008, causing asylum seekers to be increasingly worse off".
It adds: "Uprating asylum benefits would allow asylum seekers a modest, but more humane, subsistence in the UK."
It went on to call for asylum seekers' handouts to be uprated regularly in the same way as other benefits.
Under current immigration rules, asylum seekers cannot legally undertake paid employment. But the Lib Dems also want the rules changed "so that asylum seekers can better support themselves, while contributing to the public purse."
It says the Liberal Democrats would make all working age asylum seekers look for work if their case has not been resolved within six months.
The document says its plans are to ensure that asylum seekers are "kept from destitution".
Tory MP Henry Smith said last night: "It's astonishing that when Conservatives are fixing Britain's benefits system to make work pay the Lib Dems are now proposing 'uprating' benefits for asylum seekers."
Robert Oxley, of the Tax–Payers' Alliance, said: "At a time when taxpayers themselves will likely have not seen a rise in their wages in a long time, it would be better in the long–term to link benefits to average earnings."
OPINION: PAGE 12
COALITION WAR OVER IMMIGRATION
THE Tories and Lib Dems clashed over immigration last night as a Whitehall report showed that mass migration to the UK does affect British workers.
Immigration minister James Brokenshire rebuked Lib Dem Business Secretary Vince Cable after he said rising immigration was "good news" for the UK.
It came as Government analysis concluded that migrant workers replaced Britons in jobs during the economic downturn.
Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg defended Mr Cable saying the Tory argument was based on "myths".
Should asylum seekers be given qmore benefits? Yes: 0901 792 5308 No: 0901 792 5309 Yes text DXFRIYES to 86611 No text DXFRINO to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight.
Document THEEXP0020140307ea370000i
