{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3461"}
____
  
NEWS
Ukip posters are 'hard-hitting reflection of reality', says Nigel Farage, as party pledges to spend £3m on Euro elections
By Christopher Hope and Matthew Holehouse   
839 words
22 April 2014
17:47
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage has defended a new immigration-centred poster UK Independence Party campaign as 'a hard-hitting reflection of reality' after it was attacked as 'racist' by some of his Labour opponents
Nigel Farage has defended a new immigration-centred poster UK Independence Party campaign as “a hard-hitting reflection of reality” after it was attacked as “racist” by some of his Labour opponents.
The anti-European Union party is using a £1.5 million donation from millionaire businessman Paul Sykes to launch its biggest-ever publicity drive on Tuesday ahead of next month’s European Parliament elections.
The party said that it hoped to more than double its spending to £3million on the Euro elections, compared to £1.3million in the last Euro elections in 2009 according to Electoral Commission records.
The sums set to be spent by Ukip dwarf the £2.5 million and £2.3 million spent by the Conservatives and Labour respectively on the same elections in 2009, as the archly Euro-sceptic party tries to win its ever national election.
Video courtesy: ITV Daybreak
The posters – which will be displayed at hundreds of billboard sites - carry stark warnings that “British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour” and that 26 million unemployed people across Europe are “after” British jobs.
Under the slogan “take back control of our country”, others complain that 75 per cent of British laws are made in Brussels and that UK taxpayers fund the “celebrity lifestyle” of EU bureaucrats.
Ukip’s opponents compared the immigration posters with those used in the past by the far-right British National Party.
Labour MP Mike Gapes said they were “racist” and appealed to “all decent British Commonwealth and EU citizens” to register to vote in May’s polls.
But Mr Farage, the leader of the party which is tipped to push the Conservatives into third place and perhaps win the election outright, dismissed the concerns of the “chattering classes”.
“These posters are a hard-hitting reflection of reality as it is experienced by millions of British people struggling to earn a living outside the Westminster bubble,” he said.
“Are we going to ruffle a few feathers among the chattering classes? Yes. Are we bothered about that? Not in the slightest.
“Ukip is hugely grateful to Paul Sykes for his magnificent contribution to the great cause of restoring Britain’s ability to be a self-governing nation. The political earthquake I have spoken of is on its way.”
Writing in The Telegraph on Tuesday, Mr Sykes said he would do “whatever it takes to help Nigel Farage’s Ukip emerge the winner” in the Euro elections.
He says: “It will be hard-hitting to capture public attention. But its real purpose is to show the British people just how many of their democratic rights and powers successive governments have quietly smuggled away to Brussels.
“The time has come to take back control of our country and the right to govern ourselves. May 22 is our chance to catch a tide that can restore our freedoms and carry us forward to a glorious new chapter in our nation’s history.”
Mr Sykes says that opening the borders to EU migrants was a “cruel and heartless act because competition from people from much poorer countries” to force down the wages of British workers.
He adds: “I have promised to do whatever it takes to help Nigel Farage’s Ukip emerge the winner. I want to help Nigel deliver what he calls a “political earthquake” next month.
“So I am supporting the biggest advertising campaign in the party’s history to bring home to the British people what is at stake.
“The European elections are the most important for many years. We have the chance to support a party – Ukip - that represents a complete break with the past.”
An ICM poll at the weekend forecast Ukip will win 27 per cent of the vote at the European Parliament elections, behind Labour on 30 per cent.
The Tories were placed third on 22 per cent with the Liberal Democrats a distant fourth on 8 per cent.
Writing on The Guardian’s website, Nick Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister and Liberal Democrat leader, criticised Mr Farage, has been an MEP since 1999, as “every bit the professional politician he enthusiastically reviles”.
He said: “More importantly, there is nothing remotely new about his party’s ambitions. Ukip are simply the fresh face of a longstanding Eurosceptic establishment, supported by many in the Conservative party and significant parts of our press.”
Mr Clegg also said that he would be happy to hold another in/out television debate with Mr Farage, despite polls suggesting he lost debates last month and this month.
He said: “I would meet the Ukip leader in front of the cameras every day between now and polling day if I could.”
Document TELUK00020140421ea4l003pe
