{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"3590"}
____
  
News
Cameron aims to get close to Market with immigration talks
TIM ROSS   
821 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
4
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
DAVID CAMERON will open talks on overhauling European immigration rules with Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, during her official visit to Britain this week.
The Prime Minister is seeking to build an alliance of "like-minded countries" that are willing to reform the rules on "free movement" of people inside the European Union.
His aides hope that Mrs Merkel, leader of the most powerful country in the EU, will offer some support for his aims during her one-day trip to London on Thursday.
In a sign of how important the chancellor is to British hopes of reforming the EU, she is being given the rare honour of addressing both Houses of Parliament in the ornate Royal Gallery in the House of Lords, before taking lunch at No10 and having tea with the Queen.
Her visit is being seen as evidence of the increasingly close alliance between the chancellor and Mr Cameron. In a further sign of the growing ties between the two leaders, the Prime Minister will travel to Germany to co-host a trade fair with Mrs Merkel next month, at her invitation.
Immigration is likely to be the most controversial topic for discussion over lunch in Downing Street, as Mr Cameron seeks her support for a tougher line in an attempt to pacify his Eurosceptic MPs and neutralise the threat to the Conservatives from the UK Independence Party.
"We are trying to get a group of like-minded countries together to do some specific work on what the options would be to tighten the rules," a government source said. "Merkel's visit is an opportunity to start those discussions."
Sources said talks on reforming European free movement rules would focus on concerns over "benefits abuse" by EU migrants and the need for stronger transitional controls on immigration from new member states.
Mr Cameron has called for sweeping reforms to the EU's founding principle of "free movement", under which citizens are able to move within the EU to work without the need for a visa.
Britain has raised concerns, with a number of countries that the current rules are open to abuse, allowing people to travel to the UK simply to claim benefits.
The European Commission has reacted furiously to Mr Cameron's suggestion that limits should be placed on free movement rights, accusing the UK of becoming a "nasty" country. Without German support, any change to the current rules on EU migration would be impossible.
British sources suggested they were hopeful that Mrs Merkel, who is also under pressure over immigration domestically, would show her willingness to support tighter rules on when migrants can claim benefits. She is believed to be ready to consider Mr Cameron's suggestion that stronger "transitional controls" on migration should be introduced when a country joins the EU.
The Prime Minister is expected to urge her to back the idea that citizens from new member states should not in future be able to move to other countries for work until certain conditions have been met, to avoid an influx of cheap labour.
Fears were raised that the lifting of transitional controls for Romanian and Bulgarian citizens at the beginning of this year would result in thousands of people coming to Britain looking for work.
Figures last week suggested that Romanians and Bulgarians took one in 10 new jobs in 2013, while the number living in Britain rose 42 per cent in a year to 144,000 people.
During her visit, Mrs Merkel is expected to meet Nick Clegg, the pro-European Deputy Prime Minister, and Ed Miliband, the Labour leader.
The discussions at No10 are expected to be the most "informal" part of her trip, as the two leaders know each other well and have built up a rapport. Mr Cameron and his family were the personal guests of Mrs Merkel last year, staying at the 18th century country castle, Schloss Meseberg.
She stayed at Chequers, the Prime Minister's country residence, in 2010.
The agenda for lunch will include the evolving situation in Ukraine, as well as wider reforms to the EU, such as improving competitiveness and new measures to "repatriate" powers from Brussels to individual member states.
Mr Cameron has promised to negotiate a new deal for Britain's membership of the EU and put the results to a national vote in a referendum on whether to remain in the EU, if the Conservatives win next year's election.
British sources hope Mrs Merkel will publicly embrace his reformist agenda during a planned press conference at No10, before she travels to Buckingham Palace.
Her most challenging task on the day may be to remain standing for her address to the assembled MPs and peers in Parliament's Royal Gallery. Mrs Merkel is still using crutches after fracturing her pelvis in a skiing accident in Switzerland last month.
Document STEL000020140223ea2n0008p
