{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"2105"}
____
  
News; Opinion; Columns
These weird Euro elections are the sunset of democracy
689 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
3; National
24
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
verything is weird about this week's Euro-election, and nothing weirder than the possibility that the party that comes top of the poll will be one that hasn't got a single seat in Parliament. Our other parliament, in Brussels and Strasbourg, plays an important part in producing a huge proportion of the laws we must all obey. Yet on Thursday we shall only be choosing a bunch of unknown nonentities to represent us there, commanding just 9 per cent of the votes that can pass or reject those laws - and, hardly surprisingly, the majority of the British electorate will not even bother to turn out to vote for something they don't begin to understand.
We look askance at what the major parties tell us this election is all about. Mr Miliband tells us we should vote for him because he will freeze energy prices, which he has done more than anyone to put up; Mr Clegg tells us we should vote for him, because the Lib Dems are the only party that will keep us in the EU; Mr Cameron tells us that his is the only party that will give us the chance to vote in a referendum to leave it, although he says there is no way he could ever support a vote for us getting out.
The central figure of this campaign has been Nigel Farage, which is why the press and the media have devoted so much coverage to vilifying him. I go back a long way with Mr Farage. We have often spoken on platforms together since 1994, when he was already the star performer for a Ukip that had barely got off the ground. Just before the 1997 election, he invited me to give the keynote speech at Ukip's first national conference. In 1999, I accompanied him to Strasbourg, shortly after his election as one of the party's first three MEPs, to report on just what a strange, unreal madhouse the European Parliament was, housed in a building that was like a cross between a Kafka novel and a Fritz Lang film.
But if one issue has dominated this present, equally unreal campaign, it has been that symbolised in Ukip's election leaflet, showing a beaming Mr Farage under the headline: "Our politicians have allowed open-door immigration - Only Ukip Will Take Back Control." This is as empty a pledge as Mr Cameron's about that 2017 referendum, which can never happen. There is no way Ukip or anyone else can take back control of our borders so long as we wish to continue trading with the EU's single market, with which our "open-door" policy is as inextricably linked as it is with our belonging to the Council of Europe, the UN and much else. The only way Britain could regain control over immigration would be to break every kind of international agreement, and to slam the door on the world.
It is equally disturbing that a party founded on a desire to extricate us from the EU should have no properly workedout policy for how this could be done. Ask Ukip what are the practical steps whereby we could achieve a successful exit from the EU, and the answer is little more than a blank stare and empty platitudes.
The underlying reason, of course, why Ukip is likely to do well this week is that it is the only way in which we can express our anger and contempt for the entire political class, which we feel has betrayed us, lost in its bubble of trivial and meaningless make-believe. It is for that reason alone that, joining so many others across Europe flocking to support EUsceptic parties, I will vote for them. But I shall do so well aware that this is only a gesture - all that is left to us as we see what remains of our democracy gurgling further down the plughole, and in the sad but sure knowledge that where there is no vision, the people must eventually perish.
Document STEL000020140518ea5i000ab
