{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"883"}
____
  
Observer Review Books Pages
The New Review: Books: FICTION: When the American Dream sours: Family Life Akhil Sharma Faber & Faber pounds 14.99, pp224
Sukhdev Sandhu   
681 words
4 May 2014
The Observer
OB
35
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
Birju Mishra was the chosen one. The elder son of a Delhi couple who had moved to New York at the end of the 1970s, he was diligent and dutiful, studied hard, bagged a place at an elite school. But he wasn't just another Asian swot or nerdy immigrant. He liked sport. He even had a girlfriend (a Korean one at that). His promise and potential matched those of America itself. His success appeared to prove that the American Dream was no chimera. Then one day he dived into a swimming pool and hit his head. At once, his glistening future was over.
Akhil Sharma's Family Life is a delicate and often moving work of palliative poetics, based on a calamity that befell his own brother, that documents the impact of Birju's accident on the people around him. As he lies stricken and unable to communicate, his younger brother Ajay, through whose eyes the novel is narrated, prays so hard his gums hurt, is sent out of class by insensitive schoolteachers when he starts crying, concocts elaborate stories about Birju's brilliance. His father takes to drink.
Anyone who has ever had the misfortune to spend long stretches in hospital waiting - possibly in vain - for a loved one to recover, or had to deal with the high costs and frustrations of finding a nursing home for those they cherish, will recognise and perhaps even take solace from Sharma's account of how the Mishras coped after their son's accident. There is both patience and forensic rigour in the way Sharma itemises Birju's convulsions, droolings, seizures, stiffenings, sweating, vomiting.
There's also understated comedy in those sections where Birju becomes a kind of pilgrimage site for the growing south Asian population. Descending upon the Mishra household are travel agents, petroleum engineers and sweetshop owners who think they can heal the young man; pious nationalists who celebrate Mrs Mishra's care for her son as an example of how Asians are as devoted and family-oriented as Americans are selfish; holy men and hucksters. This isn't all bad - the Mishras get company and free dinners - but it also means they're barely one step up from being a freak show. The outsiders are "like tourists visiting a temple to see an exorcism".
It's been 14 years since the publication of An Obedient Father, Sharma's only other novel. Family Life has been whittled down from more than 7,000 pages: he has chiselled and scraped his prose rigorously, shaving all traces of ostentation or finery to leave it as clean and functional as a new hospital ward.
Another, perhaps more adventurous writer would have aspired to render the chaos and volatility in the Mishra family's lives in more vagrant language and syntax. A more ruthless editor would have urged him to cut the chapter in which Ajay reflects rather ponderously on the art of writing. ("As I kept reading Hemingway, who seemed to so value suffering in silence, I began to see my family's pain as belonging in a story.")
The longer Family Life goes on the more it resembles a coming-of-age story with Ajay getting into scraps at school, learning the art of wooing young women, and coming to see his brave, broken-hearted parents in a new light.
A lot of drama, perhaps too much, gets compressed into a short space. But the novel is mostly involving, far removed from the sobby cliches of the misery memoir, and, let's hope, a taster for future fictions in which Sharma adroitly continues puncturing the myth of south Asians in America being a unified and model minority.
To buy Family Life for pounds 11.99 with free UK p&p call 0330 333 6846 or go to guardianbookshop.co.uk
Captions:
Akhil Sharma has finely chiselled his prose in Family Life, discarding all ostentation.
Document OB00000020140504ea540003s
