{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"591"}
____
  
Features
HERO SNIPER HITS THE PR MARK...
BY BLACK DOG   
522 words
6 April 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
26
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Dog bows to no one in admiration of the heroic British sniper who killed six Taliban with a single bullet in Afghanistan.
The MoD basked in the reflected glory of a rare 'good news' story from Afghanistan. But one brass hat was less impressed.
'They knew about the sniper for a while and held back the official announcement so it took attention away from the start of the withdrawal of our lads from Helmand province,' he sneered. 'Bloody disgrace.'
Who said only New Labour spin doctors looked for a 'good day to bury bad news'?
 
***
Labour MP Chris Bryant has used his excellent new book, Parliament, The Biography, to perform the opposite of actress Gwyneth Paltrow and rock star husband Chris Martin's 'conscious uncoupling' gesture. In a touching show of affection for his beloved civil partner of four years, Jared Cranney, the dedication in Bryant's book is to their 'conscious coupling', with the naughtily suggestive inversion of their initials to read JC B.
***
HEARD THE ONE ABOUT RED ED'S JOKE WRITER?
As if life couldn't get any more farcical around 'Team Miliband', Harriet Harman's chief of staff is returning to the stand-up circuit part-time. Ayesha Hazarika, credited with writing Ed's few funny jokes, will make her comeback telling 'funny and personal stories about being a new kid in a new country starting a new life'. Scots-born Ayesha, left - the daughter of Indian immigrants - knows how to deal with hecklers. She once told Hugh Grant that he was 'f****** rude' after he swore at her.
***
 
George Osborne's protege, Treasury Minister and Bromsgrove MP Sajid Javid, is getting under the skin of the increasing number of bruised Labour victims of his sharp tongue in Commons exchanges. They have taken to calling him 'the Bromsgrove Bully'. When Javid asked a friend if he should be concerned, he was told: 'It's a compliment, they tried to upset Norman Tebbit by calling him the Chingford Skinhead and it was the best thing that ever happened to him.'
***
MOGG'S SMART ANSWER
Old fogey Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg is famed for his Savile Row three-piece suits and the double-breasted pyjamas he (allegedly) wears to bed. But does he actually own any casual clothes?
'Well, I can confirm that I do not possess a single pair of jeans,' says the Somerset MP. 'I am, however, partial to a smart pair of corduroy trousers at the weekend.'
He is in good company: Enoch Powell used to go for picnics on Hampstead Heath in a suit and bowler hat.
***
 
After painstakingly winding Big Ben and 1,000 other Commons clocks forward an hour last Saturday, Westminster official Paul Roberson - who has the splendidly Dickensian title of Parliament's Clockmaker - set his alarm before retiring to bed.
With hundreds more parliamentary timepieces to switch to British Summer Time, he had to be up with the larks on Sunday. But he forgot to change one clock. 'I overslept,' confesses Paul. 'I forgot to forward my own alarm.'
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140405ea460000r
