{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3432"}
____
  
NEWS
Sketch: The BBC v Nigel Farage
By Michael Deacon Parliamentary Sketchwriter   
548 words
15 May 2014
19:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage questions why the BBC gave such prominence to the resignation of Ukip’s Sanya-Jeet Thandi, and says the broadcaster doesn’t want to discuss immigration
Nigel Farage did not sound happy with the BBC. Martha Kearney, of Radio 4’s World at One, had just asked him about Sanya-Jeet Thandi, whom Mr Farage had once lauded as Ukip’s “rising star”. This week she quit the party after accusing it of 窶徨acist populism窶 .
“What’s surprising,” said Mr Farage darkly, “is that one 21 year-old leaves, and it’s a big story for the BBC. One person says something disobliging, and you decide it’s a major national news story.” This wasn’t the only reason the BBC had incurred his displeasure. “Nobody wants to discuss immigration,” he declared, “least of all the BBC.”
Perhaps it was just me, but something in his tone hinted that he suspected the BBC of anti-Ukip bias.
Critics might argue that, if the BBC does oppose Ukip, it has an unusual way of going about it. A broadcaster that truly opposed a growing political party, they might contend, would deny it coverage wherever possible, rather than, for example, give it relentless publicity. (Mr Farage has been a guest on Question Time 15 times in the past five years.)
A broadcaster that didn’t want to discuss immigration, these critics might add, probably wouldn’t keep inviting Mr Farage to discuss immigration.
Such critics, however, would be naïve. Because that is the BBC’s secret plan. The Corporation has cunningly decided that the way to undermine Ukip… is to give airtime to Ukip.
In recent weeks, the BBC’s campaign to silence Ukip has intensified dramatically. Acting on the orders of shadowy executives, BBC producers have mercilessly rung up Mr Farage at all hours, hissing such threats as, “Please will you come and be interviewed on our programme, Mr Farage?” and “We can offer you the prime slot straight after the news.”
Having forced their helpless victim into a studio and ordered him to inform the electorate about his party, producers report back to their superiors. “Ha, ha, ha!” cackle the superiors. “For the sixth time today, we’ve got Nigel Farage telling our millions of viewers and listeners about the dangers of immigration! This will shut down the immigration debate once and for all!”
“Yes, boss,” nod the producers with dog-like servility. “What else would you like us to do to ensure that the topic of immigration never crosses the public’s minds, boss?”
The superiors ponder the question in silence. Then a leer of satisfaction spreads across their faces. “I know,” they say, slowly. “Invite Nigel Farage to appear on all your programmes again… tomorrow!”
“Yes, boss!” blurt the producers, with a salute, before scurrying off to resume their onslaught of coverage.
On World at One, Martha Kearney noted that since border restrictions were lifted the number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in Britain had actually fallen .
“The floodgates have opened,” persisted Mr Farage.
“But when floodgates open, you expect floods to come through, don’t you?” asked Ms Kearney.
The floodgates must be faulty. That’s cheap foreign labour for you.
Document TELUK00020140515ea5f00568
