{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3772"}
____
  
Features
A week of woe for Ukip, and yet...
Harry Wallop   
1,574 words
28 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
15
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A leader under fire, allegations of racism and unsavoury 'rogue' elements – but the party still has to be taken seriously by its opponents, reports Harry Wallop
The week that Ukip has just endured would finish off most political parties. Since the launch of its campaign for next month's European elections it has been embroiled in a series of gaffes and mounting evidence that some of its members appear to be not just "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists", as David Cameron famously described them back in 2006, but very much nastier pieces of work.
It culminated over the weekend when William Henwood, standing in a council election for Ukip in north London, reacted to the call from comedian Lenny Henry for more non–white faces in the Arts. Mr Henwood told the BBC: "I think if black people come to this country and don't like mixing with white people why are they here? If he [Henry] wants a lot of blacks around, go and live in a black country."
Incredibly, this weekend saw Ukip in the strongest position it has ever enjoyed since its founding in 1993. A YouGov poll for the Sunday Times placed it in the lead – for the first time – for the Euro elections on May 22. With 31 per cent of the vote, Ukip is a clear step ahead of Labour on 28 per cent, while the Conservatives are languishing on 19 per cent. The Liberal Democrats are on 9 per cent.
Back in 2012, Nigel Farage, Ukip's leader, claimed the party was "the third force in British politics" after it came third in a series of by–elections. By the end of next month, he could be in charge of more British MEPs than any other party, and with a legitimate claim of being able to set the agenda on immigration and Europe, Ukip's two key policies. Questions will also be asked whether, come next year's general election, this once one–issue party will not only win its first seat at Westminster, but possibly a clutch.
It is worth reflecting on what has befallen Ukip in recent days. In the aftermath of reports alleging misuse of EU expenses by Farage, the party launched its campaign last Tuesday with £1.5 million worth of hard–hitting advertisements, funded by Paul Sykes, a formerTory donor and one of Britain's wealthiest citizens. With their focus on Ukip's promise to limit immigration and how "British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour", critics dismissed the advertisements instantly as ''racist'' and ''divisive''.
Later that day, Mr Farage was caught on the hop on the campaign trail by Nick Robinson, the BBC political editor, who asked him whether employing his German wife, Kirsten, as his secretary was taking a job from a British worker. Mr Farage responded, somewhat lamely and rather unconvincingly, that no one from this country could do a job that required responding to emails in the small hours of the morning.
Then, it emerged that the views of Andre Lampitt, a builder who features prominently in Ukip's online video campaign, were, to say the least, unsavoury. In the video Mr Lampitt (himself an immigrant from Zimbabwe, or Rhodesia, as he prefers to call it) says: "Since the lads from Eastern Europe are prepared to work for a lot less than anybody else, I've found it a real struggle."
Courtesy of a basic search by Ukip's opponents on Twitter, it was found that he had also once said: "Muslims are animals their faith is disgusting their prophet is pedophile" (sic), along with other views on Africa, which the party admitted were "repellent".
The fact that Ukip used an Irish actor on its billboards to portray a destitute British builder and that it pictured one of its own party workers as a "voter" in its manifesto, are minor slip–ups compared with the views of Mr Lampitt, Mr Henwood or indeed those of Magnus Nielsen, a candidate in Camden, who claimed on Facebook that: "Islam is organised crime under religious camouflage".
But none of this appears to have dented the appeal of Ukip or their leader. Peter Hain, the former Labour Cabinet member, said yesterday that Nigel Farage is "like Teflon Man, nothing sticks to him".
Sunder Katwala, who runs the think tank British Future, which debates immigration and integration, says: "Ukip has what academics call a 'reputational shield' and for good reason – most of the public don't believe they are racist. The public take the view they are really quite different from the BNP or the National Front in France."
The party itself blames the racist comments over the last week on rogue elements, something that Mr Katwala agrees with. He says: "If you have a policy of controlled immigration you will attract mainstream people who hold these quite legitimate views. But you will also attract people who hold extreme versions of those views, and Ukip have never been very good at scrutinising its ranks."
And, possibly more importantly, a large section of the electorate appear rather relaxed about any rogue elements, according to Tim Bale, professor of politics at Queen Mary, University of London. "They may appear to be gaffes to commentators, but they are not necessarily gaffes to their core supporters. The other thing, is they are articulating a wider feeling that politics has become disconnected from ordinary people. The key to understanding them is their populism rather than their policies. Ukip's appeal is that they are outside that Westminster elite. Both European integration and the immigration we saw under the Labour government play into that feeling, because those are two things that large numbers of people in this country don't agree with, and which were done without really consulting us."
He also points out that it is just not possible to attract the support of 32 per cent of voters – even in a poll – if drawing from a shallow pool of voters.
A new book, Revolt on the Right, by Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin, published this month, finds that Ukip does just as well in former industrial heartlands as in home county golf–club territory, pointing out some of its biggest supporters are former manual workers who feel alienated from mainstream politics. As Prof Bale says: "Farage may be a public schooleducated banker, but he does a much better impression of an ordinary person than the leaders of the other parties."
This is not the first time an outside party has seriously rocked the two–party boat in a European election. In 1989, in the dying days of Margaret Thatcher's government, the Green Party caught the crest of both a burgeoning interest in environmentalism and mounting anger about the Poll Tax. It won an eye–catching 14.5 per cent of the vote, coming a strong third, and there was talk that it would go on to win several seats in Westminster so that politics would never be the same again. In the 1992 general election it mustered a mere 0.5 per cent of the vote.
Even in more recent years, minority parties have performed very well without ever translating those votes into success at Westminster. In the last two Euro elections, Ukip has garnered more than 16 per cent of the vote on each occasion, but has managed just 3 per cent, at best, in the general elections.
Lord Ashcroft, the Tory party donor who regularly conducts his own polls, has recently written: "Voters readily distinguish between elections that matter and those that don't," noting that his focus group participants viewed the European elections with as much seriousness as the Eurovision song contest.
It is this knowledge that allows those Conservatives, fearful of electoral disaster in May, to already be writing off the consequences. David Ruffley, Conservative MP for Bury St Edmunds, reacted in such a dismissive fashion to the YouGov poll when interviewed on the John Pienaar show on BBC Radio Five Live: "Well, I don't think we should be too worried. You can't extrapolate from council or Euro elections."
But the alarming prospect is that this time it might be different: the old pattern of success in the Euro elections followed by failure at the general election may not repeat itself. The dominance of the twoparty system in Westminster has been steadily breaking down, and minority parties stand a greater chance of, if not winning many seats, then certainly a larger chunk of the vote in 2015. Also, the sheer scale of Ukip's current rating means that it could cause a headache for the Conservatives even if only a fraction of Ukip's expected European support translates into votes in a general election. No wonder, then, that the Prime Minister is under growing pressure from Eurosceptic MPs and those at greatest risk of losing their seats in 2015 to toughen up his stance against Brussels.
Prof Bale, who was dismissive of the idea that Ukip played much of a role in denting the Conservatives' chance of an outright win in 2010, warns that exactly that could happen in 2015. "If Ukip doubles its vote from last time [when it got 3.1 per cent], the Tories will start to run into trouble," he says.
"They are articulating a feeling that politics has become disconnected from people
Document DT00000020140428ea4s00057
