{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2831"}
____
  
News
NIGEL FARAGE Leader of Ukip
354 words
28 February 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
5
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
COMMENT
NOT for the first time David Cameron has made a promise that he cannot keep. His pledge to cut net migration from hundreds of thousands to tens of thousands a year is today in ruins. And it was all so predictable.
For Mr Cameron, along with Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband, is in no position to make pledges about the scale of immigration. The fact is the rules of membership of their beloved European Union dictate every citizen of more than two dozen nations – 400 million people – has an absolute right to come and live in Britain.
And greater numbers of them than ever before are taking advantage of that right. When it comes to EU immigration the blunt truth is that Mr Cameron has no volume control and no quality control either.
And isn't it telling the biggest rise in immigration has come from the so called "Eurozone Refugees" of Southern Europe. These are people in Portugal, Italy, Greece and Spain who have no prospects there of employment or a decent standard of living because of the devastation that membership of the euro has brought to their economies.
Disgrace
And this is before the expected major upsurge in immigration from Romania and Bulgaria has taken hold. It is completely unsustainable.
For a PM to so flagrantly break a pledge on such a vital matter of public concern is a disgrace. But unless or until Mr Cameron supports withdrawing from the EU and taking back control of Britain's borders he will have no means of making good his vow to the British people.
Anyone with an ounce of common sense realises immigration is out of control. The impact on youth unemployment, on stagnating wages and the availability of public services is in my view undeniable.
Ukip has an honest answer to all this: a comprehensive points–based immigration system that will see a drastic cut in the volume of migration and ensure the migrants who do come will put more into our society than they take out. That can only be achieved outside the EU.
Document THEEXP0020140228ea2s0004z
