{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1091"}
____
  
News
Four whom the bell tolls
TOM NEWTONDUNN   
2,532 words
7 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Ulster
14,15
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
WE VISIT MARGINAL SEATS THAT HOLD KEY TO NEXT GOVERNMENT
ONE year from today, Britain goes to the polls for the most intriguing election in modern times.
The truth is, nobody has a clue who will form the next government after May 7, 2015.
The Tories and Labour are already neck and neck in the polls — our latest YouGov survey today gives Ed Miliband's party just a one-point lead.
And the return of coalitions, the collapse of the Lib Dem vote and the rise of four-party politics thanks to Ukip's remarkable surge are confounding traditional forms of analysis.
To help you navigate the General Election 2015 rollercoaster, we have picked four marginal constituencies across the country to focus on and follow over the next 12 months.
All four are bellwether seats — bitter head-to-head contests between two of the parties that represent a different but crucial symbolic battle that will decide what happens on the national stage.
In Wirral West, on Merseyside, the Conservatives face a massive test. The seat is currently held by employment minister and ex-TV presenter Esther McVey, who must keep hold of the Tories' thin northern foothold and build on it for her party to stand any chance of an overall majority.
If the Lib Dems cannot hang on to St Austell and Newquay in Cornwall, they face certain wipeout nationwide.
The party's rookie MP there, Stephen Gilbert — who won notoriety with his successful campaign to scrap the Pasty Tax in 2012 — is trying to protect a delicate majority of 1,312.
But if he succeeds, David Cameron can kiss goodbye to a second term in No10.
Meanwhile, Chesterfield in Derbyshire will show us whether Labour will be able to crush the Lib Dems in the north.
Labour's Toby Perkins took the legendary Tony Benn's old seat off the Lib Dems in 2010 by just 549 votes.
But Labour needs at least a dozen of their seats to be sure of taking power and must do much better here next time.
And in Southampton Itchen, Labour must again hold on to one of the smallest majorities in the country — just 192 — to oust the Tories from Downing Street.
So we will keep coming back to Wirral West, St Austell and Newquay, Chesterfield and Southampton Itchen to ask the big questions, such as ... Have the Tories done enough to rescue the economy, or should we all be better off by now? Is Ed Miliband's planned radical overhaul of capitalism what the country needs or does that scare the hell out of people? Will voters forgive Nick Clegg's Lib Dems for breaking so many promises? And, perhaps most importantly of all, will Ukip fade away like they did before the last two General Elections? Here, EMILY FAIRBAIRN, HARRIET HERNANDO and TOM GOODENOUGH visit our four constituencies to hear from four typical examples of voters — firsttimers, mothers, business owners and pensioners, who in each region are pictured in that order.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk FIRST-TIME VOTER Rebecca Harrison, 18, who studies health and social care at college, lives in Chesterfield.
She said: "My main concern is money. I am a care leaver, which means I've grown up in care and now live on my own. As I am studying at college I can claim income support of £57 a week.
"It's hard to survive on that. I do get rent and council tax paid but I have to pay for food and bills. I'd like more help for young people like me to succeed.
"I will vote Labour. Labour seems to care more about those who have less."
MOTHER Rebecca Goodwill, 20, who works parttime in a shop, has lived in Chesterfield all her life. She has an 18-month-old daughter and a partner.
She said: "I worry about what kind of world I've brought my daughter into. I'm worried about an ageing population where the younger ones seem to come second, with all the cash going to the elderly.
"I'm not sure there will be pensions by the time I retire, never mind by the time my daughter does.
"I was not old enough to vote in the last election and I won't vote at the next one. Every MP does the opposite of what they promise, so what is the point of voting?" BUSINESS OWNER Keith Todd, 59, who owns No 10 The Tea Room in Chesterfield, said: "My main political concern is too many taxes for small businesses. I don't like how big firms get away with paying very little while small businesses get the brunt of the whole lot.
"There is also a lot of red tape for small businesses. When you try to get something going you're hit by obstacles. I voted Tory in the last General Election because I was sick of Labour.
"Next time I'd vote for the Coalition because I think it's good for Britain. Having two parties at different ends of the spectrum dilutes their controversial ideas.
"But without that I will go Liberal."
PENSIONER Kenneth Collingwood, 71, who lives in Chesterfield, said: "My main political concern is definitely Europe.
"I want out. We are moving towards a political Europe where we are unable to make our own rules and regulations.
"I'd like us to be able to manage our own borders where we are able to say who is allowed to come into our country.
"At the moment Chesterfield is middling.
I've been around the city today and was appalled at the amount of rubbish.
"I voted for the local Labour candidate last election and will probably vote for them next time.
"Ukip is a force to be reckoned with, and if they had a candidate here they would get my vote."
IN the 1980s this Derbyshire town had Tony Benn as its MP, then the Lib Dems seized it in 2001 before Labour's Toby Perkins, above, won it back in 2010. Voters here mainly work in service industries and the jobless rate is five per cent.
FIRST-TIME VOTER Kimberley Brown, 22, a care assistant from Newquay, said: "My biggest concern is employment. I've been unemployed and so has my dad.
"It leads to depression and it needs to stop. I know what it's like, first-hand.
"I think taxes should be reduced for people who earn under £15,000 like me.
"Apart from that I am quite apathetic as I just can't relate to people in power.
"Transport is our biggest issue here. It is really hard to get out or into Cornwall and I don't think it is being addressed.
"As I'm 22 I have never voted before but if I had to vote tomorrow I would vote Conservative. I like David Cameron and I think he has done quite a good job."
MOTHER Rebecca Lightfoot, 32, is a construction firm administrator and mum of three children under 12, from Penryn. Her husband Darren, 33, is a digger driver at a quarry.
She said: "I think the amount families are helped with childcare needs to be looked at. Both my husband and I work but sometimes it just feels like you are working to pay for childcare.
"In Cornwall we are forgotten about. My parents have been trying to sort out some planning permission and it was a nightmare. In the end the MP had to help out but I think it is easier to do things like that in other parts of the country.
"At the last election I voted Conservative but if I had to vote tomorrow I'd go Liberal Dem - they seem to think about families."
BUSINESS OWNER Ben Skinner, 29, a self-employed surfboard maker, from Perranporth, said: "I am mostly concerned about unemployment. There is a lot around here but I think steps are being taken to improve this. We have an MP who wants to stick up for our area. Obviously we in Cornwall have recently got our recognition as a minority, which is going in the right direction.
"I didn't vote in the last election as I was abroad at the time. If the next one was tomorrow I'd vote for the Green Party but I am undecided. I think the Green Party fights for a lot of things I believe in."
PENSIONER William Rooney, 72, a retired postman, from Newquay, said: "My main concern is employment. I don't think when people do find a job they are being paid enough and these zero-hour contracts are bad.
"I think down here in the south-west we are just forgotten. A lot more needs to be done to make funding for us here fairer.
"If there was an election tomorrow I would vote Labour. Ukip are really a branch of the British National Party. No good will come out of it at all."
IN the 2010 General Election, Lib Dem Stephen Gilbert, above, just beat his Tory rival in this newly formed Cornish seat.
Mebyon Kernow, the Cornish independence party, won its highest share of the vote in any seat here but still FIRST-TIME VOTER Lucinda Mercer, 19, from West Kirby is a student. She said: "I'm going to university to do a medical course so I will be exempt from tuition fees, which are shockingly high and very unfair.
"I want to see the cost of going to uni come down so everybody who wants to go can do so. We are told to try hard and excel but if you don't have the money then that becomes a barrier to progressing higher.
"I'd also like the NHS to give more money to students on medical courses so they don't have to also work two jobs.
"The Wirral is a perfect example of the divide between rich and poor - the west is prosperous but the east is struggling.
"I am going to vote based on the best policies for everyone."
MOTHER Mum-of-two Jennifer Pearson, 48, is from West Kirby.
She said: "I am worried about the economy, lack of jobs, unemployment and zero-hours contracts. They don't affect me but it concerns me. They are wrong.
"I would like to see more employment.
Tuition fees worry me. There is too much debt being put on young people.
"I lean more to Labour. I don't think it is fair to say Ukip is racist - that is harsh.
"It has some valid points. We don't have a lot of immigration here but you can see it might be a problem for others."
BUSINESS OWNER Steve Mercer, 53, from West Kirby, is director of embroidered garment firm Custom Clothing.
He said: "As a small business owner, what I'd like from the next government is some assurance over rates.
"There is big fear among local businesses that they are going to fail and be squeezed out. I would like more incentives for small businesses, shops and restaurants.
"There is a rapid turnover of property usage by shops due to failed projects, maybe as a result of business costs. I am undecided on who to vote for. The last seven years have been about survival so I've been unable to analyse policies."
PENSIONER Frank Noble, 73, is from West Kirby. He said: "For me the biggest issue is the cost of living. I haven't got that many political concerns, really. I suppose car parking is one thing that could be improved.
"I voted for the Lib Dem candidate last time round. I will be voting Labour this time because of the way their candidate, Margaret Greenwood, has stood against coal gasification (igniting coal reserves to produce gas) in the Dee Estuary.
"Ukip is a oneman band."
THIS affluent constituency is traditionally a safe Tory area, but fell to Labour in 1997. It was reclaimed by the Conservatives in 2010 with a 2,436 majority.
The MP is former TV host Esther McVey, above, who is Minister for Employment.
FIRST-TIME VOTER Teaching assistant Alex Cunningham, 22, lives in Bitterne. She said: "My biggest concern is the lack of jobs in the town.
"It's nowhere near as easy to find work as people make out.
"A lot of my friends are looking for work and it gets you down.
"More should be spent on the town centre to lure shoppers and new businesses to create jobs. There's nothing round here, so it's even harder to find jobs.
"I don't know much about politics, so if the election was tomorrow, I'd struggle.
"If they reached out to younger voters, I'm sure more of us would get involved."
MOTHER Louise Dunleavy, 22, lives in Woolston with daughter Lexie Mae, two.
She said: "I'm disappointed with the lack of council housing available. There's this idea that it's so easy for young mums to get council houses.
"But actually I haven't had any help at all and I've been trying for two years.
"I've been left with no choice but to rent privately, which is OK for now but if they start bringing in more changes to housing benefit I don't know what I'll do.
"I've never voted. I don't know anything about politics. I'm focused on my girl."
BUSINESS OWNER Married father-of-two Phil Ainslie, 49, owns sweet shop The Candy Store in Woolston, where he lives.
He said: "Big businesses are seeing improvements as the economy picks up but it will be a while yet for smaller businesses. I thought things would be booming, but it's difficult, especially with The Co-op supermarket down the road. "There needs to be more done to encourage support for local businesses. I always voted Conservative until 2008, when I started to feel disillusioned. I haven't voted since.
"No parties deliver on their promises.
That's why a lot of people are intrigued by Ukip. I'm not racist but perhaps we need to be more strict on immigration."
PENSIONER Retired cook Mary Farino, 62, lives in Bitterne with her husband Giulio, 72.
She said: "I'm worried about the lack of primary school places for children in the area. My grandson struggled to find a place and my foster daughter's son was allocated schools miles from his home.
"I fear the Itchen constituency is failing compared to neighbouring Eastleigh, where they spend loads on places for kids to enjoy. All we get is betting shops.
"I voted Tory last year and will do the same next election.Ukip are all over the media but I've yet to see a policy from them on UK infrastructure."
THIS constituency covers the east of the south coast port city. Itchen is seen as Labour territory, though the Tories held it in the 1980s. It has returned Labour members for the past five terms.
MP John Denham, above, is not standing next year.
Document THESUN0020140507ea57000he
