{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"93"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Farage v Clegg: trash talk ahead of big fight - but who will be on the canvas at the end?: Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister and Liberal Democrat leader, and Nigel Farage, the leader of Ukip, will go head to head in a debate on Europe today for the first time, hosted by London radio station LBC and shown live on Sky News at 7pm. Political editor Patrick Wintour assesses their form before the big face-off
Patrick Wintour   
830 words
26 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
7
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Their pre-bout boasts
Clegg: "I never underestimate them [Ukip] because they speak for a part of the nation that feels left behind." Farage: "I'll say, 'Come on Nick, tell me why you think British people want the EU flag, anthem and Mr Rumpy Pumpy [president of the European council Herman Van Rompuy] - I'm all ears.' Clegg's European at heart, not British."
Issues
1 Would leaving Europe mean job losses as UK businesses lose access to the EU single market? Clegg will cite the views of business. Farage will cite new potential markets as a result of globalisation.
2 Does EU free movement of workers put unsustainable pressure on public services in the UK, drive down wages or make it more difficult for UK's young unskilled workers to find jobs?
Farage has warned of fresh waves of migration from southern Europe. "If the eurozone goes as badly over the next few years as I still believe that it will, we face the prospect of the largest migratory wave that has ever come to this country and we have three political parties who are not prepared to do anything about it."
3 British foreign standing. Clegg is likely to argue Britain has more influence globally as a member of the European Union and that episodes such as the Russian invasion of Ukraine show the need to work in partnership with the EU.
4 Crime and climate change. Clegg is eager to argue Britain will face a greater threat from international criminals and terrorists if no longer cooperating with EU. Farage will argue EU laws and human rights legislation make it impossible to throw out criminals.
5 Prospects of negotiating a new, looser relationship with Europe. Clegg says there is a credible alliance for a reformed Europe so long as the UK does not put a gun to the head of the EU. Farage says: "Renegotiation is a con. It is not obtainable. It is not achievable. We cannot change a thing in Europe."
Social attitudes
Clegg, fluent in five languages, says: "There is simply not a shred of racism in me, as a person whose whole family is formed by flight from persecution, from different people in different generations. It's what I am. It's one of the reasons I am a liberal."
Immigration makes us stronger, he says, adding: "We hold our own because of our ability to embrace the future rather than cling to the past."
Farage believes Britain has become unrecognisable. "It was not until we got past Grove Park that I could hear English being audibly spoken in the carriage," he said of a train journey. "Does that make me feel slightly awkward? Yes it does." Asked why he minded people speaking in foreign languages, he replied: "I don't understand them . . . I don't feel very comfortable in that situation and I don't think the majority of British people do."
Patriotism
Clegg loves the BBC, NHS, the shipping forecast, Britain's cups of tea, glimpses of the sun, its sense of freedom and the fact "that Britons insist on queueing when we go abroad, even when the locals don't".
Farage says his party has made patriotism respectable again, but is accused of looking back to a monocultural UK. For instance, he said: "I'm getting a bit tired of my kids coming home from school being taught about every other religion in the world, celebrating every other religious holiday, but not actually being taught about Christianity."
Personal standing and future
Clegg challenged Farage to the debate knowing he needed a gamechanger to prevent his party coming a miserable fourth in the European elections. He now, at the very least, has the chance of going down fighting. Farage has set the bar high by promising a political earthquake in those elections. He needs to show in the debate that the first tremors are audible.
Farage has said that if Ukip fails to win a seat in the general election next year, he will quit. "Good lord, yes. I will be out the door before you can say Jack Robinson."
Clegg has said he will continue as Lib Dem leader regardless of how badly his party does.
Things they probably should not say
Farage: "I agree with Nick" (even if he means Nick Ferrari, the debate's moderator). Or: "Some of my best friends are foreigners . . ." Clegg: "I agree with Nigel." Or: "Some of our best nannies are foreigners."
Document GRDN000020140326ea3q00051
