{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3460"}
____
  
NEWS
Ukip accused of 'hissy fits' as immigration posters launched
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
409 words
22 April 2014
17:47
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage unveils poster campaign warning of consequences of EU migration
Nigel Farage has defended Ukip’s European election poster campaign as a “hard-hitting reflection of reality” after rival politicians attacked it as racist.
Ukip has launched its biggest-ever publicity drive ahead of next month’s European Parliament elections with a series of billboard advertisements warning that foreign migrants are “after” native jobs.
One poster shows a builder begging, with the caption: “EU policy at work. British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour.”
Another states that 26 million unemployed people are “looking for work”, adding: “And whose jobs are they after?”
Under the slogan "take back control of our country", others complain that 75% of British laws are made in Brussels and that UK taxpayers fund the "celebrity lifestyle" of EU bureaucrats. The posters were funded with a £1.5 million donation from Paul Sykes, a former Tory donor.
Mike Gapes, the Labour MP for Ilford South, said the posters are “racist” and said all “decent British Commonwealth and EU citizens” should register to vote.
Mr Farage said: "These posters are a hard-hitting reflection of reality as it is experienced by millions of British people struggling to earn a living outside the Westminster bubble," he said.
"Are we going to ruffle a few feathers among the chattering classes? Yes. Are we bothered about that? Not in the slightest.
"Ukip is hugely grateful to Paul Sykes for his magnificent contribution to the great cause of restoring Britain's ability to be a self-governing nation. The political earthquake I have spoken of is on its way."
Mr Farage has faced increasing scrutiny over his party’s expenses, with The Times claiming the party had to explain the use of tens of thousands of pounds in European Parliament allowances.
Those claims have been met with anger, with the party claiming the newspaper’s journalists are part of David Cameron’s “chumocracy” of close friends and family.
Mike Freer, the Conservative MP for Finchley and Golders Green, accused Ukip of throwing “hissy fits” in the face of press scrutiny.
“It's right that Ukip are getting some scrutiny. They've been rather good at dishing it out in the past, and seem to be rather sensitive, and have hissy fits, when they get the scrutiny returned on them,” he told the BBC.
Document TELUK00020140421ea4l002gx
