{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2875"}
____
  
Features
THE WEEK IN WESTMINSTER
353 words
29 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; North
34
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MONDAY, MARCH 31
Commons: Work and Pensions Questions.Wales Bill, Second reading. A short debate on planning and the green belt in Walsall South.
Westminster Hall: Not sitting. Lords: Questions. Water Bill, Report stage (Day 2). A debate on improving the health of deaf people.
TUESDAY, APRIL 1
Commons: Health Questions. Ten Minute Rule Motion: Regulation of Gambling Advertising. Finance (No 2) Bill, Second reading. A short debate on the reconfiguration of services at the Sir Robert Peel Hospital.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: North Wales economy; Government support for grassroots football; UK automotive industry; Improving flood resilience in Worcester; Europe for Citizens programme 2014–20.
Lords: Introduction of Lord Bishop of Rochester. Questions. Immigration Bill, Report stage. A short debate on early access to innovative medicine for lifethreatening conditions.
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 2
Commons: Northern Ireland Questions. At noon, questions to the Prime Minister. Ten Minute Rule Motion: Scotland (Independence) (Westminster Representation). An Opposition Day debate. A motion to approve a Statutory Instrument relating to terrorism. A short debate on UK policy on promoting LGBT rights in Uganda.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: Elliot Review and food crime; FSA and the Connaught Income Fund; Future of English Heritage; Mandatory regulation of the hairdressing industry; Transparency of UK visa bans.
Lords: Questions. Defence Reform Bill, Third reading. Intellectual Property Bill (HL), Consideration of Commons amendments. A short debate commemorating International Roma Day. A short debate on encouraging a cinema culture in the UK. A short debate recommending a global goal on inequality in the post–2015 development agenda.
THURSDAY, APRIL 3
Commons: Energy and Climate Change Questions. A statement on the future business of the House. A select committee statement on the publication of the fourth report from the work and pensions committee: Support for housing costs in the reformed welfare system. Two backbench business debates: i) subject to be announced and ii) Civil Service reform. A short debate on blasphemy law in Pakistan.
Westminster Hall: Incapacity benefit migration.
Lords: Questions. Immigration Bill, Report stage (Day 2). A regret motion relating to the Housing Benefit (Transitional Provisions) (Amendment) Regulations 2014.
8
Document DT00000020140329ea3t0008w
