{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1738"}
____
  
News
SHUT IT, sister
1,265 words
17 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
2; National
14,15
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
SEXISM UK: SUN COLUMNIST HITS BACK
UNITED Nations "expert" Rashida Manjoo caused a storm with claims the UK is one of the most sexist countries she has visited.
Bizarrely, she put us behind the likes of Algeria, India and Azerbaijan — countries that are hardly known for their progressive treatment of women.
Here outspoken Sun columnist Louise Mensch hits back.
UN Special "Rapporteur" Rashida Manjoo says the UK is the most sexist place she has ever been to.
And with that joke of a pronouncement she has managed to hammer the last nail into the coffin of UN credibility.
So Britain is the biggest boys' club Rashida's ever seen? That's pretty amazing, since she's previously reported from rape capital of the universe, India, where girls are burned alive for having too small a dowry.
Where women are routinely gangraped and where a politician recently suggested the victims "should be hung" but the rapists let off because "boys will be boys".
Or how about the other countries she visited on this trip. Somalia, where a 13-year-old girl who had been raped begged for mercy as Islamists stoned her to death? Croatia, where even the EU says the number of women working and going to college is "significantly below the EU average"? Italy, where Berlusconi's bungabunga parties symbolise how the elite treats women — and where female ministers faced a "sexist onslaught" in the press two months ago over their fashion choices? What about Bosnia, where rape was a national institution? Give over, Rashida — your Marxism is showing. And it isn't pretty. Socialist Rashida is from South Africa and a Muslim.
In her own crime-ridden country, rape is more than commonplace — it's a way of life.
A UN report ranked South Africa number one for rape and stated 41 per cent of victims are children — and female genital mutiliation is widely practised there and under-reported by a complacent government.
How DARE this woman call herself a feminist? The reaction on Twitter was one of total contempt.
"Has the UN forgotten how it sat back on Rwanda?" asked one tweeter.
We've had Maggie Thatcher as Prime Minister. Theresa May is Home Secretary.
And Justine Greening is the unfortunate Cabinet minister who has to deal with Rashida and her like at the UN, as she hands out aid to fight discrimination against women in the failed dictatorships that they prefer to London.
But the UN has never had a woman as Secretary-General — and only one of its four top jobs is held by a woman.
Do you think that's why genderapartheid Saudi Arabia sits on the UN's Human Rights Council? Shall we remind Rashida of women's "human" rights in Saudi Arabia? They are lashed for driving and required to obey a male "guardian" wherever they go — including travelling abroad.
They have no rights over their children and rape in marriage is legal there.
No, really, UN! Terrific job on women's rights! The UN is a bloody disgrace. Their last "rapporteur" was antigovernment too — protesting against George Osborne's welfare reforms. You know, the ones that recently made us the fastest-growing economy in the G7.
In the UK women get things done And be of no doubt — you pay Rashida's wages.
Our UN dues sent this woman to Britain to criticise government policy on women — while she REFUSED to visit any governmentfunded shelters for domestic violence that she was invited to.
No bloody wonder they wouldn't let her into Yarl's Wood immigration centre — the UN has an anti-British agenda and an anti-capitalist one, too.
Clearly Rashida knew just what she was going to say before she had the privilege of touching down in the country of Mrs Pankhurst, Boadecia and Elizabeth I. This is a country where women get things done — unlike her own.
This is the country of Jane Austen and Florence Nightingale, the country of Mary Wollstonecraft, founder of feminism. It's the country of self-made millionaires Martha Lane Fox and Tamara Mellon.
It's the country of Beatrix Potter and J.K. Rowling — of Kate Bush, the Spice Girls and Baroness Trumpington.
UK women have run MI6, defeated the Armada, invented nursing, and pioneered astronomy and — in Mary Somerville — popular science.
Culturally, militarily, in the arts, music, science, business and politics, British women have led the world. What, precisely, has the UN done? What wars has it stopped? How many women has it saved from rape and mutilation? The UN is arguably even a force against the liberation of women.
It sanitises Saudi Arabian and other African and Middle Eastern countries' abuse of women under the flag of "cultural rights".
Who sits with the Saudis on that "human rights" committee? A roll-call of the worst offenders: Algeria, Morocco, China, Rashida's South Africa, Namibia, Russia, and Vietnam.
The lot of them are cesspits for women's equality.
It's as a "Rapporteur" — that's pretentious for "reporter" — of this very UN Committee, the one with Saudi Arabia and South Africa on it, that Rashida Manjoo took her business class flight to the UK to slam us for being sexist.
Well, take a hike, sister. And if you want to find "in your face sexism", take a look around your own UN committee room.
You'll find it everywhere. But don't get too close to the Saudi delegation.
They don't want a female like you sitting anywhere near them.
HOW WE COMPARE WHEN it comes to the worldwide sisterhood, how does the UK really measure up? Using official World Bank data, we compare Britain's record on women with that of other nations and use the Global Gender Gap Report to give each a sexism rating.
UNITED KINGDOM Female prime minister Yes Death in childbirth per 100k Female literacy Female prime minister Yes Female unemployment 7.4% 12 98%+ Females in higher education 70.7% Equality score 74.3% Female unemployment 7.4% 12 98%+ Females in higher education 70.7% Equality score 74.3% ALGERIA Female prime minister No Female unemployment 18.6% Death in childbirth per 100k 97 Female literacy 63.9% Females in higher education 36% 63.9% Females in higher education 36% Equality score 59.66% Equality score 59.66% ITALY Female prime minister Noprime minister No Female unemployment 11.9% Death in childbirth per 100k 4 Female literacy 98%+ Females in higher education 75.4% Equality score 68.85% 75.4% Female prime minister Noprime minister No FemaleFemale unemployment 30.5% Death in childbirth per 100k 8 Female literacy 96.7% Females in higher education 43% Equality score 69.8.6% Death in childbirth per 100k 8 Female literacy 96.7% Females in higher education 43% Equality score 69.86% AZERBAIJAN Female prime minister Noprime minister No FemaleFemale unemployment 6.5% Death in childbirth per 100k 43 Female literacy 98%+ Females in higher education 19.8% Equality score 65.82% 65.82% INDIA Female prime minister Yes Female unemployment 4% Death in childbirth per 100k 200 Female literacy 65.5% Female prime minister Yes Female unemployment 4% Death in childbirth per 100k 200 Female literacy 65.5% Females in higher education 20.3% Equality score 65.51% Equality score 65.51% CROATIA Death in childbirth 17 17 Female prime minister Yesprime minister Yes FemaleFemale unemployment 15.7% Death in childbirth per 100k Female literacy 98%+ Females in higher education Equality score 70.69% 68.8% 68.8%
Rapporteur ... Rashida Manjoo
Document THESUN0020140417ea4h000c2
