{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"869"}
____
  
News
JUSTICE AT LAST FOR PHILIP?
Christopher Wilson   
1,522 words
5 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
22,23
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
The arrest of Gerry Adams was the result of taped interviews with IRA members held by a US college. Could this archive also hold vital clues about the murder of a Daily Express reporter in the Harrods bomb outrage and bring
WHATEVER the fallout from this weekend's detention of Sinn Fein's Gerry Adams it has brought hope to the many people on mainland Britain, and in Ulster too, who never thought they would see justice for the victims of IRA atrocities.
The law states clearly that Mr Adams, interviewed for four days over the torture, abduction and murder of Jean McConville is innocent until proven guilty – and yesterday he was released without charge. But questions about the unaccountable deaths and torturings perpetrated by the IRA will now be answered. It may take time but the truth will out.
One of those deaths was that of Philip Geddes, a Daily Express reporter. Philip died, aged 24, in the IRA bomb attack on Harrods, the Knightsbridge department store, on December 17, 1983. He had been shopping for Christmas presents and, warned there was a security alert, hastened to the heart of the story. The IRA's bomb killed him instantly. He was just a reporter doing his job.
Others died that day, many more were injured and even now they and their families bear the burden of that ferocious attack. They in turn are a mere fraction of the other deaths, maimings and injuries perpetrated on innocent citizens by the IRA.
As one closely connected to this IRA murder I can speak with confi–dence of the feelings which were triggered by Mr Adams' arrest. Hope, fear, anger and remorse will have crowded the minds of those connected with Warrington, Hyde Park, Enniskillen, Omagh, Chelsea. Each will think of their loved ones. Each will pray that at last justice may be done and the culprits – so many of whom slipped into the shadows to live a peaceful and carefree life today – may finally be apprehended.
I recall the days I spent sharing an office, and sharing a pint, with Philip. We were young, we were having fun, we were going to live for ever. Journalism was the best job in the world.
I wasn't kith and kin, just a work colleague, yet the day he never came back to the office has haunted me for 30 years. How much worse must it be for the relatives and dependents of those whose innocent lives were snatched away.
For the information which led to Mr Adams's arrest contains a treasure trove of other names, other atrocities, all of which will sooner or later come to light.
It is a fearful, also a liberating moment but too late for Philip's family to share – his father died of a broken heart, friends say, and his mother retreated into the shadows. They have all gone.
Philip was the only child of a Polish immigrant tailor and his English wife. The early years of his life were spent in the tiny flat they occupied at the top of a building in Barrow–in–Furness, Cumbria, which also contained a tailoring workroom and shop.
Philip's father Michael came from a small village near the Russian border. He joined the Polish army at the outbreak of the Second World War and was captured by the Germans, but managed to escape and make his way to England with the help of the Resistance.
Philip's father changed his name from Gedshkia to Geddes and determinedly settled into the life and community of Barrow, a popular figure who worked all hours to make his tiny business succeed. After primary school Philip won a place at the local Barrow Grammar School for boys and, such was his brilliance, he landed a place at Oxford University.
From there it was a short step to Fleet Street, first as a reporter on the London Evening Standard, later on the Daily Express. As a reporter he was fearless, inventive, and ambitious while retaining a sympathetic streak and the ability to take a joke. While others chose smart London stores for their clothes, he wore with pride the suits his tailor father made for him.
FOR one so young Philip generated an extraordinary amount of affection and his death cast a long shadow over many lives. Only last week prior to Mr Adams' arrest emails were circulating which contained memories of the man who died 31 years ago.
Channel 4's political correspondent Michael Crick, an Oxford contemporary, recalled: "He always struck me as such a gentle, decent, intelligent person with a good sense of humour and mischief. He would have gone on to great success as a big–name journalist."
Chris Blackhurst, former editor of The Independent, was a year behind Philip at Barrow Grammar and counted himself a friend: "He was clever, funny, smart – and very kind. Extremely well–read and erudite. When Philip died his parents never recovered."
Peter Freeman, one of Philip's early employers, said: "He worked hard, played hard and had a rare ability to communicate joie de vivre and a sense of fun."
He is remembered too with immense pride by many colleagues from his days on the Daily Express. They contributed generously to a memorial set up in Philip's name which drew together the two great loves of his life – journalism and Oxford – and helped created the Geddes Awards, which to this day are competed for each year by young replicas of that swashbuckling reporter, all hoping to make their way in the world of journalism.
Each year a lecture in Philip's name – given by leading journalists such as Jeremy Paxman and Jon Snow – is delivered at Oxford University while over at Harrods every Christmas a vigil is held to commemorate not just Philip but the many others who were involved in that atrocity.
Last December, the 30th anniversary of the bombing, the traffic in Knightsbridge came to a halt as a minute's silence was held in memory of the three police officers and three members of the public who died, and the 90 who were injured.
More than 300 people turned out to attend in a scene that is repeated all over the land where the IRA left their bloody mark. Philip was just one – there have been so many more. But what gives hope to those touched by death and despair is the evidence which brought Mr Adams to Antrim police station last Wednesday.
THE Boston College oral history project, which involved interviewing 26 IRA members and 20 members of the opposing UVF (Ulster Volunteer Force), started out as a way of writing an accurate history of The Troubles through spoken evidence from those who participated in the violence.
What the American academics involved failed to realise, perhaps, was that many crimes remain unsolved – and while their perpetrators remain alive they are subject to British law, which requires their arrest and conviction.
US and British authorities last year won a court battle against the Massachusetts college to obtain interviews from the oral history archive. They said the records were needed to investigate the 1972 killing of a widowed mother by the IRA. It is as a result of this action that Mr Adams was detained last week.
So far the US authorities are rejecting the idea that further extracts should be made available to the British authorities. But sooner or later it will become a human rights issue for the victims of the IRA and the truth will out. It behoves the British Government to be seen to be pursuing the opening up of the Boston College archive and in the coming days Prime Minister David Cameron will inevitably find himself closely questioned in the House of Commons as to his intentions.
For Philip and for his family justice will come – if it comes – too late. I last saw his mother three years ago in Barrow–in–Furness as we once again commemorated her son but by now she was a silent figure who had retreated into the shadows. She has since died.
For Michael, the soldier–tailor who made a new life in Britain to escape the atrocities of the Russian military, the last word must come from Helen Haddon, Philip's closest childhood friend: "As the weeks and months passed Michael always seemed to be seated in the bay window of his house listening to Philip's voice on a dictaphone.
"Every time I called there he played it to me – telling me it was his son's voice and 'they killed him'.
"Michael never recovered from the shock of Philip's death. He died six and half years later and joined his son in his grave, ironically looking out over the Irish Sea, facing towards the island whose conflict had cost Philip his life."
Chris Blackhurst says simply: "Philip's dad died of a broken heart."
In the months before his death Michael Geddes wrote to Gerry Adams asking who had killed his son. He never received a reply.
Document THEEXP0020140505ea550003q
