{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1742"}
____
  
Features; Opinion, Column
Watch out, David: my Tory friend is voting Ukip
Allison Pearson   
412 words
17 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
27
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
We were out walking the dogs the other morning when my friend Deborah announced she was going to vote Ukip in the May local elections. I nearly fell over the poodle.
Deborah is the most 100 per cent cast–iron solid, loyal Conservative female voter since Margaret Hilda Thatcher. Why would she suddenly throw in her lot with Nigel Farage and his motley crew?
"If the Prime Minister thinks that people who hold views like mine are swivel–eyed loons, then I want to give him a bloody nose," Deborah said sharply.
My guess is that she's far from alone. Ukip posters are blooming in some unlikely windows. It's no longer just alienated country folk; I'm told Fulham is now (ahem) a hotbed of Faragistes.
There is a sense that David Cameron has taken his traditional Tory voter base for granted. As Deborah said to me: "He has raped the nice ladies in hats and suits who turned up to do his flower arranging. On gay marriage, even his own mother was saying: 'I know, but he won't listen.'"
Yikes. The truth is, Ukip is no longer just a protest vote for cranky Europhobes. People read about that comprehensive school in Leeds where all 314 pupils are being taught English as a foreign language and they see, with dreadful clarity, that politicians long ago lost the immigration plot.
Operation Trojan Horse, an investigation into an alleged plot by Islamic extremists, will focus on claims that religious hardliners tried to overthrow secular head teachers in Birmingham schools, and segregated boys and girls. While politicians and police bickered this week over whether a former counter–terrorism man should lead that inquiry, the rest of the population was simply slack–jawed with disbelief. How on earth had this been allowed to happen in our lovely, tolerant country?
Why was Santa Claus suddenly banned from handing out presents at Ladypool Primary School in Birmingham to delighted, mainly Muslim children? Last year, Vicky Hubble, the teacher behind the event, was told by the new head that Santa's visit would be cancelled and there would be "no mention" of Jesus being the son of God.
The Prime Minister should stop showing his white, hairless legs in Lanzarote, put some trousers on and get back to deliver a stirring message to the Deborahs, before they give him a bloody nose.
Document DT00000020140417ea4h0007o
