{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"464"}
____
  
News
Miliband says he won't give voters chance to quit Europe
Kate Ferguson   
593 words
12 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
3s1; National
9
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
ED Miliband has ruled out holding an automatic referendum on Britain's membership of the EU.
The Labour leader refused to match Prime Minister David Cameron's pledge to hold the vote by 2017 if his party wins the next general election.
He said Labour would only hold a plebiscite if there are moves to transfer fresh powers to Brussels, which he said was unlikely during the next Parliament.
He acknowledged in an article that voters have concerns about the EU and said Labour would seek to return more control to national parliaments.
He added: "My priorities for government are very different from those of the Conservatives. Labour will focus on dealing with the cost-of-living crisis by building a better economy so that people can look forward to a better future for their children.
"An arbitrary timetable for a referendum on leaving Europe would damage our ability to deliver on these priorities."
But Mr Miliband promised Labour will introduce a "new lock" to guarantee a vote if new powers are handed to Brussels. He said: "There would be no transfer of powers from the UK to the EU without a referendum on our continued membership.
"This position, setting out the conditions in the next parliament under which a Labour government would hold an in/out referendum, offers the British people a clear choice at the next election." He added: "Labour's position on Europe is clear and principled: we strongly believe Britain's future is in the EU."
Responding on Twitter, Mr Cameron wrote: "By his own admission, Ed Miliband says it's unlikely there'll be an inout referendum on Europe under Labour. Only the Conservative Party can guarantee and deliver that in-out referendum."
Former foreign secretary Jack Straw, seen as a Eurosceptic in the Labour ranks, said of Mr Miliband: "He is right that the priority of the next Labour government should not be an all-consuming debate about leaving the EU. Unfortunately that is only being offered by David Cameron out of political selfinterest, not the national interest." Mr Miliband claimed Mr Cameron was "driven by weakness" and forced to appease Tory Right-wingers by promising a referendum.
He said: "David Cameron has committed the Conservatives to a major renegotiation of Britain's relationship with Europe on an arbitrary timetable.
Obsession "He is a Prime Minister who cannot tell us the nature of his renegotiation strategy or even if he will campaign to keep Britain in Europe...
"A Conservative government would be dominated by an all-consuming, damaging obsession within his party about whether Britain should leave the EU. You do not need a crystal ball to predict the consequences of such a state of affairs; you only need to read the history of John Major's government."
Mr Miliband said he recognised the "reputation of the EU is, with reason, at a low ebb" and said it had to "address anxieties about immigration".
He said: "We need fairer rules on what happens when people move here from another country and action to prevent a race to the bottom, where workers already here have their pay or conditions undercut."
Mr Miliband said a Labour government would ensure that citizens of new EU states would wait longer before gaining rights to work here.
He said rules would be reformed to stop people claiming benefits or credits for children who live abroad and to make it easier to deport "recently arrived" people who commit crimes.
Document THEEXP0020140312ea3c0006u
