{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1270"}
____
  
News
Ukip conference: Nigel Farage's damnation of Britain as a foreign land will do him no favours
By James Kirkup   
506 words
28 February 2014
17:03
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The UK Independence Party has been holding a conference in Torquay. In a few short hours, Nigel Farage, Ukip’s dominant force, showed of the party’s virtues and vices.
Ukip’s virtues came to the fore when Mr Farage was talking about the curious and colourful views expressed by some of his party. Instead of doing what other politicians do and disowning the off-message stuff, Mr Farage embraces it and turns it into an attack on homogenised and collusive political class:
“We’re not career politicians, you’re absolutely right. Unlike [Nick] Clegg, Cameron Miliband, d’you know what? I actually had a job – I worked. And this is obviously fairly extraordinary in modern-day politics when almost everybody goes straight from Oxford University into a research office, they become Members of Parliament in their middle-late 20s and they’re all very PC and no-one really says anything or stands up for their convictions, and with us you’ve got people from all walks of life. There are 34,000 paid-up members of the party and some people have views that are mildly eccentric. I would have thought that was just consistent with democracy."
That sort of attack on the political establishment is surely Ukip’s best hope of growing into something bigger than a niche party focussed on a small number of issues (Europe and immigration, mostly). It’s also the attack that worries the older parties most, because it has the potential to attract people who wouldn’t normally consider voting Ukip because of all the baggage the party carries.
That vice-heavy baggage was centre-stage during Mr Farage’s conference speech, where he fulminated about the evils of immigration:
"The fact that in scores of our cities and market towns, this country in a short space of time has frankly become unrecognisable. Whether it is the impact on local schools and hospitals, whether it is the fact in many parts of England you don't hear English spoken any more. This is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren."
Yes, some people will admire and agree with those sentiments. But others might well be put off by the whiff of vitriol directed at this country, a country Ukip noisily says it loves.
Mr Farage’s “unrecognisable" diatribe calls to mind William Hague in 2001. He pitted his dystopian idea of Britain as “foreign land" against Tony Blair’s upbeat vision of confident and cool Britannia. He got thumped. There are few prizes in politics for being seen to dislike your own country.
Ukip is sometimes written off a party of political anger. There’s actually nothing wrong with that: anger can be a powerful political force. But Mr Farage might want to take more care to focus his anger on Britain’s political classes, and not the country itself.
Document TELUK00020140228ea2s005by
