{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3638"}
____
  
News
Human rights laws put foreign killers on streets
Ben Endley   
300 words
24 February 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1s1; Lancs
19
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
HUNDREDS of foreign criminals including killers, rapists and paedophiles are on the loose after using "human rights" to dodge deportation.
More than 750 foreign crooks, including at least two killers, 11 rapists and 26 robbers, have skipped bail after they were released from prisons or immigration centres.
Despite the shocking figures, revealed after a Freedom of Information request, the Home Office has refused to name the fugitives – because it would breach their right to privacy.
Urgent
More worrying still, 16 of the criminals have been on the run for more than 10 years and 158 have been free for between five and 10 years.
Human rights legislation means foreign criminals cannot be kept behind bars indefinitely while the Home Office works to deport them.
They can only be held in custody if there is a reasonable prospect of them being removed in the near future. Tory MP Nick de Bois said: "It is deeply worrying that so many foreign criminals are walking the streets. Urgent action must be taken to find them.
"The British public are losing patience with so–called human rights claims. These criminals should be thrown out of this country and put back in jail in their country of origin."
As well as protecting the criminals' identities, the Home Office also refused to name the countries they came from, claiming it might undermine its ability to negotiate deportation in future.
A Home Office spokesman said: "We believe foreign nationals who break our rules should be removed from the UK at the earliest opportunity.
"Last year we removed more than 4,500 foreign national offenders.
"When individuals abscond, we work closely with police and probation services and employ specialist trace teams to return these individuals to prison."
Document THEEXP0020140224ea2o0001o
