{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3090"}
____
  
News
Miliband urges Labour voters to back the UK
Paul Gilbride   
436 words
25 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
2
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
ED MILIBAND will today appeal to Labour's traditional Scottish voters to reject First Minister Alex Salmond's "narrow nationalism" by warning workers will be worse off in a separate state.
The Labour leader is expected to argue that lower and middle-income families will lose out because Mr Salmond's policies will spark a "race to the bottom" on tax and wages.
Mr Salmond has been courting traditional Labour supporters in the west and centre of Scotland, whose votes are viewed as being decisive in the September 18 vote.
Economy He has hinted at a more generous benefits and pension system.
But Mr Miliband, holding a shadow cabinet meeting in Glasgow today as part of a campaign across Scotland, will warn separation will not tackle the cost-of-living crisis that has beset millions.
His comments come after Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper warned that a breakaway Scotland would need to let in one million immigrants to help fund future pensions. In Inverness yesterday she used official figures showing the population would need to grow by one million over 30 years to make pensions affordable.
Ahead of his visit, Mr Miliband said: "I want to rebuild our country in the cause of social justice, make changes needed to tackle the cost-of-living crisis, and create a more successful economy that works for hardworking people here in Scotland and across the UK.
"But I don't believe you can serve the cause of social justice and that of narrow nationalism.
"People in every part of the UK need decent jobs, a government that will stand up for them against powerful interests like the energy companies and an NHS that is there when we need it most.
If Scotland was to separate from the rest of the UK, our country would be in a race to the bottom with the Nationalists competing on lower tax rates for the top and lower wages or living standards for everyone else."
Yesterday Miss Cooper, who was born in Inverness, said: "All the evidence shows that there has to be a significant pensions gap in Scotland and that it has to be funded.
"If that isn't done as part of the UK, where the risks are shared, then it would have to be done by raising taxes, cutting pensions or by raising immigration to meet the bill."
'I REALLY DIG HEALTH LOTTERY': PAGES 8 AND 9 OPINION: PAGE 12
'I don't believe you can serve the cause of social justice and that of narrow nationalism' ED MILIBAND
Document THEEXP0020140425ea4p0009q
