{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3541"}
____
  
Features
'CAN YOU HAVE TOO MUCH SEX? I DON'T THINK SO'
GEMMA CALVERT   
2,638 words
20 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
16,17,18,19
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
Sexually bold, business savvy and bloomin' irritating at times. Luisa Zissman is like celebrity Marmite. Time to decide... Love or hate?
'How can my head be so small when I'm so intelligent?" Luisa Zissman is clad in sharp, masculine tailoring and checking out her new androgynous hairdo in the mirror. She pauses as her comment settles, glances over with a mischievous look, then bursts into laughter.
The celebrity ego, on this photo shoot at least, has definitely not landed. This is just Luisa being Luisa, provoking a reaction wherever she goes.
Feisty, sexually liberated and deliciously opinionated, the self-confessed "Business Barbie" has left a trail of commotion in her wake since walking into Lord Sugar's Apprentice boardroom - and the public eye - last summer.
But it was the 26-year-old mum of one's steamy antics on January's Celebrity Big Brother that really got everyone talking. Who can forget her under-theduvet shenanigans with American actress Jasmine Waltz, 31, and hot-tub frolics with N-Dubz star Dappy, 26? Plus, there was that "sex addiction" confession...
Since then, Luisa's kept quiet about the sex addiction, but today she's more than happy to set the record straight. The controversial star starts by explaining the diagnosis came three years ago, after the breakdown of her 19-month marriage to Oliver Zissman, 38.
"After the break-up, Ollie was going to see a counsellor and he said that I should see one, too, so I went to see one who also happened to be a sex therapist. He told me that I definitely had traits of being a sex addict," says Luisa.
Google "sex addiction" and you'll find descriptions of people who "obsess about sex", "take sexual risks" and allow sex to "interfere with work". So, did Luisa agree with the therapist's verdict? Not exactly.
"I honestly don't know if there is such a thing as being a sex addict," she says. "I think famous people like Russell Brand and Michael Douglas think it's cool to be a sex addict. But is there really anything wrong with having too much sex? I don't think so.
"It wasn't like I was leaving the office a million times a day to go and have sex, but I think I do have a higher than average sex drive."
And "average", pray tell us, is?
"Some couples don't even do it twice a week," says Luisa, flabbergasted. "If I'm in a relationship I'm doing it twice a day - morning and night. I think that's normal."
Ask her about her most bonkers (pun intended!) sexual experiences and Luisa goes silent. "I've done...." She starts, stops and chuckles at a risqué memory. "I've been part of the Mile High club. I've done it on the Eurostar. Pretty much everything that you could ever think of, I've done.
"I've been with girls, it's just one of those bi-curious things. I like trying stuff. I should write a sex book."
Luisa's world reached racy new heights at the age of 19 when she was introduced to Killing Kittens sex parties. By the time she met Oliver just over a year later - working at his gym equipment company as a marketing and PR manager - Luisa was a regular at the "elite casual sex" gatherings and got him hooked on the scene. Their liberal lifestyle continued after they married in August 2009.
"We had a very open, unconventional marriage so, with regard to being faithful, we definitely blurred the lines," says Luisa, before explaining that they split shortly before their daughter Dixie's second birthday - after she discovered Oliver was seeing another woman.
Luisa, however, says that far from being furious about her husband's relationship (she refuses to use the word "affair") with Johanna Person, 23, she thinks it was the best thing that could have happened.
"Johanna didn't ruin things at all. We weren't happy together so she helped things along nicely.
"I didn't want the [unconventional marriage] lifestyle any more - I was a mum and my priority was my daughter - but he still wanted it. It just didn't work out for us, but he's happy, I'm happy, she's happy, everyone's happy."
It sounds a touch New Agey. Not least because Luisa went on to give Johanna a job at her '50s-themed St Albans bakery, Dixie's Cupcakery.
Nowadays, Luisa and Oliver - who are only just getting around to divorcing - are best friends and business partners. The former couple also share custody of Dixie, with Oliver and Johanna - who Luisa "loves" - having the four year old two nights a week and every other weekend.
This arrangement, says Luisa, grants her more freedom than other single mums and explains how she finds time to party - something her critics have jumped on. She's also been given stick for stripping off for lads' mag shoots, being brazenly sexual and not holding back when asked her opinion.
"Women definitely come up against a lot more criticism than men do," she says. "It's very frustrating. Unfortunately, society likes to put people in boxes. You can't be an intelligent, sexy female in business who's also a mum that likes partying. Apparently that's completely taboo. But I like challenging people's stereotypes."
In the future, there's every chance Dixie will stumble across footage online of Mum on Celebrity Big Brother in some raunchy clinches. Not that Luisa is remotely concerned.
"Sex parties, kissing in hot tubs... I'm not ashamed of that," she says, shaking her head. "There are worse things you can do than kiss a guy on TV. I'm not a rapist, I'm not a murderer, I'm not a paedophile."
She's not a die-hard feminist either. We're quite taken aback when Luisa shares this nugget of information with us - after all, she's a working single mum living her life her way, with no apologies.
"I really shy away from linking myself to feminism," says Luisa. "I really don't like the extremes of it, where it's like: 'We shouldn't have Page 3.' If you want to be a glamour model, do it. If you want to be a stay-at-home mum, do it. If you want to be a CEO of a FTSE 100 company, go for it. Feminism is about having the choice to do what you want."
Quietly, mid-shoot, Luisa's manager (or "momager" as Luisa calls her) says that she hopes we see Luisa's "affectionate side".
And we do. From the compliments she dishes out ("Have you had a nose job? Your nose is gorgeous.") to her story of how she's loaned her Audi convertible to a friend who's going through a divorce, Luisa is certainly open and warm. She's also more of a girls' girl than we anticipated, and speaks lovingly about her five closest friends, including Apprentice winner, The Apprenticewinner, Dr Leah Totton, who she says is "lovely".
However, if you're looking for raw girlie emotion, you're in for a wait. Ask Luisa when she last blubbed and she can't remember. Did she cry after her marriage split? "No... Not initially," she says, somewhat sheepishly. "I'm quite unemotional. S**t happens in life, deal with it, move on."
It would surely take a strong-minded man to take on Luisa and, right now, she insists, there is nobody of note - despite being linked to multimillionaire internet tycoon Andrew Collins, 44.
"I'm always seeing somebody," she says, a cheeky smile creeping across her face. "Actually, you never really know how many people are on the scene with me!"
However, she admits that she is considering giving up her single-girl status once and for all.
"I'd love to be in a relationship with one person who loves me and I love them. I think I'll give it a try. You know, I'm growing up now. I'm quite set on what I want from a man - someone who's an equal to me. I don't want to date a celebrity. I'd like to date a businessman, someone who's in the 'working' world."
Luisa came to this conclusion after dating five unemployed guys on the trot and realising that she was not getting much out of the relationships. Take the boyfriend she whisked away to Thailand who later bought her a doorstop for her birthday. "He did smoke a lot of weed so I can only assume he was high when he went shopping for my birthday gift," she says.
She's not been short of celebrity male attention, either - at least not from her CBB housemate, Dappy, who she insists is just "a fun mate to flirt with". There was talk of a fling with her Apprentice rival Jordan Poulton, 27, which Luisa dismisses with a roll of her brown eyes. "We just kissed," she says.
Then, she was caught straddling Moshi Monsters CEO Michael Acton Smith, 40, in the back of a taxi last year. Afterwards, the pair insisted they were just "business contacts". He has a girlfriend, you see.
"I randomly bumped into Michael and his girlfriend [after the picture was all over the papers] while they were on a romantic weekend at a country hotel," Luisa says. "I texted him to say: 'I've just seen you,' and he replied: 'I just saw you.' That was awkward."
Luisa also apparently "dated" Capital FM DJ Greg Burns, too, before appearing on Celebrity Big Brother - but this is not how she sees it... "No!" she groans. "Just because we've had a bit of an encounter in the past... It really does not mean that I'm his girlfriend."
She readily admits she's "a little bit famous" but stops short of calling herself a "celebrity". "I don't live a celebrity lifestyle," says Luisa. "I get up at 6am every day and bake in my shop for three hours then I go to work in my office. I get up with my daughter, I put her to bed. I go to Sainsbury's to do the food shopping..." Er, Sainsbury's? With her three businesses and a Ferrari on the drive of a four-bedroom house in St Albans, we had Luisa down as a Waitrose kind of girl.
"I was actually going to say 'Waitrose', but I wanted to sound more ordinary, so I changed it," she says, bursting into hysterics.
On The Apprentice, Luisa's CV boasted that she had "the energy of a Duracell bunny and the sex appeal of Jessica Rabbit". It's true, but she's more than that.
As well as Dixie's Cupcakery, Luisa runs online business The Baker Shop, which trades in 91 countries, and Bakers Toolkit, which launched last November.
Thirty staff work across Brand Luisa and she invests her profits back into the businesses, meaning the future is very attractive indeed.
"My goal was to buy a Ferrari by the time I was 30 and I was actually able to get one aged 26. My next life goal is to turn over £6million within the next few months and make a profit of £1million."
No wonder she can afford holidays to the Turks And Caicos Islands and counts helicopter flying lessons as her new hobby. And all this at just 26. Yeah, we know. Bloomin' amazing.
Luisa was entrepreneurial from a young age. She was nine when she started breeding and selling rabbits at home in Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire. She got a supermarket checkout job at 15 to help pay for the upkeep of a horse that her parents - former business management consultant Christina, 52, and Zo Kalozois, 56, a retired IT consultant - had bought her. And she couldn't wait to leave Northampton High School after her A Levels to get working for real. She began at a computer firm in Derby before landing a radio PR job in London at 19. Her first baking business, inspired by her grandma's love of cakes, was launched nearly three years ago.
"I've always wanted to be my own boss," says Luisa. "After leaving school I worked for people, but I've been sacked from pretty much every job I've ever had because I thought I could do a better job than them. And I told them that."
Hardly surprising, as she's not exactly afraid to speak her mind, as demonstrated when she clashed with Katie Hopkins on Channel 5's The Big British Immigration Row: Live. Politics, we suggest, could be a perfect avenue for her in the future.
"I'd make an honest MP," she says. "I'd lobby to bridge the gap between when paid maternity finishes and free childcare starts, so that women could go back to work quicker. I'd love to be an MP!" Luisa, incredibly, was back working at her desk within two days of having Dixie. "I know, it was a mad thing to do," says Luisa. "But a business isn't going to run itself."
The subsequent post-natal depression - which she attributes to returning to work too quickly - was, in her words, "the most emotionally trying time of her life". She says she only got through it by trying to be as positive as possible.
Luisa also seized control of her body. After gaining 31/2st during pregnancy and losing it slowly afterwards, her C-cup breasts were, she says, "like empty sacks of skin". The boob job she later had boosted her to a DD/E cup.
"A lot of women who have had children will be able to relate to that," says Luisa. "I just wanted to be happy with my body again."
Whatever your views on Luisa Zissman you can't dispute that she's a success story when it comes to her career. As for whether career she considers herself a role model... she most certainly does.
"Yes, I know that I sometimes do some crazy s**t, but I'd like to think that I really inspire other girls to be financially independent. Don't just aspire to be WAGs and s**g footballers because they make a lot of money. Go and make your own money. Buy your own Louboutins."
Hear hear!
Visit Bakerstoolkit.co.uk and Thebakershop.co.uk.
Cv
1987 Born in Milton Keynes.
2004 Leaves Northampton High School aged 17 and starts working.
2006 Moves to London and gets a job in PR, where she meets Oliver Zissman.
2009 Marries Oliver and falls pregnant.
2010 Daughter Dixie is born.
2011 Launches Dixie's Cupcakery and The Baker Shop. Splits with Oliver.
2013 Is the runnerup in the ninth series of runner-up The Apprentice. Starts Bakers Toolkit.
2014 Comes fourth in CBB. Speaks her mind on The Big British Immigration Row: Live.
BEHIND THE SHOOT
The tailored look, er, suited the former Apprentice star
It took a while for Luisa to get used to her quiffed 'do!
The mum of one worked the camera like a pro
Tell us what you think at Fabulousmag.co.uk, on Twitter #FabMagLuisa or at Facebook.com/fabulous
Hair Dino Pereira at HMS Creative using Kiehl's Make-up: Lan Nguyen-C-realis at My Management using YSL "louche Eclat Styling: Kate Harbour Luisa wears: jacket, Boohoo; shirt, Topman; trousers, River Island; tie, Marks S Spencer, shoes, Primark
'I SHY AWAY FROM LINKING MYSELF TO FEMINISM'
'I SAID I SHOP IN SAINSBURY'S TO SOUND ORDINARY, BUT REALLY I GO TO WAITROSE!'
Document THESUN0020140420ea4k0007g
