{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2402"}
____
  
News
More schools are investigated over claims of Islamic takeover
Greg Hurst   
479 words
15 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Inquiries into strict Islamic practices in some Birmingham schools were widened again yesterday as an exheadteacher was appointed to lead the investigation.
There was confusion over comments by Mark Rogers, the city council's chief executive, in which he rejected claims of a plot by hardline Muslims to infiltrate schools.
Mr Rogers told a Birmingham blogger that inquiries so far had found problems in some city schools but attributed these to "cultural" traditions within immigrant communities at odds with England's liberal education and parts of the national curriculum.
Although he played down the allegations, a new statement by the council said that its inquiry now spanned 25 city schools and 200 testimonies or pieces of evidence. It will submit a preliminary report next month.
It has appointed Ian Kershaw, managing director of Northern Education, as chief adviser to its investigation. He will report to a review group headed by Stephen Rimmer, a senior Home Office official, and including representatives from the police, education, faith leaders and politicians.
The stepping up of the inquiry, with Home Office and police involvement, contrasted with the remarks by the city's chief executive, who last week dismissed claims of radicalisation or any conspiracy.
"I don't believe there is a conspiracy. Conspiracy is such a damaging and loaded word. Easy to use, and difficult to prove," Mr Rogers told a local website, the Chamberlain Files.
He added: "What we may be seeing are some individuals from communities who are asking questions about the kinds of custom and practices they want to see and whether they can fit in with the prevailing cultures and customs and practices. This is not about some radicalisation agenda."
Claims include the segregation of girls from boys, extremist themes in some lessons and assemblies, and the withdrawal of some pupils, notably girls, from sex education, PE and music lessons, which are legal requirements. The treatment of female staff in the schools is also under investigation.
Birmingham City Council has said that Mr Rogers's interview was given several days ago and pointed out that its inquiries had been on-going since then.
The investigation was prompted by an anonymous letter purportedly from one Muslim to another setting out a "Trojan Horse" plan to encourage Salafi Muslims to become school governors, and then use their influence to undermine the head teacher and introduce conservative Islamic practices.
The letter named Park View Academy and Tahir Alam, its chairman of governors, as being at the centre of its alleged plot, something that the school has repeatedly denied. Park View has since been the subject of two unscheduled Ofsted inspections. It is also braced for a critical judgment shortly. Its sister academies, Nansen Primary and Golden Hillock, were also inspected with 15 other city schools as part of the inquiry.
Document T000000020140415ea4f000aq
