{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"870"}
____
  
Features
Why no help for Peaches?
566 words
5 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
39
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
PEOPLE judge others far too quickly.
£50 LETTER Nobody knew how Peaches Geldof was feeling yet people have called her selfish for using heroin, which played a part in her leaving behind her sons.
Addictions aren't always just because you like the feeling, they are due to trying to block thoughts out of your head and you find the vice that does that for you.
People don't like to ask for help as it is seen as a weakness. If only they did maybe it wouldn't end so sadly.
HEIDI COLLIER By email WHY do people who have a fantastic lifestyle have to find release in drugs? They should find happiness in their family. It's a tragedy for Peaches' husband and two lovely boys. Rest in peace.
LESS than after being down, we are much is not What a surprise. figures for growth, unemployment there an election any chance? JOAN SMITH By email THE story that Peaches had taken heroin, and it could have led her death — leaving her tiny children without a mother — is as tragic as Kate McCann revealing she can't rest until she knows what has happened to her missing daughter Madeleine.
Both stories show in life bad things sadly do happen.
GARY TUTTON By email IT'S so sad to learn that heroin is likely to have played a part in Peaches' death.
What makes it more tragic is Peaches was a mother to two young children who she doted a week told crime is now told that being recorded.
on.
What about immigration, and so on? Is coming up by Celebrities may have fame and fortune but no one really knows what goes on.
DAVID ROSE By email We shouldn't judge Peaches.
MARIE GOSNEY By email LOSING a child is a very painful experience and my sympathies go out to Peaches' family.
The police say they will hunt her dealer.
But when a drug user dies of an overdose, my constabulary put it under "statistics". The police force does not hunt their killer. Law and order do not reign.
RAY PRICE By email HOW sad to hear that the family of the 15-year-old boy charged with the murder of schoolteacher Ann Maguire are receiving death threats.
I have two teenage boys. I try to keep track of them but I wouldn't know if they had a knife stuffed in their pockets in the mornings.
The only person we can blame in this situation is her killer.
MARIE JENNINGS By email I HAVE the highest admiration for the judge in the Max Clifford case for taking into consideration his antics during the rial before sentencing him. It just shows the public that these kind of people who think they can do what they like and get away with it have no regard for the law.
GEORGE SLOAN By email WHY would anyone criticise John Terry, pictured, for his tears after Chelsea's Champions League exit? His tears symbolised the disappointment felt by every supporter.
JUDITH HAIRE By email two more LESS than a week after being told crime is down, we are now told that much is not being recorded. What a surprise. What about figures for growth, immigration, unemployment and so on? Is there an election coming up by any chance? DAVID ROSE By email goes
Document THESUN0020140505ea55000f2
