{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1224"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
Nick and Nigel hack at each other — and leave the big gladiators hurt
ADAM BOULTON   
1,155 words
23 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
27
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Do you try to ignore someone creating a nuisance or confront them? Ever since UKIP's breakthrough in last year's council elections, this dilemma has bedevilled the three parties of modern-day government — Conservatives, Liberal Democrats and Labour — the trio Nigel Farage likes to call "LibLabCon", with the emphasis on the final syllable.
Until now David Cameron, Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband have refused to mix it with the troublemaker. They won't debate with Ukippers in the television studios and they don't have to face them in the Commons, since UKIP has no MPs.
At the same time, without making a fuss about it, the mainstream parties have quietly adapted their policy positions to UKIP's pitch. All three of them are now worried about immigration, and say they reject the current basis of Britain's membership of the EU. With varying degrees of credibility, they are all committed to the principle of holding an in/out referendum.
So even as they carry on talking between themselves, UKIP's ranting in the background has infiltrated their conversation. Nobody denies that George Osborne's budget measures on pensions and savings last week were targeted at the silver savers who seem very tempted to have a purple UKIP rinse for May's local and European elections, but, politely, nobody dwells on that sensitive matter either.
This week the "ignore them and they'll go away" strategy will come to an end when Clegg stoops to take on Farage in the first of two live televised debates. Michael Heseltine, a Europhiliac like Clegg, called it a misjudgment to equate government with "a protest group" in this way but Clegg deliberately provoked the confrontation during his weekly phone-in show, Call Clegg, on LBC, guaranteeing that it would be taken up by the rest of the media. LBC's debate, also on Sky News, is on Wednesday. The BBC plans a second round a week later.
Since Clegg and Farage disagree on just about everything, LBC is hoping for a gladiatorial contest. There are far fewer rules than for the general election debates. The studio audience will be allowed to boo and cheer and the flow of debate will be up to the "shock jock" host, Nick Ferrari. There are only two stipulations — equal time for the two men and a single topic, Europe.
Clegg rehearsed his message earlier this month at his party's spring conference in York — UKIP spews "bile" and only the Lib Dems are "the party of 'in'" the EU. UKIP offers the other side of the coin as the only party pledged to get Britain out.
A lively exchange is inevitable. Caustic put-downs are as much Farage's stock in trade as fags and pints. Voters may not put Europe at the top of their list of interests but it can be stretched to cover questions of more pressing concern, from migration and taxation to gay marriage — scheduled for debate in Brussels and a subject on which Farage got snagged last week.
Yet there may not be as much handto-hand combat as the producers would like. Without any formal agreement, the three leaders in the 2010 general election debates each concluded that going negative could backfire and avoided personal attacks. At least Cameron, Clegg and Gordon Brown were genuine rivals.
The fascination of the Clegg-Farage face-off is that UKIP and the Liberal Democrats don't have much to say to each other; they just disagree. Clegg and Farage won't really be talking to each other or even trying to win over the same audience.
UKIP and the Lib Dems are not trying to steal voters directly from each other.
UKIP is primarily taking its support from the Conservatives. The Lib Dems need to claw back from Labour and the Tories. Farage's latest claim is that his core electorate will be the betrayed working class. The Lib Dems' chances of harvesting a protest vote evaporated the day they went into government. Today they must be a party of principle or they are nothing. Anyway, except when swept up in a by-election tsunami, the "working class" has never been a heartland for the centre party.
While their Tory coalition partners grumble that Clegg has nothing left to lose by taking on Farage, the Lib Dems cheerfully acknowledge that the debates could be "a win-win" for both of them: a priceless opportunity to raise their profiles during an election campaign.
There may be something in this. At Labour HQ, bitterness is growing at how hard Miliband finds it to attract the media's attention. Meanwhile, No 10 is fretting about attempts to stage a further debate in May, this time involving Farage and representatives of the three other parties, on the eve of polling day.
The Lib Dems are not expecting a sudden turnaround in their fortunes. Rather than take days off for debate preparation as in 2010, Clegg has kept up his touring schedule. Even in key yellow areas, he has found that the mood is not as benign as it was for the Euro elections in 2009, when the Lib Dems came fourth with 13.4% and UKIP were in second place with 16.1%. Typically for politicians with backs to the wall, the Lib Dems claim that at least they are no longer vilified on doorsteps for betrayal. It's worth Clegg making the effort. These elections are by proportional representation, so every upward tick in vote share is likely to be rewarded. Lib Dems are also looking further ahead to the general election, drawing comfort from voters who say they won't back them this May, but would "consider" doing so next year.
UKIP is leading in most opinion polls on the European vote at about 30%. If, as most psephologists predict, UKIP takes first place on polling day, it will be a bigger blow for the Tories, for whom 2009 was an appetiser to the big win in 2010, and for Labour, which is desperate to prove it is a resurgent opposition.
Of course, all the mainstream parties want the UKIP tide to recede after May's election but it's in neither Lib Dem nor Labour interests for the party to disappear altogether. Down at about 5%, the UKIP vote would comprise ex-Tories, to the benefit of the other parties. A bit higher and it's less likely that either reds or blues would have an overall majority — creating an opportunity for the yellows, unless they've been obliterated.
At last Farage and Clegg have found something they agree on. They want to attract as much attention as they possibly can to their double act on Wednesday. Cameron and Miliband will ignore them, but they won't go away.
@adamboultonsky
Document ST00000020140323ea3n000pz
