{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3456"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel Farage: no Briton could work as hard as my German wife
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
790 words
22 April 2014
18:29
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Ukip leader says no British person would be able to be his secretary and work as hard as his German wife as he defends having her on the payroll
No British worker is capable of being Nigel Farage's secretary, the Ukip leader has claimed, as he defended himself from charges of hypocrisy after putting his German wife on the payroll.
Mr Farage insisted he is not denying a British worker a job by employing his foreign-born wife, saying he knows of nobody who can work as many hours as she does.
He launched a £1.5 million poster campaign for the European elections on Tuesday that warns that 26 million unemployed Europeans are "after" British jobs, driving down wages and leaving British workers begging on the streets.
Yet Mr Farage employs his German wife, Kirsten, as his secretary. She is paid £25,000 a year with European Parliament allowances.
Asked whether there is no British person able to do the job, Mr Farage said: "She came here as a highly skilled person, earning a high salary, paying a very large amount of tax."
Asked if she was "taking someone else's job", Mr Farage said: "No, because I don't think anybody else would want to be in my house at midnight, going through emails, getting me briefed for the next day.
"Nobody else could do that job. I don't know anybody who would work those kinds of hours."
"She earns a very a modest salary for working extremely unsociable hours for me, being available up to seven days a week. That is a very different situation to the mass of hundreds of thousands of people coming in and flooding the lower ends of the labour market."
Mr Farage said he was being "singled out" because one in four Westminster MPs employs a relative.
"Don't forget, I am the turkey that would vote for Christmas. I want to get rid of British MEPs and all the expenses," he said.
Launching the most expensive election campaign in the party's history, Mr Farage said immigration would "dominate" as the most important issues for voters.
His party will campaign for an Australian-style points-based system that would allow skilled people with no criminal records into the country, cutting immigration to 30,000-50,000 people a year.
That could see higher numbers of Indian and New Zealanders coming to Britain but fewer eastern Europeans, he said.
Mr Farage chose Sheffield for the launch in part because the city hosts the constituencies of Nick Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister, and David Blunkett, the former Home Secretary who oversaw Labour's immigration policy when the borders were opened to eastern Europe.
Mr Blunkett has subsequently admitted that immigration had harmed social "cohesion" in Sheffield, Mr Farage said.
The billboard campaign was funded by Paul Sykes, the tycoon behind the Meadowhall shopping centre. Mr Sykes said there would be "no limit" on his future spending.
Earlier, a Labour MP accused Mr Farage of "sowing hatred" against immigrants and said he ranks alongside European far-Right leaders such as Marine Le Pen and Geert Wilders.
Mike Gapes, the MP for Ilford South, said Ukip's plans to curb immigration would leave Britain resembling Albania, which shut itself off from the rest of the world during the communist era.
Mr Gapes said Ukip would turn Britain into a "very nasty country".
"This is a campaign designed to sow fear, animosity and hatred towards immigrants. It is a pattern similar to what has happened in the Netherlands by Geert Wilders, in France by Marine Le Pen. There is a long history of far-right parties trying to scape-goat migrants and immigrants in order to win voters," he told BBC Radio 4.
"They are saying that people's problems in this country when in fact there are two million British people living in European countries, and two million European people living here. Many are doing vital jobs in our economy and contributing to our prosperity."
The comments risked playing into Mr Farage's hands, as Ukip has been keen to portray itself as the only party prepared to have an "honest" debate about immigration.
Mr Farage said the posters used "very cool and calm language".
He added: "Any debate on immigration is closed down automatically: decry it as racism, don't talk about it, brush the issue under the carpet. We're not going to do that.
"It is the working families in Britain who have paid a huge price for that over the last 10 years and nobody in Westminster cares about them."
Document TELUK00020140422ea4m004jy
