{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3404"}
____
  
NEWS
Ukip candidate's firm 'employed illegal immigrants'
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
304 words
16 May 2014
12:03
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Restaurant owned by Ukip candidate raided by immigration officers
Ukip's small business spokesman faced claims of hypocrisy after it emerged seven people were arrested for suspected immigration offences in a raid on his restaurant.
The authorities raided the Manchester restaurant, set up by Ukip European election candidate Amjad Bashir with his two sons Tayub and Mudassar, on June 1 last year.
The Home Office confirmed seven people were arrested "for a variety of immigration offences" and a civil penalty notice was served after the raid.
The family have denied any wrongdoing and Nigel Farage said they are appealing and he was not going to "prejudge" the case.
Three days after the raid Mr Bashir resigned as a director of the company which owns the Zouk Tea Bar and Grill, and a sister branch in Bradford, but he remains a major shareholder and has continued to take a role in the running of the restaurant, the Times reported.
Mr Bashir, 61, is second on Ukip's list of candidates for the Yorkshire and the Humber region in this month's European elections.
Tayub Bashir told The Times that they were appealing against the notice and had not yet paid a fine.
He said the restaurant conducted immigration checks on all employees and vigorously denied any wrongdoing.
Mr Farage told BBC's This Week: "His son is the director and runs that business and they had an argument and a row with the immigration people which they are appealing. I'm not going to prejudge that."
Liberal Democrat MEP for Yorkshire and the Humber Edward McMillan-Scott said: "Forget the obvious hypocrisy; employing illegal immigrants is exploitative and against the law."
Mr Bashir appears in the restaurant in Ukip's election advert.
Document TELUK00020140516ea5g001xh
