{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2312"}
____
  
Guardian Features Pages
G2: Women: A certain age
Michele Hanson   
388 words
20 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
12
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
I don't want to panic you all about immigration, but I bet there's going to be more and more of it. Fighting it is just Custer's Last Stand. The foreigners will keep coming, and they'll win. And why shouldn't they? They have no choice. What would you do if you were them? Stay at home, starve and die? No. You'd try and get to a safer bit of what's meant to be the global village. A bit like ours - lush, green, full of food (for most people), water, schools, hospitals, and not in a war zone. Sod it if it's a bit crowded, the people hostile and detention centres horrendous. That's nothing on the hell hole you've escaped from.
My grandparents did it. If they hadn't come here, they'd have probably been murdered, and now that mass murder and rape, wars, droughts, floods, bombings, famines, slave labour and exploitation, collapsing factories and industrial and environmental catastrophes seem to be on the up, squillions more desperate people are on the move. They want a small share of what we've got.
What luck that the poor are often more generous than the very wealthy, because they're the ones who are going to have to do all the sharing. I suspect that the nasty shit-stirrers, such as our current leaders and anti-foreigner upstarts, are doing their best to whip up hatred among the lower orders, so that they'll do the fighting and the dirty work for them, while they retire to their fortresses in Kensington, Brooklyn Heights, Mosman NSW and Ostermalm, and everybody else scrabbles around battling for the few crumbs that are left.
"We're all right, Jack," says Fielding ruefully, from his middle-class hidey-hole in Dorset, "but what about the grandchildren?" BBC4 reports that the Institute of Business Ethics would like all companies, including the "biggest multinationals [to] sign up to an agreed set of global ethical standards". Wouldn't that be a lovely start? I try to live in hope. In the meantime, Fielding has taken to standing on the edge of the Jurassic cliffs and screaming at the sea. I may join him. What else can we do?
Document GRDN000020140520ea5k0000v
