{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"937"}
____
  
Features
THE WEEK IN WESTMINSTER
283 words
3 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
30
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
TUESDAY, MAY 6 Commons: Oral Questions, Justice, including Topical Questions. Pupils at risk of Educational Disadvantage. Wales Bill, Committee of the Whole House (Day 2). services operated by Southeastern Trains.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: Votes at 16; Cyberstalking; Loan protection gap; Commemoration of 450th anniversary of the birth of Shakespeare; Tackling fraud in the Universal Jobmatch Programme. Lords: Oral Questions: Women in frontline combat; Reducing liver disease; Including mental health treatment and support in contracts for the probation services. House of Lords Reform (No. 2) Bill, Committee of the Whole House. Immigration Bill, Third reading. NHS Commissioning Board and Clinical Commissioning Groups (Responsibilities and Standing Rules) (Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations 2014. Actions taken to follow up the Report of the Select Committee on Small and Medium Sized Enterprises.
WEDNESDAY, MAY 7
Commons: Oral Questions, Scotland. At noon, questions to the Prime Minister. Smoke Alarms (Private Rented Sector). Water Bill, Consideration of Lords amendments. Importance of self–build and custom build.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: S4C and Welsh identity; Financial Services Authority and Connaught Income Fund; Discrimination in electoral conduct; Improving the Employment and Support Allowance application process for people with mental health problems; UK policy on protection of migratory birds in Malta.
Lords: Oral Questions: Findings of the Age UK report 'Care in Crisis' on the impact of cuts to care for older people; Reviewing the Commonhold and Leasehold Reform Act 2002; Permitting the Secretary of State for Health to give day–to–day directions to NHS England; European Commission's bringing infraction proceedings in respect of Eurotunnel's structure and charges. Care Bill [HL], Consideration of Commons amendments. Civil Legal Aid (Remuneration) (Amendment) (No 3) Regulations 2014.
Document DT00000020140503ea530005y
