{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2899"}
____
  
Features
The Apostate
Simon Cottee   
4,124 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
10,11,13,15,17,18
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A young Muslim leaves Pakistan for Britain, discovers the wonders of science and rejects his faith.
On September 11, he posts a final picture on Facebook and takes his own life
It his is a story about islam, alienation and violent death — but it's not one you'll have read before. it is not about radicalisation, jihad and martyrdom. this is the story of an ex-Muslim. a young man who, as a teenager, moves from pakistan to Britain, learns about the wonders of science and embraces a militant form of atheism. who rejects God and religion, spirals into depression, and in an act of despair and disconsolation, takes his own life on a date that will resonate with everyone: september 11. this is irtaza hussain's story. But it's also the story of other men and women just like him, who, as a matter of principle and conscience, choose to abandon islam and religious belief, becoming "apostates" to the faith.
irtaza was just 22 when he died. his body was found in hainault forest in chigwell, essex, at 4.20pm on wednesday, september 11, last year. he had hanged himself. i know this not because of the inquest into his death, which adjourned last september and has yet to return a verdict; i know this because i saw the picture he posted of himself on facebook moments before he died. the last picture he took, sitting in a tree, rope ominously in view. the picture that haunts me still. it was entitled "Just a Jump away".
I am a criminology lecturer at Kent University. i first became interested in islamic apostates after the brutal slaying of the film-maker theo van Gogh by Mohammed Bouyeri, a radical dutch-Moroccan islamist, on an amsterdam street in 2004. when the police recovered Van Gogh's ravaged body they discovered a handwritten note pinned to his chest with a small knife. it was addressed to ayaan hirsi ali, a somali-born political activist and then member of the dutch parliament. hirsi ali had worked with Van Gogh on a short, controversial film about the enslavement of women in islam. she is also a former Muslim and well known in the netherlands for her scathing criticisms of islam. the contents of that note are chilling: Bouyeri condemns hirsi ali as a "soldier of evil" who has "turned her back on the truth", and threatens her with death.
I wanted to know more about hirsi ali, and whether there were others like her with similar stories about leaving islam. i met irtaza in March 2012. he had seen an advert i posted on the online forum of the council of ex-Muslims of Britain (ceMB) expressing my interest in interviewing socalled "apostates" for a research study. he sent me an email saying he was willing to talk. when he emerged from a crowded platform at liverpool street station, the first thing i noticed wasn't his height — he was tall — nor his luxuriantly thick, long, black hair, but the object in his hand: a book by stephen hawking. irtaza, evidently, was a fan. science, it transpired, was one of his great passions.
Born in islamabad in 1992, irtaza moved to Britain with his family in 2008, when he was 16, first to cardiffand then to dagenham in east london. he told me he had started to read the Koran, in arabic, at around the age of seven, recalling how a man from the local madrasa would come to his family's home every day. "they really didn't follow a fixed time. they would just come unannounced, and at one point i complained, and he said that everyone reads the Koran every day, so what excuse do you have? at that time, i really didn't have a very good answer and i actually started to cry."
Irtaza remembered attending a class where the children were encouraged to cry over the story of the slaughter of the prophet Mohammed's family at Karbala. "Basically, i couldn't do that," he said. "there were a lot of massacres in my city, there have been lots of deaths, so it was very dif-ficult for me to shed tears for the death of one man." in 2005 an earthquake had killed more than 73 people when a tower block collapsed near his neighbourhood, and later he had witnessed the aftermath of a number of bomb blasts, including a suicide bombing near the lal Masjid mosque, less than a mile away from his home, which killed 19 people.
He struggled with praying five times a day, describing his prayers as "very infrequent… i'd feel terrible about it". Moving to Britain had a profound impact on him. By the time he began his a-levels, in cardiff, irtaza was having "strong doubts" about islam. "i became a bit liberal," he confessed.
The "i was thinking about picking up music, i was thinking about having a girlfriend, i was thinking about watching movies."
Unlike many ex-Muslims i have interviewed, irtaza was open about his apostasy and had told his family about his atheism. he confided to me that the relationship with his father was especially turbulent, and leaving islam made it all the more so. according to irtaza: "My dad said, 'Well, you have three years, and if you don't adopt the religion of the book in that time then you're not my son any more.'" they had reached an agreement: they were not to talk about faith. "he's drawn a line," irtaza told me. "he says you can say whatever you want as long as it doesn't cross into religion, and i definitely try my best to follow that."
I spoke with irtaza's father, sabir, in mid-January this year. as i was warmly welcomed into the lounge of his home in dagenham, i was struck by a large poster-sized photograph of irtaza on a cabinet, sitting proudly among other less imposing family photographs. it is recent, a head shot. irtaza is smiling. he looks happy, full of life. sabir told me how much he loved his son and how intelligent he thought he was, and denied he had ever threatened to disown him.
"We had no problem with his views," sabir said. "But he had put things [on Facebook]. i told him, look, this can cause problems for me, my family and for my extended family [in pakistan]. i was just trying to minimise the contamination. there was a fear that somehow harm can come to him, to the family or to the extended family, because we can't control what irtaza says. if he says something bad, if he does something bad, creates a friction, he gets into trouble, we get into trouble, our family gets into trouble. that's the only thing that bothered me."
There was also the issue of irtaza's dismal career prospects. despite his intelligence, irtaza had performed poorly in his a-levels in cardiff, and was unable to secure a place at university. this made him despondent: as he put it in an internet forum post in November 2010, "i don't have a future at this moment in time." that his brother, ijtaba, was academically very successful would only have amplified irtaza's crushing sense of underachievement: he had to settle for working at his father's furniture store in romford.
When he wasn't studying for resits or working in the shop, irtaza would immerse himself in literature, absorbing the works of 19th-century philosophers, contemporary scientists and 21st-century "new atheists". and when he wasn't reading he was actively involved in various secular meeting groups. he proudly posted photographs on Facebook of himself with intellectuals and activists such as richard dawkins, lawrence Krauss, steven pinker, ac Grayling, peter tatchell and dan Barker, author of losing Faith in Faith: From preacher to atheist. irtaza looks especially enthused alongside Barker, a prominent american atheist who served as a christian minister for 19 years, whom irtaza described as "the man who turned me into an atheist".
The sunday times contacted Barker and asked if he remembered meeting irtaza. he said he did and recalled it was at an event organised by the central london humanists in london, in November 2012. Barker was the guest speaker.
"Irtaza came up to me with one of my books and asked me to sign it," he said. "after talking with him for a while, he offered his help and we got busy with the set-up for the event. he had a lot of energy." Barker described irtaza as "a reader and a thinker, with the heart of an activist", someone who "truly wanted to make the world a better place".
Away from the buzz of these events, irtaza lived a solitary life. he would spend most of his time in his bedroom, his father told me, hunched over his computer keyboard, hooked into a world of distant strangers. On October 21, 2010, irtaza made his first post on the online forum of the ceMB, announcing that he had recently left islam "because of its inability to justify the restrictions it imposes on me", elaborating that "i had a lot of trouble trying to make sense of what my parents had enforced upon me and i had quite a lot of difficulty trying to find out why it would be a good thing to call myself a Muslim".
Though he used a pseudonym on the ceMB forum, irtaza didn't hide behind it, and he was later to appear on national television, in May 2012, on the BBc1 show the Big Questions, hosted by Nicky campbell. he represented the CEMB using his real name. That took courage and conviction. Calmly, and with only a hint of nerves, Irtaza expressed his reservations about faith schools.
"Secular education," he said, "is quite open to every other view, whereas if you allow a faith school of just one religion, then they will teach the world view of that religion."
He garnered a couple of rounds of rapturous applause for his comments during the debate. "Everyone says that faith teaches children to be curious," he said. "Well, they already have a natural curiosity and I do feel that we should pursue curiosity for curiosity's sake."
In the months after our interview I stayed in contact with Irtaza, mainly through email, but we gradually lost touch. The last time I saw him was at a CEMB lunch in November 2012. Most of us went to the pub afterwards, but Irtaza didn't join us. He seemed distant, and left soon after the meal.
To read the scores of condolences on Facebook, Irtaza was well-liked and admired. "You were a caring, sensitive soul with a brilliant mind," said one acquaintance, echoing a common sentiment. Andrew Copson, chief executive of the British Humanist Association, described him as "an intelligent and thoughtful young man".
Irtaza had 290 friends on Facebook, yet he was profoundly lonely. In one post he alluded to the "minor heckling or snarky comments" he would encounter on the street in Dagenham. It is not difficult to imagine the tenor of these. Irtaza made it clear that he had little love for Dagenham. And Dagenham, going on what Irtaza said, had little love for Irtaza.
His father, Sabir, told me that Irtaza was prone to depression and that this had steadily intensified in his teenage years, culminating in a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder, for which Irtaza was taking medication. This didn't make him easy to live with, Sabir confessed: "It was very difficult." He said his son could be physically and verbally aggressive. On one occasion last year, he said, Irtaza called the police from the family home pretending to be Sabir, saying that he — Sabir — was going to kill his entire family. According to Sabir, the police came and Irtaza was arrested and taken to Goodmayes Hospital in Ilford, where he stayed at its mental health unit for "almost two weeks".
Irtaza said the aggression ran both ways. "I had [taken] a lot of abuse from him, physical abuse sometimes," he told me, conceding that he was prone to angry outbursts himself. "I retaliate with anger," he said. "I say angry things."
At one point as we spoke, Sabir broke down. He said that he felt responsible for Irtaza's death, because he hadn't tried hard enough to bring his son back into the Islamic fold. "I believe that, in Islam, if you believe in God and if you're a Muslim, you can't kill yourself. You're not religiously allowed to," Sabir said. "If I had trained him to be a good Muslim he wouldn't have done this. I wouldn't have lost my son." Sabir also believed that, had Irtaza remained a Muslim he would have had a clearer purpose in life and wouldn't have felt it necessary to end his own. "It's very difficult to bury your own son," he said, his face hot with tears.
With little money, few real friends and poor career prospects, Irtaza fell into a deep depression. Reading his online postings, which became progressively more desperate towards the end, it is clear that his problems started to crowd in on him and that he couldn't see a way out. In one of his last CEMB forum posts Irtaza said he felt "detached from reality… it feels like life has come to a horrible end once again". "Life", he said, "just seems incredibly difficult and I don't want to spend the rest of my life like this."
In another post Irtaza said that he hated "how people just ignore me even when I have something useful to say". This was a persistent theme in our interview. And it was a theme in Irtaza's suicide note, which he posted on Facebook. It was addressed to all his friends and family; to all of us who stood by and did nothing to help when Irtaza most needed it. In the note, Irtaza speaks of his pain and his desire for an "ultimate liberation" from his torment. He speaks, too, of the indifference of friends and family alike, of "the fools" who "will hold a candle saying that they missed me enough to mourn yet stand by doing nothing".
It is unsettling and upsetting, but it isn't entirely surprising. Irtaza was deeply troubled. Everyone who knew him was aware of this. "In my opinion, Irtaza's illness had nothing to do with his atheism," Dan Barker said, "but I'm not an expert in these matters. Perhaps some of the general cultural and religious stress from changing religious views might have contributed, but that could be said about any stress in one's life. Mental illness is no respecter of persons. It is very sad."
"Irtaza was a young growing adopted with frustration, and And it wasn't the first time Irtaza had tried to kill himself. As he told me himself, he had taken an overdose of paracetamol in April 2011. This hospitalised him and he nearly lost his liver. But the second time round, it wasn't a cry for help. This time Irtaza really meant it. And he wanted the whole world to know it.
On September 6, 2013, at 9.13am, Irtaza wrote the following: "I never exactly pictured what being a grown-up is like, but it sure doesn't seem to be great." It was the last thing he ever posted to the CEMB forum. Four days later, on September 10, events came to a head. This is what Irtaza informed his friends on Facebook that day: "So I've been punched in the back by my own father and now I've called the police. After this I'm pressing charges and tattling on everything that is potentially illegal. You guys may not hear from me for a while so I'm just going to make it clear now as to what's happening. Wish me good luck."
At around the same time Irtaza told a close friend, via Facebook chat, that he had "got my dad arrested" and that his father had been taken away to be cautioned. Irtaza also confided to this friend that he needed to find somewhere else to live, but that he had nowhere else to go. The conversation ended on a dark note, with Irtaza saying: "Sad how Nembutal is hard to get". Nembutal is a potentially lethal drug, which euthanasia campaigners describe as the "peaceful pill".
Later that day, at 2.16pm, Irtaza posted on the Facebook wall of an ex-Muslim meet-up group. Referring to his father, he says: "He just came back and wanted my house keys, which I didn't give back." At 9.19pm, he tweeted publicly for the last time, a final, haunting thought: "Perhaps it's just life itself that doesn't spare the mind it awakens."
The next day, September 11, at 9.28am, Irtaza sent a series of private direct Twitter messages to Maryam Namazie, one of the founding members of the CEMB and someone who had tried to help Irtaza many times before. In these messages Irtaza says that "I'm in some serious trouble with my dad right now" and refers to taking "drastic actions for myself… to avoid any kind of further pain and suffering". By the time Namazie responded, it was too late.
It was also too late for a small group of atheist and ex-Muslim friends who had rallied to find Irtaza that afternoon, and who had alerted his family to the seriousness of the situation after seeing what Irtaza was posting online. At 12.38pm, Irtaza put his suicide note up on Facebook. His next and final post was the photograph of himself sitting in the branches of a tree.
Namazie says she was in shock when she found out later in the evening that Irtaza had killed himself. "I kept thinking, 'What if?' What if I had pushed him more? What if I had insisted that he meet me when he could not, or that he move out when he decided to stick things out? Many of his last messages were so full of hurt and despair."
I asked Sabir Hussain about the days prior to his son's death. He confirmed that there had been an incident between himself and Irtaza on September 10. It was around 8.30am, he said. Irtaza was in the bathroom brushing his teeth. Sabir asked if he could enter to retrieve his hairbrush, but he said his son demanded that he wait. Sabir firmly denies that he punched Irtaza, but admits that "I pushed him towards one side to take the brush out".
Ijtaba, who was in the house, but did not see the incident, confirmed this account in a separate interview before I spoke with his father. Immediately after this, Irtaza called the police. "They came and they arrested me," Sabir said.
"They took me to the station and gave me a caution. I admitted that I pushed him, and that was good enough for a simple caution." He returned later in the afternoon. Sabir said Irtaza was in his room and that they didn't speak.
The next day, at around 9am, Sabir called the police.
"I told them, 'You take him away, out of the house, otherwise he's going to hurt somebody.' He was aggressive." The police came and interviewed Irtaza. "But the police didn't listen, and then he left the house and hanged himself."
What happened in the Hussain home between the moment of Sabir's return from the police station in the afternoon and the time he called the police the following morning remains unclear.
I also asked Sabir if, as his son had claimed to me, he'd been physically abusive towards Irtaza in the past. He insisted that he hadn't, but admitted that on one occasion when Irtaza "slapped his mother, I slapped him, but not on the face, at the back".
Towards the end of our interview, Sabir recalled that he had been extremely anxious that the police caution he received would "adversely affect" his then-pending application for permanent residency in the UK. He also said the thought of returning to Pakistan, with its record of religious intolerance, may have been what "pushed Irtaza over the edge". Whether this is true cannot be known, but the issue of Sabir Hussain's jeopardised residency application may explain the subsequent and final escalation between father and son on the morning of September 11.
Irtaza had an Islamic burial on Friday, September 13, in accordance with his family's wishes. A week later, Irtaza's friends held a secular memorial service for him in Kentish Town Community Centre. The turnout was good and many warm and affectionate tributes were paid. Irtaza's family was also present. Just as the event was about to end, Irtaza's father rose to his feet and made an impromptu speech. By all accounts it was deeply moving, relaying memories of happier times, when Irtaza was a young child in Pakistan.
Irtaza's apostasy was clearly a decisive event in his life, but so, too, was moving to Britain as an immigrant, and the challenges of growing up as a stranger in a strange and not entirely hospitable land. In another poignant tribute to Irtaza, one friend and fellow ex-Muslim said: "We all recognise ourselves in him... Irtaza was just like us, a young person growing up in an adopted country, with sometimes difficult situations at home, financial issues, problems with career and employment, loneliness, heartbreak, sometimes stress, frustration, depression and despair."
There is a lot of pain and torment in the lives of ex-Muslims. In 2012 a young Algerian ex-Muslim I interviewed also took his life. Like Irtaza, he had been an active and much admired member of the CEMB. Irtaza's family and friends will naturally be asking how he could have done it. But the more urgent question is: when will it stop? All his adult life Irtaza felt invisible, unheard. It is time to listen and to hear a new kind of story
Simon Cottee is a senior lecturer in criminology at Kent University. He has conducted his research with the support of a grant from the Economic and Social Research Council. His book The Apostates: When Muslims Leave Islam is out in July, published by Hurst & Co
Voices of apostasy
Simon Cottee has interviewed more than 35 ex-Muslims about their experience of losing faith. This is what some of them, using pseudonyms, had to say
"I hope you will not let a difference in belief come between us, I am still your daughter who will always love you."
ALIA, from a letter to her parents "coming out" as an apostate
"If you're going to come out to others, do not be under any illusions: it won't be easy." SAMIR
"I'm finally free, I can finally be myself. But I do miss the family a lot. I miss big gatherings. I miss the food. Hopefully one day they will come around." ALIA
"I think there's still a feeling of: I'm sinning, or I'm doing something wrong. It's like there's an inner Muslim in me still, yelling at me and saying, 'What are you doing?'" NUBIA
"I did not want to leave Islam. It's not something I set out to do. I was trying really hard to hold onto it." NABILAH
"Islam is wonderful in that every single Muslim is your brother and sister and you don't feel alone. As soon as you leave Islam you get this overwhelming feeling of loneliness." NABILAH
"I thought I was the only one." MARYAM
"The real struggle came a few years later after I'd apostatised. I felt that my life had lost meaning and that there was nothing to live for." AHMED
For confidential support in dealing with depression or matters of suicide, contact the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or visit samaritans.org
"The man who turned me into an atheist"
"If you believe in God and if you're a Muslim, you can't kill yourself. If I had trained him to be a good Muslim, I wouldn't have lost my son'"
"Irtaza was just like us, a young person growing up in an adopted country, with loneliness, frustration, depression and despair"
Document ST00000020140330ea3u000k3
