{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2143"}
____
  
Business
Exit from EU 'could hit UK harder than financial crisis'
Kathryn Hopkins   
362 words
17 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
64
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A decision by Britain to leave the European Union would be a risky gamble that could result in economic losses larger than those suffered at the time of the global financial crisis, a group of influential economists has warned.
In fresh analysis of the effects of a so-called Brexit, the Centre for Economic Performance (CEP) said that in the worst-case scenario Britain could suffer a fall of between 6.3 per cent and 9.5 per cent of GDP because of increased trade and regulatory costs. This compares with a 7 per cent drop in output after the global financial crisis struck.
In the most optimistic case, it would result in a 2.2 per cent fall in GDP. There would also be further effects on immigration, foreign investment and regulations, according to the CEP, which is part of the London School of Economics.
Britain received the most foreign direct investment of any European country in 2011. Part of the country's attraction is as an export platform to the rest of the EU so, if the UK were outside the trading bloc, this position would likely be threatened, the economists added.
More than half of all British exports go to the rest of the EU, the equivalent of nearly 15 per cent of GDP. There were promising signs of life in the latest set of trade numbers. Exports of goods to countries within the EU increased by £700 million to £12.3 billion, according to the Office for National Statistics.
"Given that the UK government is trying to rebalance the economy towards export-based growth, the 15 per cent of GDP destined for the EU is a significant share," the report said.
"Losses due to trade alone could be very substantial. Even under very optimistic assumptions, the sum of the static and dynamic trade losses would be almost 2.2 per cent of GDP. More pessimistic calculations would lead to a long-term loss of almost a tenth of national income. The dream of splendid isolation may turn out to be a very costly one indeed."
Document T000000020140517ea5h0006q
