{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"822"}
____
  
David Cameron is trying terribly hard to woo Angela Merkel. But why? David Cameron has spared no diplomatic expense to woo his favourite European, when she arrives tomorrow. But why does he need Angela Merkel so badly and what unites the two leaders? Cathy Newman reports
By Cathy Newman Presenter, Channel 4 News   
654 words
26 February 2014
07:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Tomorrow a new special relationship will be consummated. When Angela Merkel rocks up, the German Chancellor will be made to feel she's the only world leader who matters.
David Cameron has spared no diplomatic expense to woo his favourite European. She'll address both houses of parliament and hold an audience with the Queen. While Mrs Merkel is treated to what looks suspiciously like a state visit in all but name, poor old Francois Hollande just got a hurried pow-wow in a pub.
Part of this is driven by desperation on Mr Cameron's part over EU reform. He urgently needs to prove to his fractious party - and the Ukip-pers agitating on the sidelines - that he can get German support for changing Britain's relationship with Europe. But Mrs Merkel needs the Brits too. To be precise, she needs us to stay in the EU.
But the strength of their relationship goes far beyond mere mutual self-interest.
They've forged a close bond, which is all the more surprising because, on the face of it, they've got little in common. The upbringing of the Lutheran pastor's daughter and chemist couldn't have been more different from Mr Cameron's lineage as the old-Etonian-educated son of a stockbroker.
There's much to unite them, though.
Mrs Merkel's brand of progressive conservatism has much in common with the kind of compassionate conservatism Mr Cameron tried to forge before he got spooked by Ukip. The Big Society is rarely on the PM's lips these days, and he no longer waxes quite so lyrical about the shortcomings of 1980s-style Thatcherite individualism. But as Ed Miliband rails against bankers and power giants, perhaps Mr Cameron could do worse than asking Mrs Merkel for her answer to the failings of Anglo-American capitalism.
After all, unlike the Prime Minister, the German Chancellor is a veteran election-winner, chalking up an historic third-term victory last year, leading her party to their best result in more than 20 years.
Perhaps his older, wiser friend might give him the courage not to attempt to out-Ukip Ukip. After all, in governing with the Social Democrats, Mrs Merkel has had to swing to the left. She's backed a federal minimum wage, moves to limit rising housing rents and legislation for gay marriage.
True, the UK coalition has tried several of these too. Gay marriage laws have been passed, and George Osborne backed an above-inflation increase in the minimum wage earlier this year. Rent controls though? You must be joking. In more recent weeks, you're far more likely to hear sabre-rattling on further benefits cuts and immigration reforms.
But the biggest lesson Mrs Merkel can offer Mr Cameron is about getting on with the job. Last year, she released photographs from her personal album, depicting an ordinary-looking, earnest teenager with the same pudding-bowl haircut that no stylist seems to have been able or allowed to change.
German voters have, over the decades, come to trust their Chancellor because she seems so normal and unglamorous. Of course, the British Prime Minister will never be able to shake off the privilege of his Eton education, or erase from his CV the early years of his career as a spin doctor at Carlton Communications.
But as he learnt the hard way from his slow response to the flooding crisis, Mr Cameron can earn the respect of the public by solidly and competently knuckling down.
That's his best shot at becoming a winner a la Frau Merkel.
Document TELUK00020140226ea2q002bj
