{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2993"}
____
  
CULTURE
Cold Blood: Adventures with Reptiles and Amphibians by Richard Kerridge, review
By Steve Jones   
754 words
9 May 2014
12:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A trip down to the bottom of the garden is most enlightening… and a tad scary
Most biologists have a guilty secret: they started as birdwatchers. I’m not ashamed to admit it, nor that I spent more time reading ornithology books than peering through binoculars.
Richard Kerridge was not drawn as a boy to the heavens, because birds fly away. Instead, he turned to the world at his feet in hedges and ponds, and began to collect toads, newts and even adders, which he kept in his back garden (he let the adder go in case it got out and bit someone).
His memoir, an account of a life in pursuit of British frogs, toads and lizards, is interwoven with an account of his difficult relationship with his father. It also tells, in notably warm-blooded prose, of the way the essential moments of his life – meeting girls, teaching students, being approached by a hopeful (and unsuccessful) paedophile – have been punctuated by encounters with slowworms, natterjack toads and smooth snakes.
Like Truman Capote – to whose In Cold Blood the title of Kerridge’s memoir nods – he does not shrink from reporting direct speech from many years ago. The two authors also share a preoccupation with style (as the Comte de Buffon, the 18th-century literary man and expert on frogs put it, “Le style c’est l’homme même”).
Capote’s prose is literary and spare, while Kerridge’s is literary and not. On the first page we meet “coconutty warmth” and “ribbons grass”. We never quite get to Evelyn Waugh’s “Feather-footed through the plashy fen passes the questing vole,” but we skirt dangerously close.
For a work mainly on natural history, though, it is content rather than form that matters, and there is plenty of excellent material here. Kerridge knows an enormous amount about his favoured creatures. I had no idea that a few hundred yards from my front door, on the banks of Regent’s Canal near Camden Lock in north London, there lurks a colony of creatures even more remarkable than those who loiter narcotically on its towpath.
The Aesculapian snake is 6ft long and feeds on rats and mice. It is a southern European species that has somehow made it to London NW1, perhaps dumped there as their ancestors outgrew their welcome in a collector’s home. Now there may be 30 of them, although they do not yet feature on Camden Market’s innumerable pieces of decorated trash.
 READ: Steve Jones' witty examination of faith and the scientific method 
The “Camden Creature” is a threatened species. As an illegal immigrant, the authorities want it out and the London Invasive Species Initiative has called for its destruction. This shows a remarkable shift in attitudes towards British wildlife. In the Sixties, the period in which much of this book is set, commercial collectors for pet shops destroyed thousands of animals, wiping out species such as sand lizards from places where they were once abundant. Now they are being replaced by shifting specimens from elsewhere and protected by conservation laws (finding a great crested newt on a site can cost a fortune to anyone who hopes to build on it). The new rules are hard luck for any young person who wants to establish their own menagerie, as Kerridge did.
He is good both on anthropomorphism and on the irrational fears most people have of his favourite creatures (although I am less than convinced that people hate snakes because they threatened the first primates who ventured out of the trees). His tale is also a reminder of how much life has changed since his – and my – youth. Now young people can see amazing creatures whenever they wish, but through a glass darkly on a television screen rather than in a pond full of tadpoles.
Cold Blood shows us how much is to be gained by studying nature. A book that persuades anyone to try sampling life at first-hand rather than at second is much to be welcomed. For, as its author says, to do so can make even the suburbs wild. What could be a more noble ambition than that?
 Cold Blood: Adventures with Reptiles and Amphibians by Richard Kerridge 
Chatto & Windus, 304pp, Telegraph offer price: £14.99 + £1.35 (RRP £16.99). Call 0844 871 1514 or visit books.telegraph.co.uk 
READ: The species humans have driven to extinction
Document TELUK00020140509ea59002eb
