{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2083"}
____
  
News
ENGLISH ARMY SCENTS VICTORY
Gillian Bowditch; Jason Allardyce   
1,942 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
15
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The future of Scotland in the Union hangs on a knife edge — and the nation's 400,000 English residents may have the final say, write Gillian Bowditch and Jason Allardyce
For Anya O'Shea, the Scottish independence referendum is a chance to make history, not just study it. The final-year Edinburgh University student, who grew up in London, will vote No on September 18. For her, Scottish independence is an idea whose time has passed.
"I don't want to be divided from my family down south by a needless border," says O'Shea, a history student who campaigns for Better Together. "My dad is Welsh. My mum is a Polish immigrant. I have an Irish surname. I'm from London but I've grown up in Scotland and plan to live here after graduating. The separatist idea of everyone in different parts of the landmass being totally different just makes no sense to me.
"I'm at university, surrounded by young people from all over Britain and the rest of the world. The internet is bringing people together all the time. People are moving around for work and studies, and independence seems an old-fashioned idea. The world is moving in a direction of bringing down borders and barriers. My friends and I are just starting our careers. We would be the generation that would carry independence. It's about seeing the rest of your life ahead of you with so much uncertainty and so many potential restrictions that currently don't exist."
O'Shea's views chime with the findings of the latest Sunday Times Panelbase poll. While those born and bred in Scotland are almost equally divided between the two camps, with a very slight majority favouring independence, those born over the border are far more likely to vote No than Yes. It means, in a close ballot, English voters, who make up 9% of the population, could swing the referendum for the unionists. The poll shows 40% of voters overall in Scotland favour independence, with 47% against and 13% undecided. If the undecided are excluded, the figure is 46% for independence and 54% against. Strip out those who are not Scottish and the margin is much narrower: 44% of Scots say Yes, 42% say No and 14% are undecided.
But among people of English origin living in Scotland, only 27% back independence, with 66% against and 7% undecided. The figure is similar for all non-Scots, with 25% backing independence and 65% against.
There are 4.1m people eligible to vote in the referendum, of whom 422,386 are English; 35,123 are Northern Irish; and 16,186 are Welsh. These votes could make the difference between success and failure for Alex Salmond's campaign, and could potentially lead to increased tensions.
"THE classic example is the referendum in Quebec in 1995 where there was a case of what they called les autres — the others," says Professor Matt Qvortrup, author of Referendums and Ethnic Conflict. "It was a really tight race, absolutely neck and neck. Then it transpired that those who had voted No, who had swung it basically, had been the anglophones.
"Jacques Parizeau [the premier of Quebec and leader of the pro-independence Parti Quebecois] came out on election night, being slightly tipsy, and said it was les autres — it was them — and the implication was had it not been for those traitors then we would have had an independent Quebec. He ended up having to eat humble pie, but the sentiment was very much there. "It's not nasty like that in Scotland and everybody can accept that. But even the people who were fair-minded about it in Quebec, when pressed about it, felt cheated. The implications were so great and it divided families and it really turned nasty. If you speak to Canadians, they will tell you it was very hard fought and very bitter."
Qvortrup says the all-inclusive civic nationalism of the SNP, as opposed to the ethnic nationalism of the Quebecois, is likely to temper any backlash should a minority of English voters swing the vote in favour of the Union.
"Referendums are always bare-knuckle fights," he says. "The Scottish referendum is tough but friendly. I do think it is going to get worse and there will be some very shrill voices ... There might be a wee bit of bitterness but the SNP is the only example internationally of a multi-ethnic nationalist party. What is interesting about them is the way they are selling it. You can be a Scottish nationalist and an Indian or an Italian or an Englishman."
There are, of course, plenty of English-born people — including cabinet ministers Mike Russell and Shona Robison — who will vote for independence. Andy Lythgoe is one. The 56-year-old commercial property consultant has lived in Scotland since the 1980s, but would describe himself as English.
"I still have family and friends south of the border but I don't think independence will affect the social union," says Lythgoe. "My reason for voting Yes is essentially economic. If you'd asked me how I would have voted in the late 1980s when I came to Scotland, I'm sure like a lot of people I would have been a No voter. But working for a large property consultancy I got to understand a bit more about the Scottish economy. The propaganda that the people in the UK, not just Scotland, have been fed is that Scotland is unduly subsidised. The reality is, the opposite is true. I firmly believe that, given the opportunity to make decisions for itself, Scotland will be in a position to perform better economically and socially." The Panelbase poll comes just days after David Cameron visited Scotland and invoked the memory of the late Labour leader John Smith in an attempt to defuse claims that voting No makes you "less Scottish". John Curtice, professor of politics at Strathclyde University, says it is British identity, not Scottish identity, which is the key to the vote.
"Cameron is trying to neutralise the issue of identity but everyone in Scotland feels Scottish," says Curtice. "That's not the source of division. It's how British they feel that is crucial. People who were not born in Scotland are more likely to feel strongly British and they are also the group most likely to want to hold on to the Union. If it were merely about how Scottish people feel, Scotland would have been independent years ago. The point is, this is a referendum in a society with a dual sense of identity. One identity is stronger than the other but that weaker identity seems to be enough to help to pull people into the No camp.
"Feeling strongly Scottish may be almost a necessary condition for voting Yes, but it's not a sufficient condition. You need other reasons as well. Another interesting factor is that the Scottish Social Attitudes Survey suggests that the proportion of people who deny they are British has fallen in the past few years. It used to be 30% who said they felt Scottish but not British. More recently it has been 25%. In 2012, that may have been the Olympics effect but for 2013 it is much the same. It seems that some people in Scotland have rediscovered their residual Britishness."
Identity politics has a long but not particularly happy history. It is a sensitive issue, particularly in a World Cup year when anti-English sentiment has occasionally reared its head. The SNP and particularly Salmond have worked hard to ensure their brand of civic nationalism is all-inclusive. Scots of all political persuasions and none have finely tuned antennas. When the author Alasdair Gray wrote an essay calling English incomers either "settlers" or "colonists", there was a big outcry. This month Finlay Calder, a former Scottish rugby international and British and Irish Lions captain, told The Sunday Times he believed Flower of Scotland, the nation's unofficial anthem, should be ditched ahead of the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow because of its anti-English sentiment. He urged the organisers to choose something more forwardlooking and uplifting. The moderator of the Church of Scotland has called on the party leaders to attend a "service of reconciliation" after the referendum.
Sir Tim Rice, the English lyricist who has an estate in the Scottish Highlands, is among those backing the Union, saying: "It would be insanity for the country to split up."
He is uncertain whether he will retain a Scottish base in the event of independence. "If [the SNP members) are as insane independently as they are not independently, then a lot of people might say, 'Stuff this for a game of soldiers.' Who knows?" Alan Bissett, a writer and performer, has been a staunch supporter of the Yes Scotland campaign. Last week he tweeted a poster of a young girl with her mouth taped over, under the banner "Jockholm Syndrome — don't think we do that for you." Bissett wrote: "Jockholm Syndrome — Condition of a Scot who identifies with the same British state which keeps Scotland captive."
The image caused an outcry. Jill Stephenson, a professor at Edinburgh University, led the condemnation. "When people say, 'If you are not voting Yes, you are a traitor, you are a quisling, you are part of the Jockholm syndrome,' that is extremely offensive," she said.
Last week Bissett, who had removed the tweet, was contrite. "[Stephenson's] criticisms were probably fair. I take what she said on board. I got into the campaign for positive reasons and to create a better Scotland. If I find myself throwing shit at people, what stage of the campaign have we reached here? I lapsed into that and it brought me up short. If people feel genuinely British, I have to respect that."
He added: "They live here and if we want to welcome them here they have to have the same democratic rights as everyone else. If they vote as an expression of their British identity, Scots have to accept that. People are very sensitive about nationalism for good reason. [For independence to feel] like the right way ahead, it has to be an inclusive and positive project. I don't think there will be a backlash [against the English] because the majority of people in the Yes campaign are inclusive. If there were a narrow No vote, I think there would be a determined campaign not to scapegoat anyone. Apart from anything else, that would prove the harshest critics of the Yes campaign correct."
Curtice points out that it will be some weeks after the referendum, when all the analysis is done, that we will know what factors influenced the vote. If it is a slender No win, as the polls predict, that could be due to any one of a number of socio-economic groups — youth, women, non-Scots — who backed the Union, but he points out that the narrower the vote, the more heated the aftermath is likely to be.
"There will be a broader issue about reconciliation," he says. "This is being fought pretty brutally on both sides. If Scotland votes No, there are lots of people on the nationalist side who will be very disappointed. If Scotland votes Yes, it will come as a brutal shock to a lot of unionists who just assumed it would never happen. Whatever happens, there will be a need to come together."
EVERYONE IN SCOTLAND FEELS SCOTTISH. IT'S HOW BRITISH THEY FEEL THAT IS CRUCIAL
Document ST00000020140518ea5i0010v
