{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3242"}
____
  
News
The message on the doorstep is: don't trip over yourself
Ann Treneman   
558 words
9 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
M Ps debated whether MPs should be allowed to regulate MPs yesterday. It didn't go well. Indeed, I am not sure if MPs should be allowed to self-regulate their debates on selfregulation. We always end up finding out too much — about them.
The first thing you need to know: doorsteps are dangerous places. John Mann, Labour's rebel with a cause, had been on the doorstep and found that there was "virtual unanimity" that MPs should not regulate themselves. But Andrew Lansley, the Leader of the House, has discovered that people did not realise how marvellously independent the system is. This was a great shame and, indeed, if more independence was introduced it would make it all much worse (I paraphrase).
The body at the middle of the selfpromulgated, self-regulated debate was the Standards Committee. This is the panel that overturned the Standards Commissioner's ruling that Maria Miller, the Culture Secretary, should repay £45,000 and reduced the amount to £5,800. Sir Nick Harvey, the rather cerebral Lib Dem, is a member of that committee and yesterday he arose to display his grip of the central issue: "I had not realised until the controversy of the last few days that the lay members did not have a vote." ARGH! For his own safety, I do hope Sir Nick does not venture out on to the doorstep very often.
Other MPs didn't believe there was a problem called Maria at all. Instead there was one called Media. "Surely this is not so much a failure of the system as a complete and abJect failure of the media," railed the arch Tory Sir Gerald Howarth. "Is it not time that the media paid proper attention to parliamentary reports rather than seeking to engage in witch hunts?" In the press gallery, we exchanged looks and hid our voodoo dolls.
Now another knight of the realm, Sir Peter Bottomley, Joined in. "It would be worthwhile for the media to read paragraph 14 of the recent report, which contains the accusation, along with paragraphs 28, 29, 32, 39, 49, 56 and 61 ..." Labour MPs reJected the idea that the answer to life was contained in paragraphs 28 et al. "N o one is going to buy the idea that this was all got up by the media," insisted David Winnick. "We must recognise the mistakes that have occurred and we must be less complacent."
Mr Lansley, who reminded us even more than usual of a bollard, for he is denser than most, insisted: "I do not think that I am in any way complacent about this."
Surely the doorstep will be the Judge of that. But now, what was this? It seems that the Tory Peter Bone (surely he will be a Sir soon) has been you-know-where: "I went doorstep canvassing on Thursday night, Friday night, Saturday morning and Saturday afternoon. There was one issue of huge concern, which was immigration from the European Union."
I am sure you can see what that has to do with self-regulation. Now, if you'll excuse me, I'm going to get back to my voodoo. But stay away from the doorstep: you don't know who you're going to meet there.
Document T000000020140409ea490004z
