{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"597"}
____
  
News
Italy's funny Farage gives the Halfwit and Super-Dwarf a jolly good bashing
John Follain   
766 words
6 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
2; National
27
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
DRAPED head to foot in the blue-and-gold flag of the EU, with two holes for him to see through, Beppe Grillo, the maverick comedian turned politician, told an audience of Italians last week: "A ghost is stalking Europe!" The ghost, he explained, is the euro and Italy must hold a referendum on the single currency because "the countries that don't have the euro — like the UK — are better off".
Launching his campaign for next month's European parliamentary elections, the tousle-haired Grillo, 65, leader of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, ranted and raved through a speech peppered with swearwords, sexual innuendo and scatological jokes, blaming Italy's economic woes on Brussels and Angela Merkel, the German chancellor.
With opinion polls predicting that the movement will take second place to the centre-left Democratic party of the prime minister, Matteo Renzi, in the May 25 poll, Grillo has returned to his showman roots with a tour of theatres and concert halls entitled I'll Give You Europe. "I'm not the man I was any more — that comedian. I'm supposed to entertain you? No!" he warned at the start of his show, before making an obscene gesture at his audience in Naples' modern concert hall on Thursday night.
But for two hours he did just that, raising laughs from a paying audience of 2,000 while firing off statistics and denouncing Italy's ruling elite and the EU.
"I'm the only real extraordinary political leader because there's never been a movement like ours. Saying no is the highest form of politics," proclaimed Grillo, Italy's most popular blogger and the son of a factory owner and pianist, whose party, founded in 2009, won just over a quarter of the vote in last year's general election.
"We need to go there [to Brussels], sit down and say, 'Angela, what the f*** are you saying?' " Grillo said, adding that much of Italy's debt was in fact investment in German banks.
He called for EU subsidies to save Sicilian fishermen from competition from Japanese tuna-fishing fleets, and southern Italian orange producers from Tunisian competition.
"I promise you: if we win the European election, we'll have given such a strong signal that they'll all go home," he pledged.
But it was his denunciations of "this shitty state" of Italy that drew the most applause and cheers. He said Renzi was "a halfwit" who had agreed electoral reforms with "the super-dwarf [Silvio Berlusconi], who doesn't even have the right to vote" — after his conviction for tax fraud.
"Bastards!" he shouted, spitting with anger.
Grillo did not even spare the Queen, who was mocked for offering Pope Francis produce from the royal estates during her visit to the Vatican last week.
"The Pope gives her a 17th-century facsimile, and what the f*** does she give him? Bran!" Grillo's strong following in a traditionally pro-European country is a reflection of the Euroscepticism that is growing across the continent and coloured last month's French local elections. It also mirrors the expectation of a strong performance by UKIP in Britain in the European elections.
Some projections have suggested anti-EU or protest parties such as Grillo's could win up to 30% of the seats in the European parliament — enough to form a "blocking" minority that could prevent legislation from being passed.
Support appears to be driven by a mixture of anger against the austerity imposed by Brussels, concern about immigration and dissatisfaction with the performance of the mainstream parties.
But these outsiders are a diverse bunch. They range from economic liberals, such as the Alternative for Germany party, to Holland's anti-immigrant Freedom party, Hungary's thuggish Jobbik and Greece's neo-Nazi Golden Dawn — raising doubts about how effectively they will be able to work together.
In Italy even the audience at Grillo's show, who were mostly in their thirties and forties, did not necessarily share his animosity towards the single currency.
"Grillo is right to call for a referendum — the people who suffer the consequences of EU decisions should have a say," said Yvonne De Rosa, a photographer. "But I don't know whether I would vote for or against the euro."
Valentina Vaccaro, an office worker, shared her scepticism: "Grillo is great fun, but I'm not sure what he would do in power."
@johnfollain
SAYING NO IS THE HIGHEST FORM OF POLITICS
Document ST00000020140406ea46000pz
