{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2435"}
____
  
Features
Waving the flag for Britishness
Allan Massie   
1,436 words
14 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
17
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A new survey suggests that our national pride is waning. But that might just be a good thing, says Allan Massie
Rudyard Kipling is regarded as the Bard of Empire, and therefore of Britishness. Yet there is a significant moment in his book of school stories, Stalky & Co, when a Conservative MP addresses the boys on these themes. The strident vulgarity of his expression of imperial patriotism embarrasses them, to the point that they deride him as "a jelly–bellied Flag–flapper".
These days, it sometimes seems as though we are all flapping flags – whether on the streets of London as the runners in this weekend's marathon passed by, or in a string of television shows lauding Britain for its baking, its sewing, its all–singing, all–dancing "talent".
So what to make of the British Social Attitudes survey, which shows that we are actually less proud of being British than we used to be? According to its findings, which will be published later this year, a little over a third of us now say we are "very proud to be British". Ten years ago, 43 per cent would make that claim.
There is an argument, of course, that we are still proud of being British, but simply embarrassed to express it. Many of us, like Kipling's schoolboys, find boasting and loud expressions of patriotism distasteful. For all his bombastic reputation, the poet himself, in "Recessional", thought such foolishness best left to the "Gentiles" and "lesser breeds without the Law" – by whom, it is generally agreed, he meant the Germans. The Union flag is not often flown in suburban gardens, in the way the Stars and Stripes is in the USA.
Yet there are also reasons why many of us may be less proud of being British than we used to be. We are in a discontented mood. The years since the financial crash have been difficult. The Afghan and Iraq wars brought neither victory nor honour. The expenses scandal has damaged our democracy. The excesses of certain tabloid newspapers have stained the reputation of the Press. The BBC is no longer trusted as it used to be. Even the NHS, which some have seen as central to our sense of identity, is as often criticised as praised.
The high point of Britishness arguably came in the years 1940–55. The struggle against the Nazis, the creation of the welfare state, the coronation of a young Queen with its promise of "a new Elizabethan Age" – all fostered a strong sense of national identity and pride. We knew that, thanks to our actions in the Second World War, we deserved well of the world. It's no wonder that, according to the new survey, older generations – reared in that knowledge – are much more likely to be very proud of being British than younger ones.
Yet in other respects, the elderly may be more discontented, distressed by the rapidity and extent of social change – to such an extent that they may complain of being unable to recognise the country they live in now. Conversely, the young, who have never known a country that wasn't multicultural and socially liberal, may quite reasonably have only a weaker sense of anything distinctively British. This was certainly the finding of another recent poll, undertaken on behalf of the BBC. For the Facebook generation, national boundaries may not mean very much.
There is another interesting discrepancy in the survey, and one that goes against what we think we know – that a slightly higher percentage of Scots declare themselves very proud of being British than of the English or Welsh. The difference is not great – 38 per cent per cent as against 35 per cent and 34 per cent – but the figure in Scotland has remained the same while it has fallen south of the border.
There is an obvious reason for this stability. The independence campaign, with the referendum this September, has concentrated the mind of Scottish Unionists. Britishness for us is not something vague or nebulous. It is something to be defended, for we recognise the danger of being deprived of it. Paradoxical as it may seem, Britishness is, for we Unionists, also part of what it means to be Scottish, and it is a part that we now have to articulate. In the first devolution debates in the Seventies, those opposed to a Scottish Assembly campaigned under the slogan "Scotland is British". Few might say that unequivocally now – but would instead still argue that "Scotland is also British".
The rise of Scottish (and Welsh) nationalism has also had an influence in England. "Britishness is still there in the background," commented Sunder Katwala, director of the British Future think tank, "and we will come together for events such as the Jubilee and the First World War centenary." And, one might add, the London Olympics and Andy Murray's Wimbledon victory. But, he continued, "the other nationalities are gaining ground. In England, as well as in Scotland and Wales, British is becoming the second identity." Though the England football and rugby teams still sing the National Anthem, their supporters are now at least as likely to wave the flag of St George as of the Union. They are less inclined to make no distinction between England and Britain, English and British.
Yet this is a welcome development, and not only because the English reluctance – some might say, inability – to make this distinction has long irritated the Scots, Welsh and Northern Irish. Having the English realise that England is not identical with the United Kingdom may lead to a better understanding of Britishness and of what it means to be British; it may also result in a constitutional settlement fairer and more acceptable to all, including the English.
One wonders, though, about the question of whether immigrants who settle here may find it easier, in the first generation anyway, to think of themselves as British rather than belonging to one of the other nationalities. Britishness, after all, must by its very nature be inclusive. The United Kingdom was created by the 1707 Treaty of Union. Before it, nobody was British; ever since, everybody has been, whether they like it or not. It may well be that immigrants are more comfortably accommodated and assimilated into a multi–ethnic Britain than into the sort of immemorial England imagined and celebrated by, for example, Enoch Powell. It would be interesting to have the views of Sajid Javid, the new Minister of Culture (for England, but not Scotland).
Many, especially the young, cannot bring themselves to say they are "very proud" of being British – but are nevertheless at ease in a country that is generally tolerant and now extremely diverse. This applies to England, in particular: there is probably no country in Europe that has experienced so great a change in the composition of its population with so little strain or social unrest.
This is much to the credit of the English. It may be presumptuous of a Scot to suggest that they have been more easily able to adapt to this change because three centuries of Union have accustomed them to immigration from the other nations of the UK.
Defining the idea of Britishness has never been easy. It is rooted partly in the history of the last three centuries, in memories of Empire and world wars, and partly in certain institutions, notably the Crown, Parliament, the Royal Navy, the Army and the Royal Air Force. Yet there has never been institutional uniformity. The Church of England is not the Church of Scotland; the legal and educational systems of the two countries are not the same. Even the NHS has always been administered differently either side of the old Anglo–Scottish border.
I am inclined to think that Britishness is more a habit of mind than anything else: that it speaks of tolerance; of a willingness to settle disagreements by argument and negotiation rather than by violence; of a distaste for revolution; of respect for others and for their privacy; of individualism that doesn't exclude a sense of community. These may all seem imprecise qualities. Yet, taken together, they suggest something of what it means to be British, and something of which it is not difficult to be proud – because the sum of these things adds up to a country in which it is still good to live.
"In England, as well as in Scotland and Wales, British is becoming the second identity
"Many of us, like Kipling's schoolboys, find patriotic boasting distasteful
Document DT00000020140414ea4e00053
