{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2040"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
This kingdom feels less united than ever
946 words
28 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Britain's grumpy regions are being ignored. They need to be secure and distinct to live happily in a grand fellowship
'It gives us dignity, respect" says councillor Bert Biscoe, as Westminster announced Cornwall's new status as a "national minority". Dan Rogerson MP says it ensures "that public institutions take account of Cornwall's unique identity". Well, I love Cornwall, but looking out at a Suffolk sky felt a stab of irritable envy.
What about us, then? The Kingdom of East Anglia, children of Raedwald the Wuffing and Edmund the Martyr, rudely subjugated to England a millennium ago, yet an earldom under Thorkell the Tall, whoever he was. Can't we be a national minority too? OK, there isn't a language (though listen to the half-Danish lilt at the end of Suffolk and Norfolk sentences and its unique use of verb forms. That doo make you think, bor!). The east has tradition, music, architectural style and a fine suspiciousness: not for nothing is the Norfolk motto "Do different!" Like Cornwall, we protrude into the sea, are bounded by rivers and see family names — Gildersleeves, Prettyman — on generations of gravestones.
The same argument could be made for Durham, Northumberland or Yorkshire. For all our mobile society and small size we are an amalgam of dialects and ancient fealties.
Cornwall's new status may be little but a Lib Dem political wheeze and a lever for EU grants, but other regions feel disregarded too. Incidentally, I notice that the EU definition of national minorities has a clause on "combating discrimination", which presumably means — as when the police investigated Anne Robinson's dislike of the Welsh — a possibility of racist accusations. The BBC should quake in fear today after having implicitly, outrageously, in Jamaica Inn accused the Cornish of mumbling incoherently. If East Anglia got status, Steve Coogan would have some explaining to do about Alan Partridge's Norfolk.
OK, I jest. But there is a restless sense of dislocation in the kingdom worth examining. If the Scots vote yes, it will be a huge upheaval; if no, Mr Salmond will claim that they were cowed by wicked "English" threats. Meanwhile religious and racial groups are circling the wagons, and across great swathes of the country rumbles envious hostility of the preening capital. It feels as if common citizenship is fading. Easier to say: "To hell with emmet furriners, I'm Cornish!" and the messageboard beneath Petroc Trelawney's triumphant article on the new status, which dismisses the UK as "an increasingly random concept", is full of other claims, some only halfjoking. "Time that Cockneys became a protected species. We have been slowly driven out of our traditional haunts." Even better, the flippant "I live in Hertfordshire, and Bedfordshire has been oppressing me." Another comment suggests that the micro-region boost is "the EU trying to prise another stone from our sense of being British."
If UK pride is degenerating into grumpy regionalism, our own governments bear much blame. MPs with subsidised London pads prate of "Britishness" while letting the capital — a cultural, political, financial powerhouse — become overweeningly important. Localism is lip-service: councils are hog-tied, capped, overruled. Westminster can dump a power station or wind farm on you, or dictate education and healthcare. Infrastructure grandiosity prioritises London business: the HS2 rail line will crash through valued countryside, serving only those wishing to streak north for a quick deal and get back to their "real" world. More useful for the north to improve communications between its centres.
As for culture, it is not only the dominance of London fine-arts funding that matters, or the BBC carting metropolitan presenters up to Salford. Often overlooked is what the government did to television. The proud old ITV franchises — Granada, Anglia, Tyne Tees, YTV and the rest — were duty-bound to meet a quality threshold, serving regional identity. Their programmes were a popular source of pride. But Mrs Thatcher abolished the threshold and threw franchises open to the highest bidder, however scummy. Successive governments welcomed digital rivals and foreign ownership. Now ITV makes no regional programmes bar brief news bulletins (and resents paying for those).
Such things erode a sense of belonging. So does the way that high streets are ever more homogenised, identical chain stores everywhere. Business rates are allowed to soar upwards and regulations to proliferate (many of EU origin). Only big corporations with economies of scale can afford much commercial space: idiosyncratic local businesses retreat. In some places the only shopping and eating areas with a strong sense of identity are those dense with immigrant cultures.
Disorientation creates disunity, a scrabbling for meaning and community. Gordon Brown talked of "Britishness" but did not understand, any more than most politicians, the paradox that the more secure a region feels, the more willing it is to be part of a grander fellowship. The kingdom feels most united when respected for its parts, not just its Celtic fringes and ethnically different newcomers. See it as a casket of jewels, heaped together but proudly distinct, each shining.
I felt this strongly a quarter of a century ago, sailing with children round mainland Britain in a chilly summer, enjoying every difference of coast, harbour, accent, museum and folk tale from the ragged west to the sandy North Sea coasts, appreciating Orkney and Blakeney, Portsmouth and Polperro. Travelling the encircling sea fed a sense of ownership and, yes, Britishness. "Better together" is not just a slogan for Scotland 2014. But to be really happily together, we must be distinct.
HS2 will serve those wishing to streak north for a quick deal
Document T000000020140428ea4s0004s
