{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"773"}
____
  
Features
letters@the-sun.co.uk
482 words
25 February 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
43
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
The page where you tell Britain what you think
WE are always hearing how many jobs this Government has created but it's all a myth.
Many of these jobs are only 16 hours a week. That's three people doing a week's work that one used to do. These jobs have no security and, even with benefit add-ons, people are living below the breadline. Cameron and Osborne want to try the real world some time.
GEORGE VARLEY Leeds
BIG congrats to Ellie Goulding for winning Best Female at the Brits 2014.
Ellie, pictured, has come a long way since winning the Critics' Choice award in 2010. With all her great tracks, no wonder she is such hot property now.
MARIE GOSNEY Billingham, Teesside
IN response to reader Ben Williams' anger at those calling for cuts to foreign aid, my response is that very few people are saying we should stop aiding those in poverty-stricken nations. But out of the £12billion handed out in 2013, less than ten per cent reached the poverty line.
And if we are one of the world's richer countries, why does every penny of the aid budget need to be BORROWED?
DARREN TURNER Aberdare, S Wales
SO now there is a call for a ban on snacks while driving.
One thing that causes even more careless driving is when there is an irritable baby in the car, with only the driver to look after it. Let's see them try to ban that one.
MIKE CRYSELL Taunton, Somerset
UNION boss Bob Crow is doing a good job for his members, who democratically elected him.
I bet most of those people who are knocking him would have him as their union representative.
PETER LEE Putney, SW London
I AM appalled that slavery is taking place in Britain and is soaring. So I feel relieved that specialist squads at airports will soon be used to spot cases. This hidden crime has to be dealt with swiftly.
JUSTIN COOPER East Finchley, N London
UKRAINE is not a part of the European Union. So why are the western countries interfering? Let them sort things out by themselves.
KEN CHAPMAN Alfreton, Derbys
NEWLY appointed cardinal Vincent Nichols, the Archbishop of Westminster, criticises our benefits system.
Yet it is one of the best in the world, if not the best.
That is why so many immigrants want to come here. He ought to be more concerned about the really poor of the Roman Catholic countries of Central and South America — and also those in Poland.
ALFRED BURN Swindon, Wilts
JUDGING from his choice of clothes while touring the Middle East, Prince Charles, pictured, seems to think he is Lawrence of Arabia.
But he is supposed to represent Britain and wear our clothes. Please, Charles, act with some dignity.
MIKE ARNOLD Hornchurch, Essex
Document THESUN0020140225ea2p0006f
