{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3433"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel Farage: Ukip youth leader quit because she was intimidated
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
735 words
15 May 2014
19:05
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip leader suggests Sanya-Jeet Thandi quit the party because she had been under 'pressure' from her peers at LSE not because the party was racist
A British Asian leader of Ukip’s youth leader who quit the party after branding it “terrifying” and “racist” left because she was “intimated” by her university friends, Nigel Farage has said.
Sanya-Jeet Thandi said in a public resignation that she was leaving Ukip because abandoned its core supporters and now appealed to the “stupidity of ignorant anti-immigrant voters for electoral gain”.
However Nigel Farage, the leader of the UK Independence party, suggested that it was not a shift in Ukip policy that had lead to Miss Thandi’s decision but a result of “peer pressure” from fellow students at the London School of Economics where she is studying.
Mr Farage said that Miss Thandi had already given up her role as youth leader in the party because “since she had gone to the London School of Economics, [she] had been coming under a fair bit of peer pressure over being in Ukip.”
He told Radio Four’s World at One programme: “the week before she had appeared live on channel four news to debate our immigration policy and to say it was the most equitable and least racist immigration policy of any of the parties in Britain today… and a week later she has changed her mind.
“She may have been intimidated; I don’t know quite why she has changed her mind.
He added: “We hadn’t changed in seven days had we – nothing had changed. Every comment every image every manifesto commitment in the European elections hadn’t changed. So she changed in seven days, we didn’t.”
Miss Thandi appeared on Channel 4 News to defend her membership but a week later publicly quit the party and is calling on other Ukip supporters to boycott the upcoming European and local elections.
Miss Thandi, who joined Ukip at 17 as events co-ordinator of the youth wing and spoke at the party conference, said Ukip posters pointing the finger at immigration “epitomise” what has gone wrong with the party.
Nigel Farage has recently sought to rid Ukip of its racist image by appearing at a rally flanked by 40 ethnic minority supporters. At an event in London, he said: “I don’t care what you call us, but from this moment on, please do not call us a racist party.”
However, the strategy, Ms Thandi said, is not “good enough" to reverse the “form of racist populism” that had developed in the party over the last three years.
Over the last few weeks a string of Ukip candidates have been exposed as harbouring racist views. Andre Lampitt, who featured in the party’s election broadcast, was suspended after saying Ed Miliband was “not a real Brit” and describing Islam as an “evil organisation”.
Another supporter said Lenny Henry, the comedian, should emigrate to a “black country”.
Ms Thandi, a privately-educated London School of Economics student born to Punjabi parents, joined Ukip because she said David Cameron was “going soft”.
Three years ago, she agreed with Ukip’s policy on immigration because current policy favoured Europeans over other migrants when her grandparents had to “work so hard” to come to England, she said.
Miss Thandi, who grew up in Kent, became one of Mr Farage’s biggest cheerleaders, telling The Times that Mr Farage was “a babe” and describing Godfrey Bloom as “cute and so kind and hilarious, he just says things for the reaction. Lovely guy but a bit misunderstood".
However, announcing her resignation on The Guardian website Miss Thandi said people with “racist views” had now been slipping through Ukip’s checks “time and time again”.
She wrote: “In order to convince society they are not racist they need to stop giving positions in the party to people with racist views.
“It is not good enough to say that these individuals just slipped through the net, time and time again. Yes, Ukip is still a relatively young party.
“No, that is not an excuse to allow racists to stand for election. Nor is it an excuse to exploit the ignorance in British society and indulge the racist vote by telling them 'they'll take your jobs'."
Document TELUK00020140515ea5f003sc
