{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2540"}
____
  
News
Clegg to take on Farage over immigration
Alison Little   
398 words
6 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
5
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
NICK Clegg and Nigel Farage will go head-to-head over the tinderbox issue of immigration in two live debates to be broadcast to the nation.
The hour-long clashes will be held in the run-up to the May 22 elections to the European Parliament after the Lib Dems and UK Independence Party reached agreement with broadcasters.
Their first bout will be on national LBC radio on March 26, mediated by host Nick Ferrari. They will do battle again on BBC2 on April 2, with election veteran David Dimbleby the referee.
Mr Clegg said yesterday he "relished the prospect of talking about how we are fighting to keep Britain in Europe to protect jobs".
Mr Farage said: "For the first time in 39 years the British people will hear a proper, open debate on membership of the EU." Warming up for the hostilities, Mr Clegg outraged Mr Farage by accusing Ukip of "letting down" Britain.
He said: "You would have thought that if your world view was based on the idea that it has been bad for Britain to be part of the EU, Ukip would have used its berth in the European Parliament to find every possible opportunity to promote reforms that create British jobs and enhance the British way of life.
"Yet Ukip leaders don't turn up to vote most of the time.
"Nigel Farage hasn't tabled a single amendment since July 2009.
"They have let down British interests within the heart of the EU."
Mr Farage hit back: "Nick Clegg has some cheek. Although he lives in London, between 2010 and 2014 he has voted in Westminster only 22.6 per cent of the time.
"I live eight hours away from Strasbourg, lead a national party and have voted 55 per cent of the time in the European Parliament. ?Prime Minister David Cameron was warned yesterday that grassroots Tories would rather the party went it alone in a minority government than cave in to Lib Dem demands to ditch an in-out referendum on the EU.
Eight in 10 party members surveyed by website ConSERVATIVEHOME said the poll should not be negotiable. Mr Cameron has pledged that if he wins a majority next year he will renegotiate Britain's membership terms, then hold the referendum in 2017.
OPINION AND COMMENT: PAGE 12
Document THEEXP0020140306ea3600061
