{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"612"}
____
  
Observer In Focus Pages
In Focus: Politics: Stuck in the middle, but with whom? Lib Dems tread a fine electoral line: In his party's spring conference, Nick Clegg must try to claim credit for coalition achievements while distancing himself from the Tories - and keeping lines open to Labour.
By Toby Helm and Daniel Boffey   
968 words
9 March 2014
The Observer
OB
28
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
Addressing the Liberal Democrat spring conference in York yesterday, Nick Clegg extolled the virtues of further coalition government. Ruling again with the Tories, or for the first time with Labour, would not be an option on the ballot paper in 2015, he said. But a Labour-only, or Conservative-only, government would be "very bad indeed for the country".
One of Clegg's key messages these days is that his party should continue in power, as it has been for almost four years, because the current coalition has overall been a great success - and because the bigger parties cannot be trusted to run things on their own.
The Lib Dems have not only shared power but produced results, he says: pupil premiums have been delivered for children; there is a new life without any tax for millions of low earners; and more bounty is to come soon for everyone as the income tax threshold looks set to be raised still higher in this month's budget - thanks to the Lib Dems.
But, with his party way down in the polls and facing the possible loss of all 12 of its seats in the European parliament, Clegg has at the same time to perform a more urgent task: that of finding a way of differentiating the Lib Dems from the Tories, with whom they claim to have done so well, by attacking them whenever he thinks he can. It is a tricky balance and a difficult sell.
Yesterday, there was plenty of Tory-bashing on show in York. Chief secretary to the Treasury Danny Alexander accused the Conservatives of trying brazenly to claim credit for the Lib Dems' successes on tax thresholds, while Vince Cable, the business secretary, said the Conservatives were "fanning the flames of prejudice" over immigration.
Clegg went for both Tories and Labour on immigration, saying that their language was "truly dispiriting".
Portraying themselves as distinct from, and not puppets of, the Tories carries other dangers. When lurching away from the right, they have to be careful not to creep too far left towards Labour because to do so would threaten their other strategic aim which is to remain, in theory at least, equidistant from the other two parties, one of which is certain to be the largest after the next election.
It is really quite difficult being a Lib Dem these days. In pre-government times, when they were merely the protest party, they could say almost anything that would get them votes. Now, after several years of enjoying power and wanting more, it is all about positioning between two polar opposites while trying at the same time not to lose the party's own identity.
Clegg's forthcoming debates with Nigel Farage on the EU will give him a chance to position the Lib Dems as the most pro-European party, a message that will resonate with core backers. Again, this is about definition - so much more difficult as the smaller party in coalition than when powerless but independent.
In essence, what Lib Dems are saying is that only they can save the nation from unalloyed Tory or Labour government, and that - given the ills of the other parties - coalition is actually the best option. Senior figures say that when analysed in detail, the argument is sound because we live in an imperfect world and disagreement can be creative.
By positioning themselves as the safeguards of everything decent, however, they do place themselves on moral high ground that many would say ill befits a party that went back on its word on tuition fees and the post-election VAT rise, and which can fight elections as dirty as any.
The tortuously narrow and difficult path that Lib Dem MPs have to tread these days is neatly encapsulated in a document given to the Observer this weekend by rebel Lib Dem MPs, peers and council leaders from the north of England, angry about a lack of investment in their constituencies. It praises the coalition in one breath, yet damns it in the next.
"Jobs in the private sector are being created," they applaud, only to add: "However, in the north-east the loss of public sector employment almost cancels out private sector jobs growth, the public sector jobs being better remunerated."
The game is to question aspects of the government record in order to distance themselves from its failings and win approval on northern doorsteps, while trying to grab some credit from the last four years of sharing power.
Talking to the Observer yesterday, Alistair Carmichael, Scottish secretary and former chief whip, recognised that some might see a difficulty - even a contradiction - between savaging Labour and the Tories while also making the case for another coalition in which one of those two evils will necessarily form the larger part.
Ingeniously, he said that all governments were coalitions of interests, and that where the antagonists were different parties in coalition, the divergences at least provoked debates rather than internecine warfare; better, for example, than Labour under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown. "There was a coalition of sorts when Blair and Brown were in government," he said. "It is a more honest coalition when there are two parties. It is a better way of governing."
Captions:
Looking both ways: Nick Clegg's pitch to voters at the election is likely to be that coalition with either party is preferable to unalloyed Labour or Conservative government. Photographs by Martin Argles for the Observer
Document OB00000020140309ea390001k
