{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"1341"}
____
  
Observer Review Features Pages
in the: shadows: Contender: Yvette Cooper is one of Labour's most influential politicians. And yet her practised modesty and unshowy style have kept her out of the limelight. But cometh the hour, cometh the woman?
BY RACHEL COOKE PORTRAIT BY ANTONIO OLMOS   
2,358 words
2 March 2014
The Observer
OB
18
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
PIty the woman politician who says anything at all in public, however mild, about ambition; it can't be much fun to open the newspapers and find out that you long for nothing less than to be prime minister (last week Stella Creasy, the MP for Walthamstow, told Total Politics she could see "nothing wrong" with being ambitious, only for this statement of the bleeding obvious to be reported as a sign of her urgent desire to move into No 10). But still, I can't help but feel that if a few more of them tried to be honest about their aspirations, it would make life a lot easier in the long run. Better, I think, to be likened to Lady Macbeth by the Daily Mail than to perpetuate the idea that ambition is a dirty word if you're female!
Take Yvette Cooper. The shadow home secretary will talk for as long as you'll let her about the more quotidian satisfactions of her job: the effect she can have on policy, or the lives of her constituents. But she'd rather die than admit she enjoys landing one on Theresa May's nose during their encounters across the dispatch box at Home Office questions. "Most of politics isn't shouting," she says, briskly. "It isn't even dramatic. It's practical. For me, there is nothing like it in terms of being able to think: this is really unfair, we must do something about it."
Even so, there must be something about politics in particular that appeals, given that she could doubtless do just as much good if she was, say, running an NHS Trust. "You can campaign from outside politics. But in the end, you're just trying to persuade politicians."
So she really doesn't relish the whiff of power? All she will concede is that the House of Commons is a crucial arena for the opposition, for only there can it put the government under "serious pressure".
We meet in Cooper's impersonal Whitehall office - she doesn't keep family photographs at work on the grounds that they only increase her guilt when she has to work late - a few weeks before yesterday's "special conference" at which delegates debated Ed Miliband's reforms to the relationship between his party and the unions. (Cooper, the daughter of a former trade union official, claims not to be anxious about the effect such a change will have on the party finances. "Most financing comes from individual members anyway," she says, neatly sidestepping the pounds 4m hit the party coffers are likely to take.) In person, she is smiley and attentive, gazing at me wide-eyed as I ask my questions - and this is pleasing at first. Most male politicians tend to interrupt or look bored. Fairly quickly, however, it dawns on me that what she's doing while I'm talking has very little to do with listening. Rather, she's busy formulating her spooling and distinctly robotic answers, most of which bear very little relationship to whatever it is that I've asked. It's like a comedy sketch. "What's your favourite cheese?" I will inquire. "Yellow," will come back the inevitable reply, followed by a long list of the colour's many virtues.
We start by talking about the mood in the Labour party. Cooper admits that it is odd knowing, for the first time in her political life, exactly when the election will be; it feels different. Can Labour win? "Well. . . I think we've got an opportunity to." This is hardly a ringing endorsement; all the parties, even Ukip, have this "opportunity". But perhaps she's worried about Ed Miliband's personal poll ratings, which continue to be poor? She shakes her head. "First, think where we started in 2010, with our lowest level of support for decades. Most people would have assumed the party would fall apart and start fighting itself. I would have expected it to have a very hard time. Second, to come back in one term is really hard. So what Ed has managed to do in a short period is incredible: hold the party together, build a stronger sense of unity."
What's his greatest strength? "I think he has shown that he gets it. There's an empathy with people. Probably the other thing is. . ." A pause. "He's prepared to stand up against some of the vested interests."
I wonder if the Labour party isn't expecting voters to have rather short memories. We know too much about the Blair-Brown wars, the infighting, the mistakes, the suspect briefings, thanks largely to a series of books by former cabinet ministers. (It's as if a wife were to hand her husband an account of all her affairs with the words: but we'll stay married, right?) And some of those involved - including Cooper and, especially, her husband, Ed Balls - were at the heart of all this.
Cooper laughs, slightly nervously. "When you're in government for 13 years, there will be things that go wrong. People will become angry. Iraq was difficult. We thought there were weapons of mass destruction. But what's the future? If the alternative is what David Cameron and Nick Clegg are doing, it's devastating. Everything in the modern media has become more confessional. In any organisation there will always be disagreements. In the end, though, I think: what did we do that was worth doing? The NHS was transformed, we increased the number of people going to university, we provided free fruit in primary schools." I joke that fruit is considered to be sugar now, and therefore verboten. "Well, I'm going to stick up for the apple!" replies Cooper, with a sharp nod of her head.
I wonder about her memories of that time, though. The conversations she and Balls must have had of an evening. Did it feel like she was working in a lunatic asylum? "I don't think it did feel like that. Most of the time, as a junior minister, you're just worried that you've got to do an adjournment debate next week. You could think: why is so much time being wasted on these arguments? But any government needs strong figures, checks and balances. You do need internal debate."
Perhaps it's these "checks and balances" - ie a lot of bitching and shouting - that put some women off politics. In recent months, after all, a number of women MPs have announced they will stand down in 2015. What does she make of their loss, and why is she willing/able to keep going when they are not? "It is a challenge if you've got children. We in the Labour party did a lot to recognise the pressures on women with children, and we brought in women shortlists, too. Harriet Harman in particular has been a fantastic champion; when I had problems with my maternity leave [as she has written, after the birth of her third child in 2004, civil servants treated Cooper's absence "with hostility"] she was incredibly supportive. I don't think the Tories have ever faced up to those issues. They've never done anything to get more women in parliament, and then [once they're elected] it's just sink or swim. They've never had a Harriet Harman."
Doubtless, she's right about this, but her argument, alas, ignores the fact that just as many Labour women MPs as Conservative are off: the latest casualty is Sian James, the MP for Swansea East. (Our meeting, I should add, takes place before the Daily Mail's story about Harriet Harman's time at the National Council for Civil Liberties, and that organisation's links to the Paedophile Information Exchange. When I call Cooper's office for a response to it, I'm referred to her Twitter feed: "Known @Harriet Harman for 25 yrs and rarely met a stronger champion of families & children or defender of women & child victims of violence.")
HEr Home Office brief is undoubtedly challenging - in opposition, a lot of her work is "reactive" - but she's proud of her campaigns for new legislation on stalking, and for Britain to accept Syrian refugees (the government accepted the arguments in both cases). Is she aware, though, of how right wing she sounds when it comes to immigration? "I don't think our approach is right wing. If we say nothing, which is what we did before the 2010 election, we leave the whole debate free for the right wing. Tone does matter; that's why we were so critical of the vans [which told illegal immigrants to go home]. But we have to recognise that people are worried."
It's said - though this might be a sexist cliche - that women are more collaborative than men. What does she make of Theresa May? Do they ever have a drink? Cooper cools visibly. "She's a strong House of Commons performer. But her focus is too narrow. It's an impoverished agenda. It's not a case of women and men, it's to do with different styles. Theresa doesn't provide briefings the way previous home secretaries like Alan Johnson and Jacqui Smith did."
Cooper has brought up her children herself - she and Balls have three - so I feel fine about asking how she makes it all work, the office and home. I wonder what she said to Ed when they met all those years ago (they were working for Harriet Harman at the time). Did she tell him: I'm always going to work; I won't ever iron your underpants? Or is he just an amazing feminist man? "I wish I could say it was planned," she says. "I think it was just obvious to both of us that we would share looking after the children and the home. He does the cooking and the shopping, and I do more washing." Does she ever feel anxious about this? "No! No, I really don't. You should try my cooking. I feel guilty about the children, everybody does, but not about the house."
How does it feel when the papers are having a go at Balls? "People in the street think what they read in the paper is rubbish. There was a period when our children's school went into special measures, and a couple of newspapers sent photographers to the school. That is hard. They didn't choose it." Do they tell each other how they did on, say, Newsnight? "Sometimes, you do talk. A lot of the time, you don't."
From the outside, Cooper's career looks long-planned and seamless: after Oxford, where she took a first in PPE, she was a special adviser for a series of politicians; she was elected MP for Normanton, Pontefract and Castleford before she was 30. "I did try journalism," she says, reminding me of her brief stint at the Independent. "It was too frustrating: I wrote this great article on that nine months ago, but so what?" Crikey. But if she's aware how this might sound to me, she gives no sign.
Her interest in politics was, she says, not party political at first. It was the anti-apartheid movement that attracted her as a teenager. Oxford was a "massive opportunity", but felt "very public school, very posh". Was she surprised to get a first? Did she work all the time? "I did a lot of theatre, actually." Good training for politics? "Exactly."
However, it's the year she spent at home with ME when she was in her early 20s that seems to live largest in her memory; she brings it up unprompted. "The things I'd taken for granted, like being able to cross a road quickly, disappeared. This Morning was my lifeline. In Brookside, the body was under the patio. I was completely up to date with all the soaps."
She knows it's coming, my question about the leadership; I can tell. The room grows suddenly airless; her aide, who is recording our conversation, starts to fidget, wanting me to wind up. In 2010, when Gordon Brown stood down as Labour leader, Cooper wrote a detailed explanation of why she did not want to join the race to be his successor. Her children were, she said, too young. However, this statement came with a tease. "As for future leadership contests," she wrote. "Who knows. . ."
It seems clear that Balls, who did stand in 2010 (he came third), is unlikely ever to be Labour leader; there are some who believe he shouldn't even be chancellor should Labour win. Meanwhile, he now spends a lot of his time talking about his love of cooking and playing the piano. Do they have an agreement? Will she stand next time there is an opening? "I want to be Labour home secretary," she says, just as I knew she would.
Wouldn't it be great, though, if Labour were to have a woman in charge? It seems overdue. "Well, we've had Margaret [Beckett] and Harriet [Harman] as acting leaders. Feminism is important to me but there's a huge amount I can do as home secretary."
What was that I said about women MPs and ambition? Her own is swaddled like a baby in earnest words and practised modesty. But I can feel it all the same. Why else would such a clever and determined woman be so careful, so quiet, so heroically uncontroversial?
Captions:
Yvette Cooper photographed
in London last month for the Observer New Review.
Cooper in Eastbourne with her husband, Ed Balls, after their wedding in January 1998. John Connor Press Associates
Cooper speaking about terror suspect Abu Qatada in the Commons in April 2012. PA
Document OB00000020140301ea320006a
