{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2756"}
____
  
News
Teenager swaps council estate for Eton
John Simpson   
382 words
27 February 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
3
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Eton College, set in 400 acres of grounds and home to the sons of a global elite, is a far cry from an innercity council estate in the country's most overcrowded borough.
However, Ishak Ayiris is about to make the transition from his estate in Newham, East London, to the country's most famous public school.
Ishak, 15, will follow in the footsteps of Prince Harry, David Cameron and 18 other British prime ministers by studying at the 574-year-old college and donning the school's famous tailcoats uniform.
The son of an Ethiopian immigrant living on state support, Ishak has secured a place studying politics, philosophy and economics at the elite sixth form in Windsor next September.
The pupil at Forest Gate Community School was given money from pupil premium, a government scheme aimed at children from impoverished backgrounds, to help him to win the £76,000 two-year scholarship after an impressive performance in a series of rigorous residential interviews.
Ishak said yesterday of the prospect of being a boarder: "Leaving will be hard for my family, not so much for me. Windsor is much quieter than Newham. Newham is loud, vibrant.
"It is a wonderful opportunity for me. It will be very different because the people I have grown up with in Newham and at Forest Gate Community School don't have the same background as the people I will mix with at Eton. When my dad found out, he said he had two dreams — coming to England and for his son to go to the same school as the Prime Minster. Both of these dreams have come true. So, yes, you can say he is proud."
The teenager has set his sights on a place at the University of Oxford and a career in politics but promised that he would return to Newham to bring change to the borough.
"Drugs and crime have a big impact on our community here in Newham. My parents are helped out by state support and benefits. But I see Newham as my home. I want to live here for the rest of my life. I want to go and get the best education I can and come back and improve it."
Document T000000020140227ea2r00075
