{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"245"}
____
  
FINANCE
Earlier rate rise may be needed, warns CBI
By Rebecca Burn-Callander  
670 words
12 May 2014
13:48
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.  
The Bank of England may need to raise interest rates before May's general election, six months earlier than predicted, amid fears of a housing bubble
Interest rates may need to rise sooner than expected to offset the impact of the UK’s overheating housing market as the economy’s growth accelerates, business leaders have said.
London house prices have risen 25pc on their 2008 high, fueling speculation of a bubble. While housing transactions are currently running at 30pc below their 2006 peak and, nationwide, prices remain around 2pc down on 2006, the market is picking up pace. Property prices are set to increase by 8.2pc this year and 5.1pc in 2015.
According to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), this could force the Bank of England to raise interest rates in the first three months of next year, before the general election, as opposed to the third quarter previously forecast.
This has been echoed by economists, who claim that Bank governor Mark Carney will confirm interest rises on Wednesday, when the bank lifts its growth forecasts as part of its scheduled inflation report.
The CBI upgraded its GDP predictions from 2.6pc to 3pc for 2014 in its growth forecast, released today. Next year, the economy will expand by 2.7pc, rather than the 2.5pc previously forecast, it added.
While the growth is encouraging, the CBI said that a housing bubble could still derail the recovery. “We have to remain alert to the risks posed by unsustainable house price inflation,” said CBI director-general John Cridland. “Housing has come back under the spotlight as annual house price inflation figures have reached double digit figures on some measures.”
His comments follow last week’s warning from economic thinktank, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which said that if measures were not taken to further “restrain housing demand”, such as cutting back the Government’s Help to Buy scheme or forcing borrowers raise higher deposits, the market could quickly overheat.
Mr Cridland also voiced fears that the imminent general election could see business investment and tough decisions take a back seat to political electioneering.
In a thinly-veiled reference to Ed Miliband’s promise to freeze energy prices last year, he said: “Businesses recognise the realities of election time but want all parties to ensure their policies make a positive difference. Politicians must be wary of the risk of headline-grabbing policies that weaken investment, opportunity and jobs.
"The UK now has more stable economic foundations," he added. "Political risks must not jeopardise this."
The CBI has called for all parties to focus on reforming public services, boosting the supply of new homes, reducing the deficit and investing in UK infrastructure.
Unrealistic immigration targets, unjustified interventions into various markets, further flirtations with leaving the EU, and any lever-pulling which could delay long-term infrastructure projects or restrict labour market flexibility must be avoided if the business community is to continue to flourish, it said.
A slew of economic data, released today, confirmed that the UK economy is thriving. According to the latest Business Trends report from accountancy firm BDO, UK manufacturers’ growth prospects for the rest of 2014 strengthened in April as confidence within the sector rose to a new all-time high.
The increased confidence in the manufacturing sector is evidence of economic rebalancing, as power shifts away from the London and City-centric services industry.
The latest Lloyds Bank Regional Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) also revealed further strong improvement in business conditions across England and Wales, with manufacturers and service providers taking on more staff and reporting strong rises in their order books.
Across the English regions, the seasonally adjusted index measuring overall business activity reached 59.3 in April, up from 58.1 in March and well above the 50.0 value that indicates no change. This was the strongest monthly rise in business activity since December 2013.
Document TELUK00020140512ea5c0008g
