{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"53"}
____
  
News
At last, someone is making the Conservative case for immigration
By James Kirkup   
764 words
25 March 2014
12:43
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Conservatives for Managed Migration has launched today. It’s a small campaign within the party calling for a rather different approach to immigration. In short, its backers are unhappy with the current policy of caps on overall numbers, targeting net immigration of less than 100,000, and generally talking about how awful immigrants are.
Instead, they suggest the Conservatives should be championing the economic case for immigration, explaining and celebrating the fact that a lot of the people who come to the UK from other countries come here to work and prosper, and in so doing make the overall UK economy more successful.
Here’s an example of the Managed Migration argument:
A cap on numbers forces us to concentrate on stopping or delaying entry for precisely those who could contribute most to Britain – entrepreneurs and students. Better, surely, actively to encourage smart, skilled, or successful people to come here – and be firmer when it comes to deterring those who are none of these things.
The group is led by Mark Field, the Conservative MP for the Cities of London and Westminster. Public backers include Baroness Berridge, Brooks Newmark MP, Ben Wallace MP, Nirj Deva MEP and James Cleverly AM.
I say “public” because I know several Conservatives, ministers among them, who agree entirely with the group’s aims, but don’t dare so in public.
Mr Field has been talking this morning. He makes another interesting point, that the Conservatives should stop talking about immigrants as a problem, and start talking to them as voters. Many migrants, he says, are natural Conservatives, but are put off by the party’s current stance.
He said: “The Conservative Party has always thrived most when it has adapted to or led change in Britain. Those who have or will come here are not numbers – they are people. There are many minority and migrant communities who are bursting with the sort of entrepreneurial vision and family commitment that should make them natural Conservatives – but they are hardly going to embrace our Party us if we rarely seen to embrace them.”
Anyone familiar with my blogs on this stuff won’t be surprised to know that I think there’s an awful lot of good sense here. I won’t reprise the economic arguments for immigration,not least because I want to avoid the familiar “economic benefit vs social harm” debate that often follows such pieces.
Instead I’d like to look at the Conservatives and immigration.
I’m not pretending that Mr Field and friends speak for most Conservatives; plenty of their colleagues are grumpy about their campaign. But I wonder whether its launch is another small sign that the Conservative position on immigration is being re-evaluated. I’ve suggested here before that even senior Cabinet people can see the economic virtues of immigration.
Such people were more than a little troubled by James Brokenshire’s “Metropolitan Elite” speech, and – more significantly – the reaction of British business leaders to that speech. Faced with a choice between Ukip-style populism and the continued health of Britain’s biggest companies, a lot of grown-up Conservatives at least pause for thought.
The acid test will come in the Conservative manifesto next year: will the Tories repeat their pledge to cut net immigration to “tens of thousands” a year? I have my doubts, and I’m not alone, but we won’t get an answer for a while yet.
In the meantime, I’d like to conclude with a look at Mr Field’s argument about immigrants.
As I understand it, the Conservative Party celebrates hard work and self-help.It praises “hardworking people” who take responsibility for themselves and their families, who’d rather earn than claim, who want to get on life. It stands up for people who get on their proverbial bikes and go out looking for work, even if that search takes them far from home.Is there a better example of Conservative values in action than the Polish tradesman, the Romanian potato-picker, the Nigerian nurse or the Indian MBA student who stays on to up his own business in the UK?
And yet in recent years, that same Conservative Party has put itself in a position of being seen to denigrate and shun a significant number of people in this country who embody that Conservative ideal: immigrants.
Finally, someone is starting to question that nonsensical position, and make the Conservative case for immigration. Well done, Mr Field and friends.
Document TELUK00020140325ea3p002mp
