{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2687"}
____
  
NEWS
Ed Miliband hiring TV adviser to 'make best of brand strengths'
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
538 words
1 April 2014
19:52
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ed Miliband is hiring a £45,000 a year TV adviser to enhance his "brand" after polls found the public regard him as weird
Ed Miliband is hiring an adviser to improve his performances on television, after polls show the public regard him as “weird”.
The Labour leader wants a former broadcast journalist to help him make better use of his “brand strengths” after a series of stumbling appearances and polling that shows voters have not warmed to him.
The “Head of the Leader’s Broadcasting” will be in charge of all “visual images of the Leader of the Opposition”, according to a Labour Party job advert.
The successful candidate will advise Mr Miliband on “broadcast performance” and help him prepare for interviews and visits.
They will also be tasked with “developing fresh ideas for making the best of Leader of Opposition’s brand strengths and communicating his message in broadcast medium.”
The £45,000-a-year position will also involve ensuring Mr Miliband gets the most coverage possible at party conferences and visits, and “developing and sustaining relationships with senior broadcasters.”
The candidate will also require “excellent political judgment” and “experience of dealing with good and bad news stories”.
The Labour leader is considered “very weird” or “fairly weird” by 41 per cent of voters, compared to 34 per cent for Nick Clegg and 27 per cent for David Cameron, polling last month showed. He is the party leader most likely to have been “unpopular at school”, YouGov found.
Mr Miliband’s public appearances have been relatively infrequent, but the general election campaign in a year’s time will see him exposed to cameras every day for several weeks as he tours the country.
He is also likely to face several hours’ of live television interrogation if, as is expected, he takes part in leadership debates against Nick Clegg and David Cameron.
Nigel Farage, who like Mr Miliband is a confident public speaker, appeared sweaty and unfocused under the studio lights in debate with a more relaxed Mr Clegg last week.
A Labour Party political broadcast aired tonight did not feature Ed Miliband at all, leading the Conservatives to claim Mr Miliband had been "airbrushed".
Ed Miliband’s most senior press advisers are former newspaper journalists. By contract, David Cameron’s director of communications, Craig Oliver, is a former BBC News executive.
The decision to hire a television specialist follows a string of difficult television appearances for Mr Miliband.
He was ridiculed early into his leadership after failing to answer questions about public sector walk-outs, instead repeating: “These strikes are wrong at a time when negotiations are going on.”
An interview on BBC Radio 4’s World at One last year was described as “oddly charmless” after he raised his voice at host Martha Kearney.
His televised visit to flooded Wraysbury was overshadowed by angry confrontations with residents. He later stepped into flood water that was too deep for his Wellington boots.
Gordon Brown’s election campaign was derailed as he was caught by a Sky News microphone referring to a voter concerned about immigration as a “bigoted woman.”
Document TELUK00020140401ea41003bk
