{"newspaper":"The Scotsman","id:"3249"}
____
  
Property
Moving Matters : Tenants may soon outnumber owners, but it's not all down to the bankers
Kirsty McLuckie   
812 words
15 May 2014
The Scotsman
SC
11
English
(c) 2014   
We've been told that we have been increasingly becoming a nation of renters for some time, but the dramatic rise in the proportion of households now in the private rental sector has had many contributing factors, and not all of them are down to the financial crisis.
It is true that the credit crunch led to lending criteria being tightened to such an extent that those who in previous generations would have raised a mortgage and bought their first home were stymied with high deposit requirements.
Homeownership has become a long term dream, if attainable at all, as all but those with the wealthiest of families envisage years of saving. In the meantime, these would-be first time buyers grow old in rented accommodation.
At the same time, the number of properties available for rent has increased. From market stagnation, again as a result of the financial crisis, came home owners who couldn't sell their properties when they needed to move and had to rent out a previous home to make ends meet.
Low interest rates and a drop in house prices - again caused by the global financial predicament - attracted the investors, who chose to put their money in bricks and mortar rather than the bank for a better yield.
Perhaps they also expected long term capital appreciation and sure enough values have been rising - albeit very slowly in Scotland.
It has all contributed to the huge rise in renting and if current housing trends continue, more people in Britain will rent their home than own it by 2032, according to a new report issued by the Intermediary Mortgage Lenders Association which assesses the growth of the buy to let market and its impact on first time buyers. They say that since 2007 the private rented sector has grown from 14 per cent to 18 per cent of households while owner-occupation has dropped from 68 per cent to 64 per cent and social renting has also fallen.
Not a huge shift yet, but this is just the start, they say. And putting down this shift to the causes of the financial crisis isn't the whole picture, according to the IMLA.
The report shows that buy to let mortgages - for those landlords borrowing to invest - financed just a third of the additional houses in the private rented sector since 2007, with the remainder made up of cash or commercially-funded purchases and properties rented out by their existing owners.
Equally the IMLA report identifies multiple trends driving the rise in demand of private renting, not just the growing financial obstacles for first time buyers and second steppers.
They point to wider societal changes, such as those in the employment landscape, the increasing numbers of students, high levels of immigration, the population choosing to marry and cohabitate only after years of living singly and the rising separation and divorce rates as all playing their part in the demand for rented homes.
Then there is also the hugely influential fall in the provision of social housing which forces would-be social housing tenants to compete in the private market.
Homeownership is already lowest among younger generations and this effect will gradually move up the age brackets, as more people struggle to buy in their 30s and beyond.
Perhaps more than anything it is in the average age statistics for first time buyers that the real sea change can be seen most starkly. In the last 20 years, homeownership among 16-24 year olds dropped from 36 per cent to 11 per cent while among 25-34 year olds it fell from 67 per cent to 40 per cent.
What's more, if renters are cohabiting and starting families in rented accommodation, with the attendant roots put down through work and schools, they are less likely to buy as they get older, so the average age of a first time buyer is likely to increase further. There is also the presumably sticky problem of older mortgagees not having the working years left to pay off a mortgage, despite retirement ages increasing.
But terms of influencing the proportion of renters to owner, perhaps the biggest influence in the future is going to be the rise in population. The demographic projections point to rapidly rising housing demand, as the UK population reaches 67.8m by 2020 and 75.3m by 2035 from a starting point where there is already a shortage of homes.
All of which leads the report to conclude that if current trends continue without a major policy or economic shift to address the shortage, the majority of UK households will be renting in the private and social sectors in less than 20 years. Homeownership will increasingly be the preserve of the old.
Document SC00000020140515ea5f0002t
