{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2202"}
____
  
NEWS
Do I employ any foreigners? Well I do have a Portuguese cleaner; Danny Alexander, the Liberal Democrat Treasury Secretary, is forced to admit on air that his cleaner is an immigrant
By Robert Mendick and Matthew Holehouse   
932 words
8 March 2014
20:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Coalition is facing fresh embarrassment over the issue of immigration after a senior Cabinet minister was forced to admit he employed a Portuguese cleaner.
Danny Alexander, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, began to stutter and stumble during a live radio interview on Saturday after being asked if he employed immigrants. At first Mr Alexander, a Liberal Democrat, avoided the question.
Asked by Mishal Husain, the presenter of Radio 4’s Today programme, “Do you employ anyone from another country?" Mr Alexander replied: “Er, er, urm, er, erm … in the Treasury there are people from all around the world working in the, er, Treasury."
Miss Husain then explained her question referred to Mr Alexander’s own household, not the large Government department where he works.
Pressed on whether he employed any foreigners, Mr Alexander finally responded: “Er, ar, er, er … we use a brilliant British, er … child minder and a, er… Portuguese lady occasionally comes in to clean our home."
The employment of foreign domestic help by senior ministers has come under scrutiny after the apparent criticism of the practice by James Brokenshire, the new immigration minister. Mr Brokenshire, a Conservative, condemned a “wealthy metropolitan elite" for benefiting from the cheap services offered by immigrants. Their gain, he said last week in his first speech in the job, had been at the expense of “ordinary, hard-working people in this country".
The speech has caused embarrassment for the Government, with ministers being questioned on whether they benefit from immigrant workers. It has emerged − as a result − that Samantha Cameron was involved in the family’s foreign-born nanny securing British citizenship in 2010 while she was working for Mrs Cameron and her husband. Mrs Cameron’s name was entered on an application form for British citizenship for her long-term nanny, Gita Lima, who is from Nepal.
Nick Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister, has admitted having a “lady who has a Belgian passport who helps us", while Theresa May, Mr Brokenshire’s boss, conceded she uses a Brazilian-born cleaner.
A spokesman for Mrs May said: “Theresa May’s cleaner is a British citizen but she was born in Brazil. Theresa had no role at all in her cleaner’s application for citizenship."
The disclosures will likely fuel the view of some that the Coalition is part of the “wealthy metropolitan elite" condemned by Mr Brokenshire and is out of touch with ordinary voters. One senior source said Mr Brokenshire’s comments had simply drawn attention to ministers’ own household arrangements.
In his interview on Saturday, Mr Alexander went on to defend his employment of a Portuguese cleaner. “As a country, our reputation for tolerance, our reputation for being open-minded, is incredibly important to us and when you get to a position where people and businesses who employ people from other countries are criticised just for that, I think that is getting to a pretty poisonous position."
He added: “It is a sorry position where we have got to be asking those sorts of questions because it is based on an assumption that somehow a business or an individual who is employing someone from another European country is doing something wrong."
After the interview, an aide to Mr Alexander denied he had been hesitant in answering the question or had tried to avoid it, possibly for fear of appearing out of touch. The aide said: “That is 180 degrees away from what happened. Danny Alexander doesn’t worry about things like that. If he has a cleaner, he has a cleaner. It’s a matter of fact."
Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat Business Secretary, waded further into the row, accusing Conservatives of “fanning the flames of prejudice".
His intervention will widen the rift between the two parties with a European election campaign to fight in May and a general election next year.
In a speech at the Lib Dem spring conference in York, Mr Cable said: “It was never more necessary to have a party that was willing to stand up on this toxic issue and address it from the point of view of realism and evidence and fact.
“The Labour Party will always hide in a bunker when difficult issues like this come along and the Tories tend to fan the flames of prejudice and then they panic when it gets out of control and parties even further to the Right take over."
Mr Clegg told the conference that Mr Brokenshire’s speech was “ugly" and “irresponsible" and said the Conservatives’ position on immigration had been “absolutely slammed" by the Institute of Directors. “It is truly dispiriting to see the Conservatives and Labour party driven entirely by panic on this issue.
“The Conservative Party is no longer standing up for business. They do so at their peril."
“The Labour Party won’t stand up against xenophobia and instead of trying to reduce the temperature of the debate they try and stoke it. It’s a dismay day for Labour."
In a thinly disguised swipe at Mr Brokenshire, Norman Baker, the Liberal Democrat Home Office minister, said: “James is new to the job."
He said he did not employ any immigrants and said ministerial colleagues, many of whom have refused to say whether they employ people from overseas, should come clean.
“There’s no reason to be secretive about it," he said.
Document TELUK00020140309ea38000ba
