{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3797"}
____
  
News; Front Page
UKIP's surge into lead rocks Tories
Tim Shipman   
1,093 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
2; National
1,2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Cameron defies his Eurosceptics UKIP in text message blitz
DAVID CAMERON will refuse to make any further concessions to Eurosceptics despite UKIP surging into its first lead in the polls this weekend.
The prime minister was struggling to contain a growing Eurosceptic tide last night as he faced calls from Conservative MPs and the public to take a tougher line with Brussels to counter the UKIP threat.
Senior Tory backbenchers disclosed that they would visit Downing Street after the vote on May 22 to demand that Cameron outline much more extensive plans for the repatriation of powers from Brussels.
But Cameron will put himself on collision course with his party after privately dismissing their concerns and vowing not to give an inch — even if the Tories are humiliated in the European elections. Tory jitters will be stoked by today's YouGov poll for The Sunday Times on the EU elections, which puts UKIP in the lead for the first time, with the Conservatives trailing a distant third.
Despite a week of controversy, Nigel Farage's party has risen to 31%, three points clear of Labour, with the Tories languishing on a lacklustre 19 points.
In another blow to the prime minister, the former Tory donor now backing UKIP has indicated he will bankroll the party at the next general election — boosting Farage's chances of winning seats at Westminster for the first time.
Paul Sykes, who is worth £650m, according to next month's Sunday Times Rich List and is among the 200 wealthiest people in Britain, also revealed that he had funded "at least another two waves" of UKIP adverts before the European elections.
"I'm not giving up," he said. "That will warn the Conservatives what's going to happen. We will get more democracy in Britain if it skints [sic] me."
The prime minister, in a newspaper article last month, detailed the powers he wanted to reclaim from Brussels before his proposed in/out referendum in 2017.
They included demands to stop "mass migrations" when new countries join the EU, curbs on benefits for EU migrants and "red card" powers for national parliaments to join together to block future EU laws.
But senior backbenchers on the Eurosceptic right, such as Bernard Jenkin, Gerald Howarth, John Redwood and Bill Cash, are all preparing to tell the prime minister that he must address the issue of border controls for existing EU migrants, the European Commission's attempts to impose the Charter of Fundamental Rights on Britain and the need for national vetoes of existing European laws.
Howarth, a former defence minister, said: "It's very important that the prime minister comes out with a specific programme on Europe. Everything we touch, we find that Europe wants to influence or, worse, control us."
Another senior backbencher said: "Cameron needs to flesh out in greater detail what the deal is going to be ... He doesn't talk about Continued on page 2 ?? WW ?? Continued from page 1 changing freedom of movement, which is a red line for most of us. He has suggested it for new entrants. Why can't we have it now?" But a senior figure in Downing Street has revealed that Cameron will refuse to spell out further red lines on the grounds that an "endless list of demands" will not fit on campaign leaflets.
In a move that will enrage many, Cameron has privately stated that he has no intention of placating the Eurosceptics. "Some people will never be satisfied whatever you say," he said.
A source familiar with his thinking said: "We won't be saying more about the renegotiation after the elections. He has spelt out where he wants to see changes and that's what we are sticking with."
Cameron and William Hague are also under fire from Cash, chairman of the Commons European scrutiny committee, who is demanding a response from ministers to proposals by the panel for national parliaments to gain "red card" veto powers of EU laws. The Foreign &Commonwealth Office has yet to formally respond to the proposals as it is required to do.
Conservative MPs also want more action to defend the City after the Treasury lost a court case against an EU directive on short selling that could drive hedge funds away from Britain.
The new poll shows that it is the MPs not the prime minister who have public support: 42% of voters do not think his plans for renegotiation go far enough, against 25% who say they are about right. A total of 56% of voters think curbing immigration should be the top priority for Cameron's deal with Brussels — a view that Farage has exploited.
While Cameron has dismissed UKIP as "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists", the poll suggests the party has now broken through as a significant political force with a sizeable chunk of the electorate: 57% of all voters regard them as a protest party, 71% of UKIP's own supporters regard them as a serious party.
Sykes told The Sunday Times that if Cameron did not grant a referendum in this parliament "to give the people a say on Brussels and our relationship with it" then he would help fund UKIP candidates at the general election. "If we get a really good result in Europe and it looks promising ... we can put some pressure on by fielding candidates, rolling our sleeves up and putting a professional campaign on. They will certainly win some seats." Sykes indicated that UKIP would be sending text messages to all voters next month as part of his spending blitz. "Technology kicks off in about a week's time," he said. "That will go out to all mobile phones. You've not seen anything like this!" He warned Cameron that "the result of the European elections is going to be a challenge to his leadership". UKIP could profit from further Tory troubles this week because the disgraced MP Patrick Mercer is set to quit and force a by-election over a cash for questions scandal.
The Commons standards committee will meet on Tuesday to ban him from parliament for six months. The MP for Newark, a winnable seat for UKIP, has told friends that if he is suspended for more than a month he will have to stand down.
Tory plotters spare PM the knife — for now, page 6. Editorial, page 18. Your cash will be safe with us in the Treasury, News Review, page 5 @dipeshgadher
Document ST00000020140427ea4r000qm
