{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1605"}
____
Guardian Features Pages
Film & Music: A week in radio Speaking for Muslim women
Nosheen Iqbal   
375 words
28 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
28
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Fair play to Woman's Hour this week, for making an effort to understand "the experience of British Muslim women" with a special edition that included Salma Yaqoob, former leader of the Respect party, and Julie Bindel, "representing the silenced majority of Muslim women" (her words, since deleted on Twitter, not mine).
The only downside? The parameters were set for the debate pretty much the moment the show started. "If you look at the facts," said Jane Garvey, "you can't deny this: British Muslim women are at the bottom of the heap. They have the lowest employment rates, a large number of them have never worked and they also have the worst health."
Blimey. Put like that, it's no surprise Radio 4 wants a debate to investigate why. Except, assuming that equality in the workplace is the number one measure of success for the Muslim mothers and housewives discussed here (and not necessarily listening to or appearing on Woman's Hour) is a bit like saying the main priority for western feminism is whether the Brazilian or the bush is a more empowering move. That, and conflating "Muslim health" with stats on south Asian health is a bit misleading, no? Ethnic minorities own the bottom of health leagues on account of poor diet and education; Islam isn't dictating heart disease, rich fried foods are. But still, in principle, I'm with you, Woman's Hour, because working-class British Muslim women - who are, like immigration, talked about endlessly in mainstream media despite the insistence that they're not - are a low priority.
"I'm coming from a different perspective, being outside of these Asian subculture communities," said Mirina Paananen, a graduate and Muslim convert, who gently stuck it to the panel for patronising her choice. She didn't want to work, was glad not to have the responsibility; being "a homemaker and mother is my valuable contribution to society". Not the answer some of the panel might have wanted to hear, but then that's the problem with a debate: a useful one requires a lot more listening than it does talking.
Panel member . . . Salma Yaqoob
Document GRDN000020140327ea3s00087
