{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"1368"}
____
  
News
MAY HITS OUT AT CABLE FOR CELEBRATING HUGE RISE IN IMMIGRATION
BY GLEN OWEN    
478 words
2 March 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
2
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
THERESA May has publicly rebuked her Cabinet colleague Vince Cable for claiming that last week's figures about a steep increase in immigration were 'good news'.
The Home Secretary vented her anger at the Business Secretary and called on the Prime Minister to limit the movement of foreign labour.
Lib Dem Mr Cable was responding to figures showing that net migration to the UK jumped by 60,000 to 212,000 in the year to September 2013, powered by a 40 per cent rise in the number of people taking advantage of European laws on free movement.
Mrs May, writing in today's Mail on Sunday, expresses her alarm at the figures, which come despite David Cameron's promise at the last Election to slash net migration to the 'tens of thousands' by 2015.
And she slapped down Mr Cable for claiming it was a sign of Britain's booming economy.
'Vince Cable said this rise was "good news". I do not agree,' writes Mrs May, before going on to complain: 'At the moment we are bound by the treaties that successive governments have signed. These mean we cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants.'
She argues that Mr Cameron's plans to claw back powers from Brussels prior to a referendum on EU membership in 2017 should be used as an opportunity to change European laws on migration. The Home Secretary wants new member countries to reach a minimum level of wealth before their workers are allowed to travel to the UK to find employment.
Some 24,000 citizens of Romania and Bulgaria arrived in the year to September 2013 - nearly three times the 9,000 who arrived in the previous year.
Those numbers are likely to rise, as the statistics pre-date the lifting of border controls on Romanians and Bulgarians on January 1.
Mr Cable, who is to the left of most of the Lib Dems, and Mrs May, who is on the right of the Tories, are both keen to establish their leadership credentials ahead of any potential contest after the 2015 vote.
In his provocative remarks last week, Mr Cable said: 'Actually, those figures are good news because the reason net immigration is going up is because fewer British people are emigrating and surely that's a good thing - people are getting jobs here.
'We are getting people coming in from Europe to fill jobs in our expanding labour market.
'This is further proof that any quota on migration, such as the one Conservatives are pushing, is unworkable and contradicts our aims of getting Britain back on its feet.'
The row displays the widening gulf within the Coalition, particularly in areas where the parties are most determined to 'differentiate' their policies from each other.
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140302ea3200014
