{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1624"}
____
  
Features
Who is the real Nigel Farage?
Adrian Lee   
1,259 words
28 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
20
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
A documentary maker has just spent six months following the Ukip leader to discover what lies behind the pint and packet of cigarettes image. His findings might surprise you...
HE makes no secret of the fact that he enjoys a few pints and more often than not is to be seen in public puffing away on a cigarette. Nigel Farage's detractors have also tried to portray him as a clown, who is in charge of a party full of "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists".
One thing is for sure, love or loathe his ideology, the Ukip leader is not to be confused with the countless bland politicians who wander the corridors of Westminster.
Remarkably, in an age dominated by political correctness his maverick approach is paying dividends.
This week he was widely considered to have got the better of Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg in a live TV and radio debate on Europe.
With Ukip also expected to do well in forthcoming euro elections and party membership growing fast, a new TV documentary examines the remarkable rise of Farage on the eve of his 50th birthday.
Programme maker Martin Durkin spent six months shadowing the Ukip leader, following him to Strasbourg, where his speeches are winning a cult following, and exploring his middle–class roots in Kent. He concludes that his laddish image isn't a sham but there's more than just fags and booze.
"There isn't a hidden side behind the bloke with the pint. He is as he was as a boy, bolshie and perverse. He has the normal views of people of an older generation.
"He has their prejudices and disquiet about the pace of change in the world and a tendency, when confronted with a problem, to unfairly blame outsiders rather than ourselves or the state. But he has their admirable values too, of self–reliance, a love of free trade and free speech and genuine democracy, a suspicion of bureaucrats and experts and a wish to see the Government leave us with more of our own money. Depending on who you ask, the astonishing popularity of this normal man is either terrifying or terrifi c."
Durkin is seen accompanying Farage to the village of Downe in Kent where he grew up and where he still lives around the corner from his mother Barbara. He has been a regular at the George & Dragon pub for 30 years. "We are a middleclass southern family," says Farage. "There's no point pretending to be anything different."
FARAGE was educated at Dulwich College, South London, where he excelled at cricket but elected not to go to university. He was inspired by philosopher John Stuart Mill, who set out his opposition to state control in his infl uential work On Liberty.
He says: "That was very important for me because it made me understand how we should all live together in society and have mutual respect for one another and, within reason, have freedom to do what we want to. That has stuck with me. I hate big government. I can't stand being told what to do."
His father was a stockbroker and Farage became a trader at the London Metal Exchange. In the documentary, which will be screened next week, he shows Durkin his old haunts punctuated by regular stops in various inns. He often returns here, he explains with a throaty laugh, because the traders have a sense of humour which politicians lack. During the course of the day Farage bumps into an old pal who is outside his offi ce having a crafty cigarette break, has three pints, shares a bottle of red wine and rounds off with a glass of port. It's not clear whether he is cultivating a man–of–the–people image, which is attracting working–class voters, or genuinely doesn't care. It was during his 20 years in the City that Farage became a supporter of free trade and capitalism. His life was transformed when John Major signed the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, allowing the EU to develop and ensuring close ties between Britain and our European neighbours. Ukip was founded soon afterwards.
"This new party was looking for a candidate so I put my hand up and found I rather liked it," recalls Farage, who became a member of the European Parliament at the end of that decade. He has since become a thorn in the side of eurocrats and politicians in Brussels and Strasbourg.
Farage is seen in the programme ignoring rules that prevent fi lming, fl outing a smoking ban and riding a tram without a ticket. "Just do what you want and apologise afterwards," he tells Durkin. "I fi nd it works terribly well."
He makes little attempt to hide his contempt for the EU, as he conducts a guided tour. "There are thousands of people everywhere you look," he says. "I don't know what they all do. This is the paperclip department. Please do not think this is a proper parliament exercising proper democracy because it is no such thing."
Introducing his colleagues he says without any trace of bitterness: "I'm surrounded by people who hate me."
He has become legendary for his passionate and often extremely insulting speeches, including one in which he tells policy makers: "I want you all fi red," and another when he tells Herman Van Rompuy, president of the European Council: "You have the charisma of a damp rag and the appearance of a low grade bank clerk. Who are you? I've never heard of you."
Yet he professes to love Europe, the place. Farage, who is married to a German, Kirsten Mehr, insists: "I adore Europe because of its tiny geography and different languages, different countries, different people and histories. You get different wines and cheeses. I'm completely pro– European. What I hate is this project to harmonise it."
Ukip's policies on immigration have resonated with voters and he has faced allegations that his party attracts racists. Back home, he is seen being attacked with a placard. He has survived much worse, including a plane crash while campaigning in a light aircraft towing a banner, and testicular cancer.
He says: "We as a party are not opposed to immigration, or immigrants, but frankly there are a lot of jobs in this country that are being done by people mostly from Europe that should be done by our own people."
Ukip says immigrants should need a work visa and should have to support their own families for fi ve years before they can receive benefi ts.
PARTY membership has risen to 35,000, although it still receives a fraction of the fi nancial donations of Labour and the Conservatives. It's claimed a surge in Ukip support could cost the Tories the next general election and Farage is scenting victory in his EU referendum campaign. He recently got rid of old stager Godfrey Bloom, who made injudicious remarks about Bongo Bongo Land and referred to some women as sluts.
"As he gets closer to real political power Farage is becoming less forgiving of the eccentric outbursts of his supporters," says Durkin.
He suggests Farage faces a dilemma. Should he carry on having a beer and a laugh, or try to become more statesmanlike? For now, at least, Nigel Farage has a simple formula that appears to be rattling his political rivals.
Nigel Farage: Who Are You? Monday, Channel 4, 7.30pm.
Document THEEXP0020140328ea3s0001o
