{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1516"}
____
  
News
PM offers tax incentive to persuade Scots to stay in UK
438 words
15 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
2
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE Scottish Parliament could gain more power over tax even if voters reject independence, the Prime Minister has said.
A "no" vote on Sept 18 will "not be the end of line" for devolution, David Cameron told the Scottish Conservative Party conference in Edinburgh.
He stopped short of spelling out any detail, but insisted that he and Ruth Davidson, the leader of the party in Scotland, want devolution to "work better".
Mr Cameron said: "Let me be absolutely clear – a vote for 'no' is not a vote for 'no change'. We are committed to making devolution work better still.
"Not because we want to give Alex Salmond a consolation prize if Scotland votes 'no', but because it's the right thing to do. Giving the Scottish Parliament greater responsibility for raising more of the money it spends – that's what Ruth believes, and I believe it too."
The pro–independence Yes Scotland campaign group said the promise was a sham. Blair Jenkins, the chief executive, said: "The trouble is that we have heard it all before and it is clear from what the Prime Minister said today in his speech that he cannot and will not guarantee more powers for the Scottish Parliament.
"With Labour also hopelessly split on more powers, the message to take from this is very clear: that the only way the people of Scotland can be guaranteed to get the powers they want and the country needs is to vote 'yes' on September 18."
In his 20–minute speech, Mr Cameron insisted there will be "no going back" if voters say "yes" to independence and repeated the warning that the UK would not agree to a formal currency union to allow an independent Scotland to keep the pound.
"There's the myth that any talk about the consequences of separation is all bluff and bluster, or even bullying. Warnings on the currency. Warnings on the EU," he said.
"The nationalists say this is a big political conspiracy from south of the border – just ignore it. But that is wrong and, frankly, irresponsible."
He added: "We owe it to the people of Scotland to take that myth apart."
Theresa May, the Home Secretary, told the Scottish Conservative conference that passport checks will be introduced between Scotland and England if a looser immigration policy is adopted north of the border after independence.
"If the people of Scotland vote to leave the UK there will be profound changes for migration policy," she said. "An international border will be created where one does not currently exist."
Document DT00000020140315ea3f0005z
