{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1541"}
____
  
Business
HOW TO LIFT BRITAIN
Kathryn Cooper   
1,631 words
16 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
5
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
With the budget just days away, we offer our manifesto for the chancellor so that business can really take off. By Kathryn Cooper
Malcolm Hall is planning to double the number of young people he employs over the next two years, thanks in part to George Osborne.
His industrial supplies business, Hall-Fast, which he set up in his back bedroom in 2006, has grown rapidly since the recession and now supplies clients in 78 countries with everything from nuts and bolts to industrial pumps.
Yet Hall-Fast is a mostly web-based business, employing just eight people from its base in Mansfield, Nottinghamshire. Half are young apprentices from the local further education college. Hall wants to take on an extra eight over the next two years and the chancellor has helped him with his plans.
In last December's autumn statement, Osborne scrapped, from 2015, employer national insurance contributions (Nics) for workers aged under 21, helping to lift 450,000 businesses and 1.5m workers out of the tax altogether.
"I have always tried to support young people from the local area, and the government's move means I can hire apprentices earlier than I might have done otherwise," said Hall, 39.
Britain's economy may be accelerating but youth unemployment remains at just under 20%. Few workers of any age feel they have shared in the recovery so far, given that pay growth remains so weak.
When the chancellor delivers his fifth budget on Wednesday, it will be his last chance to make an impact before the 2015 election. He must make it a package for jobs and growth. If employers hire more staff, there is a good chance that productivity and, in turn, real wages will be rising by polling day. If not, Labour could seize the initiative on living standards and, with it, the coalition's chances of a second term.
"The government could boost the pay packets of thousands of hard-working people by making it easier for businesses to take on more staff, speeding up the recovery in the labour market," said Matthew Tinsley of the Policy Exchange, David Cameron's favourite think tank.
Osborne must boost exports, unlock investment, improve infrastructure and slash energy costs if the recovery is to have legs. Below, The Sunday Times unveils its seven-point manifesto for business.
CUT TAXES ON JOBS
National insurance (NI), introduced by David Lloyd George when chancellor in 1911, is now an income tax in all but name. It is the biggest tax faced by businesses, raising £60.5bn from employers in 2012-13 and adding nearly 14% to the cost of hiring every worker. When NI is added to income tax, Britain's top rate is 47%.
With corporation tax now the lowest in the G7 — at 21% from April — and 2.7m people taken out of income tax by the coalition's increases in the personal allowance, the chancellor should turn his attention to NI. The separate income tax and NI systems place a huge burden on businesses, particularly small firms. The accountancy firm KPMG has estimated the cost at nearly £800m a year.
Osborne helped ease the burden in the autumn statement, but employers need the support now as the economy emerges from recession. He should bring forward his Nics exemption for young people by a year, and extend it to the under-25s.
Policy Exchange believes the chancellor could go even further by aligning the threshold for Nics — £7,956 from April — with the £10,000 personal allowance, saving employers £250 a year per worker. It would cost £5.4bn if implemented straight away, but the Treasury could stagger it over several years. Ultimately it would pay for itself in higher employment.
"We want to see a road map for NI in the same way we had a road map for corporation tax," said Katja Hall, chief policy director at the CBI, the employers' organisation. "That would give certainty to businesses and encourage them to hire."
EXTEND HELP TO BUY
Osborne's controversial housing initiative is boosting the supply of new homes, despite widespread fears that it would pump up a new property bubble.
The number of new homes being built is up 16% since the first phase of Help to Buy, the equity loan scheme, was launched in April. Nearly one-third of new-builds in England are funded by Help to Buy, according to analysis by the investment bank Morgan Stanley.
Construction firms are hiring thousands of apprentices and graduates, suppliers are bringing mothballed factories back into production and the industry is already reporting shortages of bricklayers and carpenters. Stewart Baseley, executive chairman of the Home Builders Federation, said: "The sooner housebuilders have certainty about the sales situation post-March 2016, the better in terms of land buying and forward planning. Almost every land appraisal prepared today will have to include assumptions about sales conditions beyond the end of the scheme."
OVERHAUL BUSINESS RATES
Business rates are an iniquitous tax, with thousands of small firms paying more in rates than they do in rent.
The tax is based on rental values that are recalculated only every five years. The last revaluation, in 2010, was based on 2008 values — before the financial crisis hit and rents tumbled. The next update has been pushed back from 2015 to 2017. In the meantime, rates rise in line with inflation.
In December, the chancellor capped April's increase at 2%, rather than 3.2% if it had gone up in line with inflation, but he should have been bolder. The system needs a root-and-branch review, to assess whether five-year revaluations are fit for purpose and whether rates should be replaced with a local sales tax.
"We appreciate the effort made at the autumn statement but a fundamental reform of the outdated business rates system is still needed," said Adam Marshall, director of policy at the British Chambers of Commerce.
LOOSEN IMMIGRATION RULES FOR THE HIGHLY SKILLED
The government's curbs on migration from outside the EU are making it harder for businesses to recruit skilled workers from overseas, just as the economy is picking up.
Thousands of highly paid, skilled workers who have been sponsored by international employers to work in Britain will have to leave by 2016, under a five-year rule introduced in 2011. As many as 30,000 a year have come to work in this country under the scheme.
SUPPORT A SECOND DASH FOR GAS
Cuadrilla Resources, the shale gas driller that claims to have found decades' worth of gas under Lancashire, recently celebrated the five-year anniversary since its founding. Yet it has drilled only three wells, and none in more than two years.
The stasis is typical. The government has talked a big game but done little to remove the planning and financial obstacles to fracking, the controversial drilling technique used to unlock the gas.
And this is the thin edge of the wedge. Twenty gas-fired power stations have received planning approval, yet only one is being built. Because coal is so cheap, generators are losing money on gas-fired plants. They will push the button on new ones only if the government makes crystal clear its long-discussed plan for financial support.
The chancellor is likely to freeze the carbon floor, a UK-only tax on big polluters that industry claims has rendered manufacturers and energy providers uncompetitive. That will be welcome, but will do little to break the logjam.
LAY FOUNDATIONS FOR MANPOOL
London accounts for 22% of Britain's economic output, far outstripping any other region, but a new "supercity" in the north would rival the capital — and add billions to the economy.
Jim O'Neill, the former Goldman Sachs chief economist who now heads the City Growth Commission, recently floated the idea of creating "Manpool", a superconurbation combining Manchester and Liverpool. The idea generated the inevitable storm of protest from locals but has economic merit.
The combined city regions of Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds and Sheffield would account for 10% of Britain's economy, more than any devolved nation, according to the Institute for Public Policy Research North.
One of the lasting benefits of HS2, the proposed high-speed rail link, could be improved connections between northern cities, rather than their links with London.
Campaigners have called for the second phase of HS2 to be extended by just 20 miles from Manchester to Liverpool, to link with the city's redeveloped port. The extension would cost just £1.5bn but unlock benefits of £8bn.
UNLEASH A 'SUPERINVESTOR' Ideas for grand infrastructure projects are ten a penny. Funding them, however, is often trickier.
Big investors, such as Aviva, Prudential and Legal &General, are willing to spend cash — as are sovereign wealth funds from China, Kuwait and Abu Dhabi. Yet often these investors want to see the British government put its neck on the block before they will sign a cheque.
Britain has the capacity to set up a superinvestor fund that could provide seed capital to build schools, hospitals and affordable housing. And it would not need a penny of new taxpayer cash.
There are about 40,000 public-sector pension schemes in Britain that trace back to local authorities, NHS trusts and countless quangos. Combined, they hold assets worth about £1.4 trillion.
Smashing the schemes together into one megafund could save about £34bn over five years in fees, according to London School of Economics research.
The huge fund could plough a good proportion of its assets into bold investments that promote the national interest. If the superinvestor took the long-term risk, providing equity for these projects, it would unlock billions of pounds in debt capital from the private sector.
Document ST00000020140316ea3g000fb
