{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2643"}
____
  
'The access labyrinth for foreign students'
By Zakaria Mahmood   
1,138 words
20 March 2014
08:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The UK’s reputation in higher education is being tarnished by an overseas student recruitment process that is full of pitfalls, says Zakaria Mahmood
Four years ago, a young relative of mine, living abroad, told me he wanted to come and study at a British university and asked me to help him out, to which I happily obliged. Little did I know what I was letting myself in for.
Along the way I found a labyrinthine system so difficult to navigate that it was putting off young students and forcing our universities to make impossible choices.
In fact, to call it a system was to give it too much credit. The process was and still is riddled with unnecessary risks and uncertainty for both would-be students and institutions. Furthermore, it generates distrust and is open to exploitation at too many points along the way.
It doesn’t have to be like this. The government estimates that overseas students bring ﾂ｣17.5bn billion to our schools, colleges and universities and wider economy each year. Our education system is held in the highest regard and it remains one of our biggest export earners.
The world market for higher education is estimated by the government at around £3 trillion, but the truth is that the UK will lose out if it fails to fix the problems around visa support and management.
British education may be world class, but access to it is in serious need of attention. It’s time to develop a system that looks at the problem in the round, that aligns its many moving parts and provides peace of mind for students and their families and for the institutions.
The government also needs reassuring because the current visa system is often the subject of negative headlines. We need more thorough security checks to make sure that those getting visas are bona fide students.
There is plenty of public data that, if put in one place and checked, would eliminate a great deal of the uncertainty about dubious applications. Similarly, the tens of thousands of agents around the world that act as middle men between students and institutions need vetting, and those that are sound, need a more transparent system in order to do their job properly.
The majority of agents work hard and have built up strong relationships internationally but inevitably, with such growth, too many inexperienced and unscrupulous brokers have moved into the market.
But it’s in the financial arena where most problems occur. At present, students have to prove that they have the required tuition fees plus a maintenance allowance in order to be considered for a visa, which is normally achieved by presenting a bank statement to show that they have the funds. This system is open to abuse.
We know that too often agents are able to deposit the required £9,000 in a student’s bank account first thing in the morning, obtain a statement in collusion with the manager of the local bank and have the money back in their pockets by lunchtime. Such students eventually come to the UK with pennies.
Students are enticed into a university with only a deposit to be paid and once they have paid the agent his fees, visa costs and the flight they manage to arrive in the UK with only £3000 of outlay.
It is students like this that create the biggest problems for our institutions because they are spending too much time working to make ends meet and not enough time in lecture halls or libraries. Once in Britain, cash strapped students can work up to 25 weeks a year and up to 20 hours a week, leaving little time or energy for genuine academic work.
That’s why I have advocated a comprehensive financial management system, at the heart of which is the creation of escrow accounts, where funds are held in a reputable UK high street bank and are released to the college or university gradually as they become due.
This would prevent the creation of fraudulent statements; giving institutions and visa authorities the knowledge that students are able to pay. But most crucially it tells the world that the UK is serious about the fair and transparent management of fees, visas and admissions.
And it is fair for everyone. It gives genuine students and their families the peace of mind that their life savings won’t be lost if a college or university loses its licence, even temporarily or falls into financial administration.
The troubles experienced by many institutions that have lost their licences – often, ironically, because they have failed to keep rogue students in check – have done untold damage to the reputation of the whole sector.
Many FE colleges and some universities have less than robust systems for international students with few financial guarantees. Institutions need more robust systems to handle admissions, finances and immigration compliance.
We have to remember that, despite their best efforts, institutions are overwhelmed by the administrative complexity and chopping and changing of immigration visa procedures and policies.
This is why middle-class families across emerging markets now cite as one of their top concerns (in addition to post study work) this uncertainty that the current UK system creates. And it is also why they are increasingly opting to send their children to Singapore, Australia and New Zealand, where fee protection schemes are in place.
Their escrow systems provide a financial peace of mind that we in the UK aren’t able to offer.
Cash-strapped institutions in the UK that rely increasingly on overseas students for their survival are going to find it harder to attract talent unless they can provide assurances about their financial strength to students and agents. More is needed beyond the gentleman’s understanding that is currently in place.
Britain’s reputation as a centre of educational excellence remains very high, but that should not lead to complacence because our competitors are chipping away at our lead.
Recently, the Australian Government announced a 'rebuilding' of their international higher education offer including the possible reintroduction of post-study work opportunities.
The UK’s top tier reputation for education is being tarnished and students and institutions are ill-served by a recruitment process that is too disjointed and full of pitfalls.
Only by creating an escrow system, bolstering security checks on students and giving institutions and agents around the world an independent seal of approval, will the suspicion and uncertainty surrounding our existing creaking system be removed.
Only then will our system be fairer, safer, smoother and smarter. And only then will our universities colleges be unshackled to compete for the best talent and offer an education that is the envy of the world.
Zakaria S. Mahmood is CEO of AMLAPS
Document TELUK00020140320ea3k000rx
