{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"3525"}
____
  
Features
NIGEL CAN REWRITE HISTORY WITH JUST A PINT AND A SMILE
BY JAMES FORSYTH   
1,057 words
20 April 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
43
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
NIGEL Farage will never have a better chance to break the mould of British politics. If UKIP can top the poll in the European elections in four weeks' time, the public will have delivered a vote of no confidence in the entire ruling political class.
No one will be able to dismiss UKIP as a bunch of cranks. They'll be the winners of a national election - and will have to be treated as such.
Before polling day, Farage will be drinking pints of bitter rather than gin and tonics. Why? Because UKIP believes their victory lies in winning over blue-collar, Labour voters.
Alarmingly for David Cameron, Farage is concentrating on Labour voters because he believes he already has a host of Tory supporters in his column. Senior Conservatives concede that at the General Election they can hope to win back only half those they've lost.
The other half are so disillusioned with politics that they don't think it makes any difference whether Cameron or Miliband is Prime Minister. They won't be moved by warnings that if you vote UKIP, you get Miliband.
For the moment, Farage's circle is relaxed about the stream of stories about UKIP expenses. It believes that attacks from the so-called Establishment only add to its appeal. But Farage must keep his temper in check. If he blows a gasket on live TV, he'll blow UKIP's chances, too.
His 'Join the People's Army' campaign tour will begin in Yorkshire this week. His plan is to use immigration as a battering ram to break into Labour's northern strongholds. His message will be that immigration has hit working class jobs and wages and that only UKIP can do anything about it.
In an act of political ju-jitsu, Farage will also try to turn Miliband's cost-of-living attack on the Tories back against him. He'll point out that the squeeze on wages began under Labour. UKIP HQ believes that the voters' attitude to Labour is the same as Les Dawson's to his late mother-in-law: 'Gone but not forgiven.'
The prize for UKIP isn't just electoral victory but forcing Miliband to offer a vote on membership of the EU. One senior UKIP figure declares: 'Our dearest wish is to force Labour to revisit the referendum question.'
Last month, Miliband made it clear that he would call a vote only in the event that more powers were going to be handed to Brussels. But if UKIP top May's poll, Miliband will come under almost unbearable pressure to offer a referendum regardless.
For Cameron, coming third in a national election for the first time in Tory history is going to cause problems. The Right is even now readying its demands. A Minister influential with this wing warns: 'The Right will be robust in pushing the party to reflect the realities of defeat.'
The Right will also want its people promoted in the reshuffle expected afterwards. I'm told: 'The PM will have to look after the Eurosceptics and ensure that it is a reshuffle that promotes party unity.' If he doesn't do this, there will be trouble.
It isn't hard to see how this could lead to Tory defeat in 2015. If the party indulges in months of in-fighting, the public will tire of it.
But perhaps the biggest worry for Cameron is how many UKIP supporters don't think it makes any real difference whether it is Cameron or Miliband in No 10. These voters aren't going to be persuaded by Tory arguments that Cameron is a better Prime Minister than the Labour leader would be. Their indifference could well let Miliband into Downing Street.
 
TV STAR OR TECH GURU - THE TORY WOMEN TIPPED TO FOLLOW BORIS
TWO women are dominating Tory talks about who should one day succeed Boris Johnson as Mayor of London.
The dark horse is Joanna Shields, chairwoman of Tech City - Cameron's digital industry initiative. The leadership knows it takes a different kind of Tory to win in traditionally Labour London, and Shields, a naturalised American, is not a typical Tory.
But she is not well known. By contrast, Karren Brady is a TV star thanks to The Apprentice. She introduced George Osborne's last conference speech and was Cameron's small business tsar. She also has London roots and is vice-chairman of West Ham Football Club. Either way, if the Tories are going to get their candidate hired in the capital, they'll need someone as different from a normal politician as Boris is.
 
ED PINNING HIS HOPES ON OBAMA'S BRUISER
THE prospect of Prime Minister Miliband just got more real. He has signed up the man who guided Barack Obama to two election victories. In 2012, David Axelrod portrayed Obama's opponent Mitt Romney as an elitist who wouldn't help ordinary people. Obama won despite trailing on the economy. Labour are hoping he can help them do the same.
Miliband has long needed to beef up his team but was reluctant to call on the New Labour past. And as one Miliband ally gleefully declares: 'No one is now going to say, if only we had Peter Mandelson.'
The 2015 Election will pit Axelrod against former colleague Jim Messina, now advising the Tories. They fell out badly under Obama and I understand Axelrod became more interested in the job after Messina joined the Tories. This all adds to the sense that the next Election is going to be the most bitter, and personal, political fight for a generation.
***
DAVID Cameron and George Osborne will make a rare joint appearance on Tuesday. The pair have long avoided public events together because the sight of them could reinforce the perception that the Tories are a party of posh boys.
This appearance marks the start of an effort to promote the team around Cameron. As backing for the strategy, No 10 aides point to the lead that the pair already have over Miliband and Balls on economic competence. Indeed, it is tempting to see this Tory emphasis on the team around Cameron as simply another way to get at Balls.
***
 
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140420ea4k0000q
