{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2237"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Spring is near: time, says the minister, to ethnically cleanse your house
CAMILLA CAVENDISH   
1,220 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
21
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Are you now, or have you ever been, a member of the metropolitan elite? Even those who can't afford the luxury of a Polish nanny may feel that last week's speech by the immigration minister James Brokenshire was a little McCarthyite. Brokenshire attacked middle-class families who employ sparky foreigners instead of lumpish Brits. It's not reds under the beds that will get you into trouble: it's asking a red to make your bed.
It is true that the wealthy have enjoyed the benefits of hard-working tradesmen and staff from other countries without caring what effect they might be having on native Brits. Brokenshire could also have said that Labour members of this metropolitan bubble were deaf to public fury during their 13-year policy of uncontrolled immigration. But declaring open season on every MP who asks a Colombian to do their hoovering won't do much to advance the debate. In Washington it has been open season on home helps for 20 years. In 1993 Nannygate swept away two of Bill Clinton's candidates for attorney-general. His first choice, Zoe Baird, had employed one illegal Peruvian as a nanny, another as a chauffeur, and paid no social security taxes for them at first. His next choice, Kimba Wood, had also employed an illegal alien and paid no tax. In the end the job went to Janet Reno, who was childless, so above suspicion.
With the British Nannygate, Brokenshire has leapt from the legitimate exposure of illegal employment into the homes of people employing legal migrants. Move over, Baroness Scotland, who was recently revealed to have hired (unknowingly) an illegal housekeeper. Now we know Dave and Sam Cameron had an Australian nanny (gasp). Nick Clegg employed a Belgian.
The government is not amused by this reminder from one of its own that we are governed by the metropolitan elite: there's quite enough of that coming from Labour already. And it is annoyed that the speech sowed more confusion about Tory policy in a week when data showed the government would miss its net migration target and the Home Office was accused of having exaggerated the extent to which migrants stop Brits getting jobs.
The question of whether foreigners are "taking our jobs" is a complex one. There is no fixed number of jobs to be divided up, because migrants help to expand the economy and increase the size of the pie. And it's common sense that employers will hire better and cheaper workers if they can. Analysis in 2012 by the Migration Advisory Committee suggested migrants depressed the job prospects of natives, especially the low-skilled. The new report finds less evidence of this, especially when the economy is strong. But it finds that it happens in times of recession and high immigration.
It's hard to know what to make of this, since both reports contain caveats about the data.
Neither report deals with dislocation of workers who find it hard to get work locally. And displacement is only one side of the coin. Without high rates of migration, employers might have hired more unemployed Brits. High migration rates create the Pret a Manger paradox: a bias towards eager foreigners who don't need to be trained to be cheerful and who turn up on time.
If you want to do another impossible calculation, why not work out the impact of immigration on the size of the economy against its social cost? For immigration is about much more than economics: it is about values. Outsiders change the nature of the society they enter. Diversity brings new ideas, energy and understanding. But mass immigration also puts a strain on public services and makes it hard to build trust.
A fascinating report last week by the Centre for Entrepreneurs found the public feels positive about migrant entrepreneurs, who, it claims, have created one in seven of all new small companies in Britain. Some critics say it is hypocritical to praise foreign entrepreneurs who create jobs but to decry the impact of immigration on social cohesion. Yet that is perfectly logical.
When Nigel Farage of UKIP says he feels like a foreigner in his own country, he is articulating views that polls have reflected for years. People fear the scale of immigration. And they know that as well as all the enterprising souls, Britain has also imported some groups whose practices are wholly antithetical to our way of life.
Talk to Jasvinder Sanghera about forced marriage. Listen to Fahma Mohamed on female genital mutilation, which is thought to have been carried out on 170,000 girls and women living in England and Wales in the past 10 years. Ask yourself why no one has been prosecuted for that crime or why no one even mentioned it for years. These are questions to which the business community and the liberal left have no answers.
Every modern country is facing similar problems, but various studies suggest Europe is worse at assimilation than the United States. American Pakistanis, for example, are generally richer and better integrated than their British counterparts. The United States has its problems, but it has been crafting a multi-ethnic society for generations with patriotism on the school curriculum. And, like Canada and Australia, it tends to hand out visas according to skills, not family ties.
After a decade of mass immigration, Britain faces the challenge of building a more cohesive society. We need an American approach to values. And we need an Australian approach to talent. The Blair government planned what it dubbed "an Australian-style points system", but the clue was in the word "style". The lack of an overall cap made nonsense of the "points". The Australians target skills they believe they need more of. The Brits just divided them into five "tiers", and then let most people in anyway.
By cracking down on bogus colleges and reforming family visas, the coalition has helped to reduce the number of non-European Union arrivals by 70,000 this year. The problem is that there is an EU-shaped hole in government policy. The number of EU arrivals in the past year reached 212,000, more than double David Cameron's target of curbing the figure to below 100,000 by the next election. Unless the EU changes its policies on free movement, Britain will eventually face a choice between staying in the EU and controlling who comes in.
The Institute of Directors says that we face a choice between closed borders and an open economy. That is nonsense. Multinationals can transfer as many talented executives here from overseas as they like. Only half the work permits set aside for skilled migrants have been taken up. When politicians and businessmen seek refuge in debates about GDP, they miss the point about the social cost. Equally, when a minister accuses law-abiding folk of hypocrisy, he creates unnecessary antagonism. A minister who wants you to ethnically cleanse your house because the government can't control EU immigration is offering the wrong kind of nanny state.
camilla.cavendish@sunday-times.co.uk
WHEN THE IMMIGRATION MINISTER ACCUSES LAW-ABIDING FOLK OF HYPOCRISY HE CREATES UNNECESSARY ANTAGONISM
Document ST00000020140309ea39000q6
