{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"893"}
____
  
CULTURE
The People: the Rise and Fall of the Working Class 1910-2010 by Selina Todd, review
By Juliet Gardiner   
887 words
4 May 2014
11:14
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
An account of the "working class century" prompts the question: why is Britain still plagued by class divisions?
Class is a slippery word and a fiercely contested concept. What are the indices that categorise the working, middle and upper classes? Occupation, income, lifestyle or self-designation?
Class is not simply a descriptive taxonomy, it is an active one, freighted with political and social meaning – and occasionally a call to arms. From Marx via George Orwell and E P Thompson to Jilly Cooper, sociologists, politicians and writers have tried to distil the essence and function of class as a useful analytical tool – and in doing so unravelled it further. The working-class aristocracy, the lower middle class (Orwell described himself as lower upper middle class), the squeezed middle (class), the arrivist upper class.
It is a national preoccupation that shows no sign of disappearing with frequent references to “toffs” – mostly old Etonians, Harrovians or Wykehamists, invariably Oxbridge educated, usually, though not always, with old money – still top dogs. Television producers prowl round the stately homes of long-lineage aristocrats like the dukes of Bedford and Devonshire. Interest in the working class proliferates, exemplified by the heated debate over the Channel 4 series Benefits Street, and reality shows such as The X Factor, Big Brother, Britain’s Got Talent and The Only Way Is Essex, which shine a fractured spotlight on working-class life, attitudes and aspirations.
Selina Todd’s book tells the history of what she designates the “working-class century”, starting in 1910 when people “who worked with their hands constituted the vast majority of Britons”. As E P Thompson, a Marxist, pointed out, it was during the Industrial Revolution that “the working class was present at its own making”, when colliers and craftsmen banded together to advance their own interests and challenge those of their employers. A class defined as a category of people having a common relation to the means of production – the seemingly unbridgeable gap between those who own capital, and those who work to produce it.
Todd claims that the impetus for her book was when she went to university to read history and found nothing about the kind of working-class family she came from. “Eventually,” she writes, “I realised I would have to write this history myself”.
One has to wonder where she looked. There have, over recent years, been several scholarly and dispassionate accounts of working-class life in the 20th century. Ross McKibbin and David Vincent, for example, augmented and exemplified by numerous vivid memoirs such as those by Richard Hoggart, Alice Foley from Bolton and Winifred Foley in the Forest of Dean, on which Todd draws in her narrative. There are also the Nab End series about working-class life in Lancashire, and Gilda O’Neill’s account of her life in London’s East End, plus several published recollections of the hunger marchers of the Thirties.
The result of Todd’s efforts is a straightforward and useful, if slightly flat, account of oppression faced by the working class. It charts the poverty, lack of opportunity and the largely fruitless attempts to change this unequal relationship through trade union activity.
During the Second World War, the task of fighting and provisioning fell heavily on the working class, which made common cause with the rest of the nation to resist Hitler. After this collective effort they hoped their demands for a better life would be universally realised.
Todd interlaces her history with the story of Viv Nicholson, who on winning millions on the football pools in 1961, exuberantly vowed to “Spend, Spend Spend!” – and did so to such an extent that within seven years she was spent.
This parable magnifies Todd’s contention that the “fall” of the working class was due to the government’s failure to deliver on the post-war promise of a better life provided by the welfare state and the false rhetoric of politicians promising social mobility, improved education and full employment. Disillusioned workers turned their backs on class solidarity and communal action and found solace in individual rewards and a degree of power through consumption – new houses, cars, foreign holidays, televisions and gadgets.
Lately, however, there has been growing pride in acknowledging working-class roots in autobiographies and memoirs, either the struggle out of poverty and low expectations, or nostalgia for a lost community of family and neighbourly warmth, support and gossip. A celebration of “street cred” in music, speech, food and fashion, much borrowed from second-generation immigrant communities, has elevated working-class culture to the status of cool.
Yet, as Todd points out, the class rhetoric has been refreshed by politicians: the class struggle has come full circle both with a widening gap between rich and poor and a nomenclature that recalls the 19th-century view of the “deserving” and the “undeserving poor”, as “strivers and shirkers”.
 The People: the Rise and Fall of the Working Class 1910-2010 by Selina Todd 
456pp, John Murray, Telegraph offer price: £23 (PLUS £1.35 p&p) (RRP £25, ebook £12.99). Call 0844 871 1514 or visit books.telegraph.co.uk 
READ: The Classless Society, Alwyn Turner's account of the Nineties
Document TELUK00020140504ea54001md
