{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3598"}
____
  
Business
LAND GRAB
Simon Duke   
1,616 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
7
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A $19 bn swoop on What'sApp shows how Facebook and Google are using their financial might to carve up the digital world. Simon Duke reports
The riches of Silicon Valley were only eight miles away, but may as well have been on another planet. For the 16-year-old immigrant, the lavish enclave of the technology industry must have seemed a cruel taunt as he queued for food stamps.
Jan Koum had fled Ukraine in 1992 to escape the anti-Semitism and poverty unleashed when the Soviet Union collapsed. He and his mother had made a game start to their new life. With help from the US welfare system, they had rented a poky flat in Mountain View — a short drive from moneyed Palo Alto.
She worked as a babysitter while Koum scrubbed the floors of a local store after school to earn a few extra dollars. That was never enough, though, so he would join the food line.
Twenty-two years later, Koum returned to the former North County Social Services office to complete his improbable rise into the ranks of the super-rich. Last week, outside the drab one-storey building, he signed the contract to sell his five-year-old messaging service, called WhatsApp, to Facebook for $19bn (€13.8bn). With an estimated 45% stake, Koum — 38 tomorrow — is sitting on $8.6bn. Brian Acton, his co-founder, has a reported 15% stake, worth $2.9bn.
For Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, the swoop on WhatsApp was a signal of intent as the kingpins of Silicon Valley take part in a landgrab. As smartphones and tablet computers upend the tech industry, the law of the jungle applies: eat or be eaten.
Facebook, Google and other rivals are using their cash piles and inflated share prices to pounce on start-ups. Since the start of the year, tech firms worth a total of $42.5bn have changed hands in America — the highest level since the dotcom boom, according to data from Thomson Reuters.
The normal rules for valuing companies have been ditched as the hunger for the Next Big Thing has taken hold.
Facebook's $1bn acquisition of Instagram in 2012 now looks like child's play, with WhatsApp setting a new standard in the crazy economics of the Valley. The smartphone app allows users to send messages and photos to each other free of charge. A clever concept, but last year it generated just $20m in revenues from its 450m users. In truth, Zuckerberg had no choice but to write the fifth biggest cheque in the history of the tech industry. The Facebook founder could not afford to allow WhatsApp, which is expected to have 1bn users next year, to become a threat to his own business. A more terrifying scenario would have seen WhatsApp fall into the hands of Google, which tabled a $10bn bid for the company.
REJECTION came as a bitter blow. In 2009, Brian Acton, a thirtysomething software engineer, applied to one of the hottest start-ups in the San Francisco Bay Area. After a decade of slog at Yahoo — a net pioneer turned dinosaur — the Stanford graduate just didn't fit the bill. "Facebook turned me down. It was a great opportunity to connect with some fantastic people," tweeted Acton. Twitter, too, rejected his application.
At a loose end, Acton joined forces with Koum, his friend and former Yahoo colleague.
The Ukranian founded WhatsApp in February 2009. His first plan was to allow users to show status updates to friends on their smartphones, but this swiftly morphed into its messaging service.
At the time, its chief rival was Blackberry's BBM, but that worked only for owners of the clunky handsets. WhatsApp's unique twist was to allow users to communicate via any smartphone at no charge. It was not long before hundreds of thousands of people had downloaded WhatsApp, and Koum and Acton found they could charge for the app. Now customers use WhatsApp free for the first year then pay $1 a year.
WhatsApp is not the only wildly popular messaging tool. Snapchat, which allows users to send pictures or videos that vanish in seconds, turned down bids of $3bn and $4bn from Facebook and Google last year.
Messaging companies are prized because they are rapidly becoming the social network of choice for the young. Many teenagers consider Facebook passé and recoil at the thought of using the same service as their parents.
Deeper forces are at play, however, which spurred Zuckerberg into action. In the era when the PC was gateway to the web, Facebook could keep its 1bn users corralled within its own gated community sending messages to friends, sharing photos and playing games. By contrast, smartphones and tablets are more like the Wild West, with other apps just two taps away. If Facebook cannot develop its own exciting new services, it has no choice but to pounce. The alternative is a costly slide into irrelevance.
The WhatsApp acquisition underlined the "continued determination of Facebook to be the 'next' Facebook", said Benedict Evans of venture capital giant Andreessen Horowitz. "The winnertakes-all dynamics of social on the desktop web do not appear to apply on mobile."
Facebook is paying $4bn cash, $12bn in shares plus bonus stock worth a further $3bn to gain control of WhatsApp. The price is by any measure astronomical, but Facebook's share price held steady after the deal. Investors know Facebook has to move quickly to adapt as smartphones take over.
Zuckerberg has also built up a large stock of goodwill since the company's botched float in 2012. Back then, Facebook had no mobile revenues. Now, however, more than half its turnover is from ads served on phones and tablets.
Buying WhatsApp is a powerful defence of Facebook's empire. However, it also extends its reach into more countries. If WhatsApp's user base doubles as expected, and Facebook can extract a little more from them, the investment could pay handsomely. While Facebook seeks to buttress its dominant position, Google has loftier ambitions. Over the past year, the search giant has spent billions of dollars on start-ups in niche fields from robotics to smart energy meters. Last month, it gobbled up a two-year-old UK start-up that teaches computers how to think like humans. The $400m takeover of Deep Mind, founded by chess prodigy and neuroscience boffin Demis Hassabis, will bolster Google's drive to create tools that predict the needs of users.
The London company is shrouded in secrecy. However, one of its early projects enables computers to play arcade games, learn the rules and devise a winning strategy — without human assistance.
The takeover came just weeks after Google spent $3.2bn on Nest Labs, a developer of wi-fi devices for the home, such as programmable thermostats that learn from their owner's behaviour. Like Amazon, it is also expanding into robotics. Two months ago it snaffled Boston Dynamics, which develops intelligent machines for the US army.
Among its creations are BigDog, a four-legged robot that can navigate bumpy terrain, and Cheetah, which boasts a top-speed of 28mph.
For Google, intelligent machines will be critical in the company's quest for a deeper understanding of human behaviour, which will in turn supercharge its online advertising cash machine.
THE land grab shows no sign of abating. The riches that the WhatsApp founders have generated in just five years will embolden the next Valley entrepreneurs. Facebook and Google are riding high and boast colossal resources to swoop on any rival. With a market value of $405bn and a cash mountain of more than $50bn, the search giant can easily accelerate its acquisition drive. Zuckerberg, meanwhile, pulls all the strings at a company worth nearly $180bn. Buying WhatsApp meant giving away just over 10% of Facebook. That's justifiable if it provides long-term protection. There is a limit, however, to how many times he can devour putative competitors before destroying the value of Facebook.
Tasty British morsels
The American giants that dominate the technology industry are increasingly turning to Britain''s vibrant start-up scene to buttress their empires.
Zynga, the San Francisco-based games developer, paid $527m (€380m) last month for Oxford tech firm NaturalMotion — founded by a former zoology PhD student.
Already this year, Google has taken two bites into the British technology scene.
In January it swooped on DeepMind, a two-year-old artificial intelligence developer, and last week it grabbed advertising technology developer Spider.io for an undisclosed sum.
Spider develops software that identifies and blocks online fraud. Fake clicks generated by computers have become a big problem in the $120bn advertising sector. As the biggest player, Google wants to clean up the industry and prove to advertisers that their ads reach real people. Spider's fraud-busting software can help "weed out bad actors" who create fake traffic, said Google. The British company has exposed several high-profile scams, including a fraudster who hacked into PCs to create fake advertising views.
The next takeover could be Hailo, the fast-growing on-demand taxi app. Founded in London in 2011, Hailo has expanded into a dozen cities, including New York, Washington and Chicago. Earlier this month it hired the former finance chief of Ubiquisys, a British tech company sold to America's Cisco for $310m last year.
Hailo has dreams of world domination and aims to be in 50 cities in a dozen countries by the end of next year. Experts believe it could make a tasty morsel for Google because of the amounts of location-based data it could collect from its users.
Document ST00000020140223ea2n00001
