{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1971"}
____
  
Features; Opinion Column
THE VULTURES ARE SERCLING
SIMON ENGLISH   
415 words
30 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
40
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
Shares dive at giant's profit warning
Sun CITY
CRISIS-HIT SERCO yesterday had another disaster — as its shares dived by 15 per cent.
Furious investors bailed out after the bungling company issued an unexpected and vague profit warning that suggests it may ask shareholders for cash to stay afloat.
The out-sourcing giant said: "It has now become evident in the light of recent performance that we may need to reassess the level of risk implicit in the assumptions underlying our forecasts.
"This may, in turn, require a material downward revision to expectations, and for us to review the appropriateness of our financing position."
Shares collapsed, closing down 60.7p at 343.8p, after £303million was removed from the value of the company.
Investment bank LIBERUM said the profit warning was a "shock" and labelled it "deliberately vague".
The disaster underlies the scale of the task facing incoming chief executive Rupert Soames, who takes over tomorrow. Wags say his job is just as difficult as any attempted by his grandfather — Sir Winston Churchill.
Serco is currently under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office and City of London Police over accusations it defrauded the Ministry of Justice through its prisoner escort and electronic tagging contracts.
The scandal cost Chris Hyman his job as chief executive last autumn.
Last month, Serco said costs relating to the police investigation were £90.5million. The admission helped send its pre-tax profits for 2013 plunging by 62 per cent to £107million.
The company has already slashed 400 jobs and issued two earlier profit warnings in November and January.
Serco's operations include administering US President Barack Obama's healthcare reforms in America and operating immigration detention centres in Australia.
But its biggest customer is the British Government. Its UK responsibilities include managing London's DOCKLANDS LIGHT RAILWAY and cycle hire scheme and our missile early warning system.
Serco might have to go cap-in-hand to shareholders for cash to stay afloat.
TAGS FOR DEAD LAGS AND OTHER GAFFES
BUNGLING Serco's recent disasters include: SEPT 2012: Patients are given infected blood by a Serco-run lab in London.
JAN 2013: Accused of falsifying NHS reports.
SEPT 2013: Claims emerge of a cover-up on alleged sex abuse of detainees at Yarl's Wood Immigration Removal Centre in Milton Ernest, Beds,
DEC 2013: Serco repays £68million to the Government after overcharging for tagging criminals.
Some were dead or in jail.
Document THESUN0020140430ea4u000dw
