{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"81"}
____
  
News
Germany to expel benefit tourists so why can't UK?
Anil Dawar   
523 words
26 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
19
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
A PLANNED crackdown in Germany on benefit tourism has led to demands for Britain to follow suit.
Germany wants to screen all EU migrants to weed out those with no hope of getting a job, and to expel welfare cheats and limit child benefit to taxpayers.
Under the new rules, EU jobseekers in the country would get just three months to find work or face being kicked out.
The proposals, which are expected to be approved by the Berlin government today, have already led to calls for the UK to take similar tough action.
Tory MP Peter Bone said yesterday: "It's the kind of idea which would give us back control over our own borders.
Doubtful "The Germans are waking up to the problem of uncontrolled migration now that Romania and Bulgaria are getting free access to their country."
Ukip Euro MP Gerard Batten said: "This sounds like a great idea. It is going in the direction of a controlled immigration system.
"If it works we should look at what we can do here. But I am extremely doubtful it can be imposed while the EU's freedom of movement rules still exist. We will have to wait and see."
Germany's Chancellor Angela Merkel set up a high-level panel to look at ways of tackling benefit tourism in January this year when millions of Romanians and Bulgarians won free access to Europe's job markets and welfare systems.
The mayors of 16 major cities in Germany have said they are struggling to cope with eastern European migrants, mostly Roma gypsies, because of the strain they are putting on public services and council resources.
A draft report by the panel, which includes senior officials from across German government ministries, is said to recommend getting tough on jobseekers without qualifications or the ability to work.
It also recommends expelling benefit fraudsters and blocking their return for a fixed period of time. Other proposals include limiting child benefits to taxpayers and cracking down on firms that hire unregistered foreign workers.
The report said: "The government supports freedom of movement and Germany benefits from it. At the same time, we must recognise that a lot of problems can be associated with immigration."
Tightest Guenter Krings, a deputy interior minister in Mrs Merkel's government, said: "Free movement at European level has a purpose - to find a place to work or study.
"If you don't have even a theoretical chance of getting employment, the necessary prerequisites for free movement are not fulfilled."
In Britain the Department for Work and Pensions said: "The UK Government will do everything possible to ensure people come here for the right reasons - to work hard and contribute to our economy and society.
"Our controls on accessing benefits and services are among the tightest in Europe in order to protect them from abuse.
"Any EU national who is removed because they don't fulfil residence requirements will be unable to re-enter for 12 months, unless they have a valid reason to be here."
OPINION: PAGE 12
Document THEEXP0020140326ea3q0003k
