{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1680"}
____
  
Features
Salmond's separatist paradise will turn many of its own into foreigners
GRAEME ARCHER   
842 words
19 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
30
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Opponents of a divided Union underestimate the SNP leader at their peril
A wobble, or a game–changer? The latest opinion polls for the Scottish independence referendum are worrisome, especially for those of us whose dislike of the potential split is matched only by the depth of our subconscious assumption – that Scotland would just vote No.
Don't go, Scotland, "we want you to stay": the Prime Minister spoke from his heart earlier this year. Not only Mr Cameron has taken up this plangent refrain; everyone from Nato leaders to David Bowie has been repeating the chorus of union. Yet an opinion poll "average" last week put the gap in favour of the UK at only 8 percentage points.
Whatever statistical argument I'd like to make about this modern fallacious practice (of averaging opinion polls from different organisations) – first of all, it's probably too dull for Saturday morning; secondly, and in any case, the majority against separatism is too small for comfort, however it's measured. Alex Salmond has spent his entire career fighting as the doughty underdog. Fighting thus, and winning.
This week, Mr Salmond accused George Osborne of "bluffing" over currency union. He was able to shrug off the killer fact that Scotland will emphatically not be part of a currency union (why would English voters tolerate Bank of England interest rates being set to assist the residents of a foreign nation?) – because of a recent stupid remark, made behind the scenes, by a Cabinet minister in London. "Of course there would be a [currency] union," this fool was quoted as saying.
The sheer laziness of the UK establishment's approach to the referendum astonishes me. That Cabinet minister may have cost us our country: does he realise that? Only ignorance of the ferocious nature of Salmond's campaigning style could have permitted it to pass his criminally thoughtless lips.
Those more familiar with the SNP leader would have known that he would pounce on this gift, and use it to disarm one of Unionism's most potent weapons. From now on, whenever the No campaign makes the point – that separatists cannot say which currency an independent Scotland would use, and, worse, how that currency would be managed – Salmond will let loose one of his bombastic, alliterative sentences, to deny there's a problem at all.
The rhetoric of the SNP's leader grates on my ear as much as does that of his English Nationalist alter ego, Nigel Farage. (Ukip and the SNP are two sides of the same toxic coin, the one that would buy entry to nationalist, separatist paradises. Cost: the UK as we know it.) But it's worth pointing out the difficult fact: the reason I dislike Salmond's rhetoric is that he uses it to such excellent demotic effect.
I've spent my entire adult life waiting for his separatist bubble to burst. It never has. The Salmond bubble becomes only larger, and shinier, and more (seemingly) impregnable, with every electoral cycle that passes. That's why he bugs me.
I fear Mr Salmond is being similarly underestimated by the No campaign. Such a miscalculation, if it persists, will be fatal. The poets of Union – men such as our great novelist Allan Massie – must displace the grey facts of Darling. And there must be complete verbal discipline from every opponent of separatism.
I'm writing this in a café at the top of a street that reaches down to the sea – far from Scotland, but not really far at all. A very British scene, one found in seaside towns all round our small island.
On September 18 it might just dissolve into foreign–ness, along with my dual Scottish and British identity. That will happen, unless the No campaign improves the quality of its work. Well, Easter is a fitting time for renewal.
There's a role for London's commentariat, too, which dances to Ukip's drum, devoting pages of discussion to eastern European immigration, rather than the instant immigration from Scotland that will result from a Yes vote. There are thousands of people like me, born north of the border but living south of it, whose potential relabelling as "foreigner" nobody appears to have noticed.
We commentators prefer to discuss the EU referendum over the Scottish one, not noticing that the EU vote won't happen unless the Tories win the next election, while the Scottish vote will certainly occur. Furthermore, unless the Scottish separatists are defeated, we can't even define the electorate for the 2017 vote on Europe.
Suddenly, lots of the rocks – the ones that support our settled view of life – appear to be crumbling. When we wake up, and find the borders quite redrawn, our mental maps will no longer work. We won't know the way home, since "home" – the United Kingdom – might no longer be there to find.
Comment on Graeme Archer's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140419ea4j0007m
