{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3409"}
____
  
News
We will still win, insists Farage as Ukip dips in poll
Martyn Brown   
533 words
16 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
2
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
A DEFIANT Nigel Farage yesterday insisted Ukip is still on course to win next week's European elections, despite slipping behind Labour in the latest opinion poll.
Mr Farage's anti Brussels party, which enjoyed a three point lead last week, has now slumped to 25 per cent to trail Labour by three points.
Ukip has also been rocked by a fresh race row after it emerged that one of its local election candidates described Islam as a "totalitarian ideology".
Mr Farage, who has repeatedly claimed that Ukip will cause a "political earthquake" in Thursday's vote, shrugged off the appar ent fall in support.
"I still think we are on course to win the European elections," he told BBC Radio 4's The World At One programme.
The YouGov poll saw Labour jump two points to lead on 28 per cent while the Conservatives dropped one point to 22 per cent.
The Lib Dems are neck and neck with the Green Party on 10 per cent.
Ukip's reverse came as one of its council election candidates in London, German born Heino Vock rodt, declared that Muslims were grooming children to be sex slaves and that "cultures are not all equal".
He also accused Muslims of turning the north London district of Brent into Afghani stan's Helmand province.
His incendiary comments, made in an email to council planners, is a fresh embarrassment for Ukip.
The party has faced allegations of racism following a series of scandals involving candi dates and a controversial poster campaign warning about eastern Europeans coming here to take UK jobs. Mr Farage has sought to dispel the image, accusing the media of stirring up hatred against Ukip and appearing on a platform alongside a number of the party's black and ethnic minority candidates.
He also expressed "surprise" yesterday that one of Ukip's most prominent British Asian supporters, Sanya Jeet Thandi, has quit the party. The 21 year old student accused Mr Farage of playing the race card to win votes and said the party's current direction was "terrifying".
But Mr Farage claimed she might have quit because of peer pressure from fellow students at the London School of Economics.
"She may have been intimidated. I don't know quite why she changed her mind," he told The World At One. "We hadn't changed in seven days, had we?"
He said it was more surprising that one 21 year old, who no longer held any position in the party, had left and it was a big story for the BBC.
Mr Farage insisted Ukip had the "best and fairest" immigration policy of any of the mainstream parties.
He also renewed his warning that 250,000 Romanians and Bulgarians could come to Britain over five years, despite official figures yesterday suggesting numbers had actually dropped 3,000 to 122,000 in the first three months after working restrictions were lifted.
"We can't get away from the fact that there are over 4,000 people a week from all parts of the European Union coming to settle in Britain," he said.
Document THEEXP0020140516ea5g0005b
