{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2431"}
____
  
News
We have just come to UK, the NHS will save our baby
LYNSEY HOPE   
1,664 words
14 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
12,13
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
ONE HOSPITAL UNIT, 24 HOURS, 14 NEWBORNS, THREE ARE BRITISH
EXCLUSIVE
Says Fernando Lopez from Colombia
ONE in three babies born in the UK now has at least one parent born abroad. And concerns are growing over the immense pressure being put on the NHS by rising immigration.
According to the Office for National Statistics, in three London boroughs 80 PER CENT of babies have at least one foreign parent.
One of the hospitals with the highest rates of non-UK births is the Homerton in Hackney, east London - and last week The Sun was granted exclusive access to its bustling maternity ward. We found a team of committed, caring staff struggling to cope with the huge challenges brought by today's multicultural society.
On the day we visited, 14 babies were delivered in 24 hours. Three of them were British.
Dr Eric Nyarko is a consultant obstetrician at the hospital. For him, communication is the main problem.
He says: "We have huge numbers of diverse ethnic minority groups giving birth here, with the issue of language barriers and many complex medical problems associated with social deprivation.
"Today I had a 25-year-old who spoke no English, with her husband saying he didn't want a male doctor touching her - and she was losing a baby at 25 weeks." Despite this. Dr Nyarko enjoys his work and says: "This is a happy and cohesive hospital and I am so proud of my unit.
"Working at Homerton is extremely challenging but I love it. I end each shift exhausted but proud at how the team has performed.
"This is such a vibrant area and the hospital reflects this diversity."
Here, some of the women who gave birth during The Sun's 24-hour visit tell their stories.
Aykun, Ekrem and Ali
AYKUN KILINC, 34, has four children with husband Ekrem, 49, a taxi driver. The family, who come from Turkey, live in Hackney, east London.
Aykun does not speak English. Ekrem says: "We have had all our babies here in the UK.
"The health care is so much better than in Turkey, there is no comparison.
"I came here to get work and also to have my family in my 20s.
"The standard of living is much better than it would be in Turkey.
"We have had a baby boy called Ali and he came two and a half weeks early. We had very good service, I like this hospital. It is very clean and the food is good.
"In Turkey you would have to be rich to have this service."
Sonoe and baby
SONOE TAKAGI, 38, is a Japanese businesswoman who lives in Stoke Newington, north London with husband Jun, 40, an interior designer. They have been here for 13 years.
Sonoe says: "I had my son via emergency Caesarean as he was a breech baby and the doctor was unable to turn him.
"It was a bit dramatic but we are thrilled he is here now and is so perfect.
"This is my first baby and I am so impressed by the NHS care.
"I travelled to Japan for work while I was pregnant and had an antenatal appointment at a private hospital.
"The facilities were not even as good as here and giving birth there would have cost us at least £8,000.
"The average cost for giving birth in Japan is, I think, about £5,000.
"In Japan health care is not free — the state pays about 70 per cent, then you pay the rest.
"The attention we have received from the health service here in Britain is second to none."
Juliana Karikari and Gifty
JULIANA KARIKARI, 33, is from Ghana. She lives in Clapton, east London with her partner Kwarteng, a cleaner, and has three boys - Kofi, 18, Kojo, eight, and Kobby, five.
Juliana, who has just given birth to her first daughter, Gifty, says: "I am so pleased to have a girl.
I have called her Gifty because she is a gift. I had her by emergency Caesarean. I had the best care, with lots of staff running to me.
"I have been living in the UK for ten years and had most of my children here. I came here for a better standard of living and because having babies here is much safer than in Ghana. The health care is very good.
"Most of my family still live in Ghana but I wanted to have my children here. My aunt and sister live here too. I met my current partner here. He is a cleaner. I think this will be my last child, but I am not sure.
"I do not have a job. I look after my children and I have good benefits for housing and child benefit."
Marina, Alessio and Petra
MARINA CASTAGNA, 32, is an Italian photographer.
She lives with her partner Alessio, who is 33, also Italian and a sales assistant.
They live in Leyton, east London.
Marina says: "My daughter Petra was born yesterday morning.
"The labour was very long and complicated.
"My mother wanted me to go home to Italy and give birth there with my famiuly around me but I think the NHS care is much better here.
"In Italy, healthcare is free but much more regimented.
"And you have to take everything with you into hospital — even the soap.
"My waters broke on Monday morning and then I was induced on Tuesday.
"It has been three days of drama, with no sleep and I am so thankful to have had such good care. "I could not have asked for better.
I have been living in the UK for four years.
"I think the treatment here is amazing — and it is free."
Gail Struyven and David Blakely
GAIL STRUYVEN, 28, is French and lives with partner David Blakely 24, who is British and works for a charity in Leyton, east London.
Gail says: "The treatment I've had here is fantastic.
"I am currently in labour and I've been having contractions now for 26 hours. I've just had an epidural and I feel much better — at last I can cope with the pain.
"David has been amazing and stayed by my side throughout. I know I am having a son and he will be called Benni.
"I should give birth tonight and my midwife Poppy has been brilliant.
"She is in and out all the time and has promised me she will be with me until my baby is born.
"In France, the national healthcare is good but probably not as good as this. Healthcare is free in France, as it is here.
"I have been living in London for a year now, working in a pub. I think I will stay in the UK now with David and our baby. I will definitely try to come here if I have another baby."
Tahira and Ahmed Mahmiird
TAHIRA MAHMIIRD, 19, lives in Manor Park, east London, with her husband Ahmed, 20, who works in a takeaway. The couple are from Pakistan.
Tahira, who has a few words of English, says: "I woke up with pains yesterday and they continued all day so my family said I had to come to the hospital.
"I do not think I am ready to give birth yet. I am not sure how pregnant I am, possibly 32 weeks.
"When should a baby be born? This is my first.
"I do not work, I live with my parents and my husband works. My family are from Pakistan and we all live together.
"Ahmed and I married through our families when I was 18 in an arranged marriage.
"I left school at 16 and I have never had a job. I hope I do not have my baby now — I am rather scared. But I know I am safe here."
And she adds: "I do not think I will have another child, as it hurts so much."
The maternity ward needs translators for 50 different languages
Hackney's population has soared by almost 20% in the past ten years according to the latest census
MARITZA GONZALEZ LOPEZ, 21, lives in Hackney, east London, and recently arrived from Colombia with husband Fernando, 23. This is her second baby.
Healthcare in rural Columbia is very poor, with high infant mortality rates and hospitals that are dirty and poorly staffed.
Maritza speaks no English and Fernando can only manage a few words.
He says: "We need help quickly.
"My wife is in pain now. This is our second baby.
"We have not been to the hospital, to see a GP before. She is very frightened.
"We have just come to the UK. The hospital is good and will help us.
"Maritza's mother is here with us too.
It will be OK, they will take care of us."
Mimosa John
MIMOSA JOHN, 22, is a student nurse. She lives in Hoxton, east London, with her partner Gabriel, 26, a fitness instructor.
Mimosa was having her first baby, which she knew was a boy. She was born here, after her parents came from Sierra Leone.
She says: "I have high blood pressure and I have been told I am likely to be induced, as there might be a danger to the baby.
"This is my first baby and I am rather nervous. But the care here seems excellent and I am really impressed. At the moment I am being supported by my mum but my partner will be here soon.
"I have an epidural booked and I hope I don't have to have a C-section. I feel very lucky to have this health care.
"I'll take time off to look after my baby but then I'm going to train as a nurse as I want to give something back to society, work hard and not live off the state."
Document THESUN0020140414ea4e0008y
