{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2323"}
____
  
NEWS
House prices can keep rising, says David Cameron
By James Kirkup and Peter Dominiczak   
428 words
20 May 2014
12:26
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Prime Minister downplays a warning by Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, and says Help To Buy is not stoking a bubble
Bank of England prepared to cool housing market
House prices could go on rising for four more years without causing concern, David Cameron suggested on Monday.
Speaking after the Bank of England raised the prospect of intervention to cool the property market, the Prime Minister urged people to be “careful” over talk of a housing bubble.
Surveys suggest that house prices in Britain are rising by more than 10 per cent a year, and by more than 40 per cent a year in parts of London.
Some economists fear buyers could be taking on unsustainable levels of debt.
Mark Carney, the Governor of the Bank of England, said on Sunday that the housing market posed the “biggest risk” to the economic recovery. He suggested he could intervene to stop banks lending large mortgages.
But in a BBC interview Mr Cameron appeared to downplay concerns about the property market. He insisted that allowing for inflation, houses were still cheaper than seven years ago.
“We have to be careful when we look at the figures,” he said. “We are still seeing house prices in real terms that are 15 per cent off the peak they reached in 2007.
“The most recent forecast I saw was that house prices in real terms would not achieve their previous level until 2017/2018.”
Mr Cameron also defended the Government’s Help to Buy scheme, which gives guarantees for people taking out mortgages of up to £600,000.
Liberal Democrat ministers including Vince Cable, the Business Secretary, have suggested the scheme is helping to inflate the housing market.
However, Mr Cameron said the scheme was delivering positive results. “Help to Buy was not a return to irresponsible lending practices,” he said. “I think [Help to Buy] has made a difference.”
Mr Cameron was speaking on an election campaign tour in Essex, where the Conservatives are facing a challenge from the UK Independence Party for the support of working-class voters.
The Prime Minister used the visit to accuse Nigel Farage of trying to “frighten” voters about immigration. Mr Farage said last week people felt uncomfortable about living next to Romanian migrants
Mr Cameron said: “Farage has said pretty appalling things and he has not had to very publicly eat his words. Some of the messages they have been making are about trying to frighten people.”
Document TELUK00020140520ea5k000gp
