{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2951"}
____
  
News
They're not so worked up over Poles in the heart of Ukipshire
Roger Boyes   
986 words
10 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
12,13
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The influx of east Europeans has led to gripes among locals but it has also revitalised a dormant Boston, Roger Boyes writes
Boston, in Ukipshire, doesn't get more exciting than this: two police cars screeching through town, past the billboard that says No Border, No Control, to floor and handcuff an east European shoplifter in a supermarket.
The suspect's face figured in a rogue's gallery pinned on the manager's wall — all blacklisted Poles, Latvians, Lithuanians whose mugshots have to be memorised by the cashiers every morning. "We've got it down to four a day," says the doughty branch manager, who does not want to be identified. "Gangs of them make off with meat and alcohol which they sell on to dodgy pubs," she says. "It's real organised crime."
There is a dark side then to Boston, supposedly Britain's most east European town, but it is not exactly the Invasion of the Body Snatchers that is being bigged up by Ukip. The other day the police found illegal immigrants from Iran, Syria and Iraq, chilled to the bone, in the back of two refrigerated lorries . A Lincolnshire police spokesman put the discovery in perspective: "This has a wider impact than human trafficking — lorryloads of vegetables now have to be destroyed."
Boston doesn't get worked up by the outside world. It was once a semicomatose retirement haven. Then it became the town where no one went, its skills — wool, weaving, goose feathers — largely irrelevant.
Then in the space of a decade, dating from the accession of east European countries to the EU, it became a place where everybody east of the Oder wanted to go. Boston's population has grown by 15 per cent to 65,000, perhaps ten thousand more if non-registered immigrants are brought into the sum, and it has become more noisy, more Slav, and in certain areas, more prosperous.
The message of Nigel Farage that uncontrolled EU immigration impoverishes the native British doesn't quite wash. Thea Cox, an estate agent, is selling more and more houses to Poles. The market, she says, is very buoyant, thanks to the east European influx. Even Anette, who runs the sex shop, Pulse and Cocktails, says the influx has been good for business. "The older native Bostonians have always bought DVDs, they don't like getting pornography on the internet," she says, "but it's the east Europeans who are snapping up the lingerie."
It was difficult to find a more radiantly optimistic couple yesterday than freshly married Scott and Catherine Sandwell, just out of the register office. They sell high-end cars, Porsches and BMWs, and are doing, they say, just fine.
Ukip's successes in the Boston area are indisputable — it now has 16 county councillors in what used to be Margaret Thatcher's home county — and the town is seen as one the most likely seats for Mr Farage to snatch from the Conservatives. Yet Ukip's appeal is based on a shaky premise: that the rapid expansion of its population will accelerate decline and push up the crime rate.
This is not what is actually happening or at least not to the degree claimed by Ukip. The party campaign in the run-up to European elections is about space, jobs and language. Yet the Polish purchase of property is enriching Boston, few want to grab back ill-paid picking and packing jobs in the flower and veg market, and the fact that Slav languages are spoken in school is a feature of modern existence that Mr Farage cannot roll back.
The real swell of support comes from native Bostonians who feel they are being crowded out of their town. West Street — which locals call "East Street" — is a parade of Polish and Baltic shops. "My mum says she can't go out at night, there are all these foreigners drinking vodka until three in the morning," says Danny, a somnolent student, who agrees with the Ukip message on closed borders. Yet West Street was run-down for years — it has been enlivened, not degraded by the Eastern influx.
Boston is a model of small-town Britain: confused, disorientated, trying to sort its way through the muddle of change. That makes it a happy hunting ground for Ukip since it offers a simple message: let's return to the 1950s. Most Bostonians, after some reflection, seem to think that does not quite meet the bill.
A 69-year-old grandfather, leaving the chiropodist's, says "Live and let live is what I say. My only gripe is those Poles have made it cramped in the doctor's waiting room."
The stress on infrastructure — on access to doctors, on over-subscribed schools, on the lower end of the housing market —certainly permeates conversation. Yet it is not on the whole leading to xenophobia. Mostly there is a quiet pride in people like Kasia who has just bought, with her husband Marcin, a bakery on West Street. "It's doing well and so is the family. My daughter didn't have a word of English when we arrived," she says. "Now she is 9, has fluent English and good English friends. Isn't that great?" Bostonians would by and large agree.
What remains of the Ukip-isation of Boston is this: a mild, very British sense of disappointment in the governing class. George Orwell, talking to miners in the 1930s, noted that they weren't unhappy with their lot until they were told they should be. Ukip is performing a similar task on left-behind Britain. Bostonians, however, are not revolutionaries. "It's just that these foreigners are so noisy on the bus, " a retired draughtsman says. "If they just kept their voices down a bit, no one would vote Ukip."
Document T000000020140510ea5a000cd
