{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2950"}
____
  
News
PM hints at TV clash with Farage
Macer Hall   
410 words
10 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Eire
4
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
DAVID Cameron yesterday opened the door to a sensational TV clash with Nigel Farage in the run up to next year's general election.
The Prime Minister indicated that he was prepared to take part in a live broadcast debate with smaller parties including Ukip and the Greens.
Officials said that formal talks to pave the way for the crunch clashes will begin "later this year".
Mr Cameron's hint appeared to confirm reports that Downing Street is planning three debates, featuring different politicians.
"I'm very keen to examine all the different formats we can have," Mr Cameron said yesterday.
Issues One would feature him and Ed Miliband while a second would also include Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg.
A third would involve the leaders of the Conservatives, Labour, the Lib Dems, Ukip and the Green Party.
The Prime Minister told BBC Breakfast yesterday: "You can have a debate where you have all of the parties. I don't think we could have a party like Ukip without an MP if you don't have a party like the Greens, who have an MP."
Ukip leader Mr Farage last night claimed that the Prime Minister would attempt to duck out of taking him on.
Mr Farage - who recently faced Mr Clegg in televised debates on Europe - said during a phone-in show on LBC radio: "He doesn't want to have a debate with me.
"Of course he doesn't, because he knows that there are two issues on which he can't win.
"One is the European question - the promise of a referendum. But the big one and the one that no one wants to debate...it is completely pointless to talk about immigration figures and targets while we are members of the EU and we have a total open door."
In a later interview, Mr Cameron insisted he would not try to dodge a debate with Ukip.
"Absolutely not," he said. "The TV debates happened at the last election really because I was very keen to get them under way.
"I'm keen for them to continue, so I'm not dodging anybody."
Mr Cameron wants to hold at least some of the clashes before the official start of the general election campaign.
He said: "I'm keen to have debates before. Last time they rather took the rest of the life out of the general election."
Document THEEXP0020140510ea5a00007
