{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1917"}
____
  
News
Ministers are told to come clean about use of migrant home help
Richard Ford; Francis Elliott   
851 words
7 March 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron faced accusations of double standards over his employment of a foreign nanny after the new immigration minister blamed the "wealthy metropolitan elite" for fuelling migration by hiring cheap staff from abroad. An attempt to appeal to UKIP voters backfired as senior ministers found themselves questioned about whether they had hired foreigners to work at their homes.
The Prime Minister has employed an Australian nanny and a Nepalese woman recruited from a charity offering help to migrants seeking escape from abusive employers.
Mr Cameron's spokesman was asked four times why Mr Cameron decided to employ a foreign nanny from outside the EU rather than a British worker but he refused to comment on anything other than "government policy".
Asked if this was a case of Mr Cameron telling the public to "do as I say, not as I do" his spokesman talked about recent net non-EU migration figures. Later the Prime Minister's official spokesman said the family's nanny had now become a British citizen.
The spokesman added: "I am very happy to defend [the PM hiring a foreign nanny]. Government policy is that we want controlled immigration.
"We are not against people who want to come here, work hard and get on. The Prime Minister would include his nanny as someone who wants to work hard and get on."
Nick Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister, initially said he was not going into whether he employs a foreign nanny, gardener or cleaner but subsequently he admitted employing staff with a Belgian passport. The controversial comments were made by James Brokenshire in his first speech on migration since taking over from Mark Harper, who quit after he discovered that the cleaner he employed did not have the right to be in the country.
In a clear bid to appeal to workingclass voters, Mr Brokenshire said: "For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services — but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country."
He said that immigration was too high and suggested that those who employ foreign labour have done well out of the situation "for too long".
Mr Brokenshire disclosed later that he and his wfie run their household themselves without employing nannies or cleaners Theresa May, the Home Secretary, refused to answer questions about whether she does, or ever has, employed foreign labour.
The Ministry of Justice did not respond to questions about whether Chris Grayling, the Justice Minister, employed foreign staff.
John Mann, the Labour MP for Bassetlaw, demanded that the whole Cabinet come clean on their use of foreign workers, and how much they were paying them.
"We need every Cabinet minister to declare what staff they have employed from abroad," he said. "They should be seeking out British staff."
He added: "It is total hypocrisy. they need to make up their minds on this."
Mr Brokenshire's speech angered business groups. The Institute of Directors said it was "feeble and pathetic" to use such language.
Others said that businesses hired overseas workers because of skills shortages and the poor work ethic in the UK.
Adam Marshall, executive director of policy at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: "Our employers tell us they need specialist skills and at the bottom they need individuals who have strong employment skills and and a strong willingness to work hard.
"They want people who are enthusiastic, people ready to work hard, people who want to learn and people who are willing to be flexible some of the time."
Mr Brokenshire reaffirmed that it was still Conservative policy to reduce net migration from 212,00 to the tens of thousands by May next year although migration groups think it is now an impossible task.
Tim Finch of the Institute for Public Policy Research said that ministers had been warned that it would be difficult to reach the target when there were a number of areas — such as EU immigration — which they could not control.
The immigration minister promised a further tightening of the rules on students coming to the UK which could lead to more than a hundred universities, colleges and schools losing their right to bring in students from outside the EU.
Under the plans they will lose highly trusted status if 10 per cent of students to whom they have offered places are found to have committed visa abuse such as submitting forged papers.
Migration and UK jobs Findings of Home Office/ Business Department review of effect of migration on UK jobs: ? Relatively little evidence that migration caused a significant number of Britons to be out of jobs when economy strong ? Some Britons forced out of jobs in recent years when the UK was in recession ? Britons, particularly the low skilled, more likely to be out of jobs since 2000, when net migration has been high ? Little evidence of statistically significant effect of EU migration on Britons
Document T000000020140307ea370003f
