{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3417"}
____
  
News
Breaking up banks isn't revolutionaey ... it's common sense
TOM NEWTON DUNN   
570 words
16 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
2; National
23
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
SUN CABBIE ED MILIBAND SUN CABBIE v ED MILIBAND
THE Sun's cabbie Grant Davis, 50, is interviewing the four main party leaders ahead of next week's Euro elections.
Labour boss Ed Miliband was yesterday in the back of real-life taxi driver Grant's cab — pimped up for the campaign — trying to convince the floating voter.
Q Lately Ed, I am watching you on the telly and you seem to be talking about anything but Europe. Why won't you discuss Europe, Ed? I am keen to discuss Europe.
AI'm being honest with people about my priorities if I become Prime Minister. The biggest issues the country faces is the cost of living crisis, the NHS.
Q Working class folk like myself are worried about the influx of immigrants, especially from the EU. How can we stop it, Ed? A It is important Labour talks about immigration. Look, I don't think shutting our borders is going to work. Europe has got to change.
But it won't, Ed, will it? QA This is something I have given great thought on. The way we tackle the cost of living crisis, we can change it. The undercutting of wages, we can change it. We are Yes, I got on perfectly well with him. I disagree with him.
AQ I bet you did. I mean, they call Farage 'fruitcake', Cameron, 'Old rich boy', and they call you 'Red Ed'. Is that fair? Are you Red Ed? A People need shorthand, don't they? Look, I am trying to propose sensible solutions. It is not revolutionary.
Q You want to break up the banks and break up the cartels. Isn't that revolutionary? A I don't think it is. I think it is common sense. But I don't really care in the end what labels people use, I will just do my own thing, plough my own furrow and say what I think is right.
Q So you don't want to wave the red flag? A I think it is about moving forwards, from New Labour, not going back to old Labour.
Q You are not Old Labour, you're not New Labour, what are you? A I like One Nation Labour, representing the whole country.
Q With all the problems we have you would expect Labour to be galloping away in the polls? Polls go up and down a lot.
AThat reflects that we are in a time when politics is pretty unpredictable. People are still deciding.
Q If you get in. Ed, if I vote for you, will you put me taxes up? A I want to try and cut taxes for working families.
TRICK QUESTIONS: In Brussels, how much would you pay for a pint of beer in euros? Ed: In the UK about £3.50. No idea. (Wrong - 5 euros) How much if you went out and grabbed a ham baguette in Brussels? Ed: A few euros? I don't know. (Wrong - 3.50 euros) GRANT'S VERDICT: Ed's a nice fella, and his heart's in the right place. But for me we need decisions on Europe, not just ifs and buts. He needs to be firmer on what Labour will do to change the EU.
To watch Ed's interview, go to thesun.co.uk/politics
Document THESUN0020140516ea5g000dx
