{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2050"}
____
  
Guardian Features Pages
G2: Arts: Digested read 'Most of all I hate you gluten-intolerant faux-lefties who claim to have ME'
By John Crace   
803 words
19 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
19
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Title Selfish, Whining Monkeys
Author Rod Liddle
Publisher 4th Estate
Price pounds 14.99
Oi, you. Yes you, you poncey metropolitan elite. Put down that Richard Littlejohn autobiography. And shut up about Clarkson. How come they get all the attention and you forget there's another irritating gobshite on the block? I can be offensive, too. Wog. There. I'll say it again. Wog. My parents didn't like wogs. Chinks. My parents weren't too keen on them, either. They once went on an aeroplane and there was a gay cabin steward. Gay. Pansy. Actually I quite like gays. Some of my best friends are gay. Muggers, obese chav monkeys . . . Oi, I said, don't ignore me. I couldn't bear it if you ignored me. Or if you weren't offended.
My parents may not have loved wogs but they loved Britain. And I love it, too. But it's turned into a shit hole. And you know why? It's not the wogs that did it. It's Ed Miliband and Tony Blair who quote Marx while hating the working class. The only people left to stand up for the working classes are me and Ukip. I was born in Middlesbrough, but I can't remember too much about it. Don't worry, I'm not being some artsy unreliable narrator. I'm just a bit pissed and I've got to come up with something everyone is going to hate. Other than me.
Am I a hypocrite? Of course I am. But I'm a working-class hypocrite, which makes me a step up from you metropolitan elite hypocrites. At least, that's what Foucault says. So fuck you. You won't find Littlejohn or Clarkson quoting fooking Foucault. Sometimes I hate the nasty little sell out I've become. The bloke who edited Today, has a column for the Sunday Times and hangs out with media types? What a tosser. If only I could have stayed more like my parents.
My Mum never complained when she was dying of cancer. Not once. She put up with it, the way she put up with the Germans dropping bombs on her. It was just one of those things as the homosexual historian, David Starkey, would say. That's the way we should be. Before she died she received 237 Christmas cards. Last year I got 16; four of them I had to send to myself. That shows how fractured Britain has become. Or it could just show that she was a great deal nicer than me.
That's the trouble with Britain. Too much me, me, me. Which is why I want you to focus on me, rather than yourself? Who cares about all this pseudo-Islington Shami Chakrabarti individualism? So you're getting divorced because you're a bit bored with your partner and your kids are are a bit bored because the Xbox isn't working and you've had so many re-e-e-eally hard struggles? Get over yourself. We'd all be much happier just putting up with things being a bit shit - though if anyone does know of a cleaner I'd be very grateful. Kids, eh? Are they so much happier now we ask them how they feel? Most of them would be far better off being nonced by Jimmy Savile than carted off to McDonald's to be turned into foie gras.
Women. I love women. And women love me, too. But I'll tell you this, love - yes, Yasmin Alibhai-Brown I'm talking to you - if you really want equality, you've got to shape up a bit. As Emile Durkheim once said, if you want the job, then don't have the baby. Maternity leave? You're having a laugh. Which brings me on to immigration. R-A-A-A-A-ACIST. Go on, say it. But it's got to be said. Me and the working classes have got nothing against foreigners, but Britain is full. So they can all fuck off.
You know who I hate the most? Lawyers. Especially the ones who stiffed me out of pounds 180k for my divorce. Bankers. I hate them too. Fucking leeching cunts. Politicians. Cheats and liars, all of them. But most of all I hate you miserable gluten-intolerant faux-lefties who claim to have ME. Why can't you get a proper fucking illness like cancer? I didn't mean that. I am totally pissed now. Just please don't leave me. I couldn't bear it if no one was reading any more.
The digested read, digested:
A selfish, whining monkey writes . . .
Document GRDN000020140518ea5j0000t
