{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3765"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Labour's core vote hit hard by Ukip
Michael Savage   
748 words
28 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
1,4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Party now too middle class, says Miliband guru Alienated voters quit Labour for Ukip
Labour voters are defecting to Ukip because the party has become too "middle class", a leading ally of Ed Miliband has warned.
Lord Glasman, a policy guru who was ennobled by Mr Miliband, said that the rise of Ukip would hit Labour "in the heartlands". He urged the party to adopt a series of measures to win back working-class support.
In an interview with The Times, he said that Labour needed to address concerns about immigration and welfare to stop voters from abandoning the party permanently. "That is the dilemma at the heart of the party's strategy — is it possible to address these economic, political and cultural concerns when the party is becoming, in many ways, very middle class? What I mean by that is liberal and progressive in its sensibility," he said.
"Ed [Miliband] is trying to address it. This is a long-term trend since 2001, in terms of the working-class vote just declining quite dramatically. The Labour middle-class vote held up [in 2010]. It was the working-class vote that died.
These are often people who are earning, who have jobs, but they don't see Labour as representing their interests."
Lord Glasman made his intervention as Ukip surged into first place in polls before European elections next month. Nigel Farage's party is at 31 per cent for the vote, according to YouGov. The poll put Ukip three points clear of Labour and 12 points ahead of the Tories.
The Labour peer is the second prominent figure in a few days to warn of the threat from Ukip. Jon Cruddas, the Labour MP overseeing the party's policy review, warned last week that Ukip had "the potential to be a significant threat to the Labour party". Ukip was accused yesterday by a Tory cabinet minister of attracting racists. Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, made the remark as he denounced "disgusting" comments by a Ukip candidate about the comedian Lenny Henry. William Henwood, a candidate in Enfield, north London, said that Mr Henry should emigrate to a "black country".
Echoing David Cameron's infamous remarks in 2006 that Ukip was made up of "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists", Mr Hunt said that Mr Farage should explain why his party was drawing racist candidates.
The case comes days after Ukip suspended Andre Lampitt, who featured in its election broadcast, after discovering he had tweeted that Islam is "evil" and Mr Miliband is not British. "I do think Continued on page 4, col 3 Continued from page 1 those comments about Lenny Henry were absolutely disgusting and I do think it's for Nigel Farage to make absolutely clear that it's not Ukip's official view, but also to explain why so many people with those kinds of view seem to be attracted to becoming candidates for Ukip," Mr Hunt told BBC Radio 5 Live.
"[Ukip] position themselves as a patriotic party. They plaster the Union Jack all over their leaflets, but actually I think there is something very un-British about this kind of language."
Neil Hamilton, Ukip's deputy chairman and a former Tory MP, said that the comments would be investigated. He added, however: "This is a council candidate of whom you would have never have heard but for all the social media archaeologists that are employed by Labour, the Liberal party and the Tories to try and track down any unknown Ukip member or activist who may have said something unpleasant on social media."
Nick Griffin, the BNP leader, defended the Ukip councillor's comments.
He told the BBC that the "real racism" was the "bullying by the BBC and by the political elite of ordinary British people, of various parties, who stand up and say what most ordinary people think".
Lord Glasman's warning will concern many Labour members. He said that there was a feeling of "dispossession and abandonment" among workingclass communities.
"There was possibly an assumption at first that [the rise of Ukip] would just work against the Tories," he said. "But there is a view that says that after the European and local elections are over, there could be a swing back to the Conservatives of Ukip voters. But will there be necessarily a swing back to Labour from the Ukip voters?" John McTernan, Thunderer, page 24
Document T000000020140428ea4s000a5
