{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3554"}
____
  
Confessions of an arch provocateur
REVIEWS BY LAURENCE PHELAN   
920 words
22 February 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
34,35
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
NEW RELEASES FILM OF THE WEEK
NYMPHOMANIAC VOLUMES I & II (18)
****
Dir. Lars von Trier; Starring Charlotte Gainsbourg, Stellan Skarsgard, 241mins
"It will be long," warns Joe (Charlotte Gainsbourg) at the start of Lars von Trier's controversy-baiting diptych about the sex life of a self-diagnosed nymphomaniac and sinner. (Cinemas will show both feature-length volumes separately, but it doesn't make a lot of sense to see one without the other.) "And moral, I'm afraid." To which we should add that it will not be to everyone's taste. And it certainly isn't for those who have found the cumulative masochistic suffering of Von Trier's earlier female characters unpalatable.
But it is funny as well as punishing and bleak. It is erudite, digressive, teasing, self-aware, self-mocking, and impossible to mistake for the work of anyone else.
Joe unburdens herself, in eight discrete chapters, to Seligman (Stellan Skarsgard), a passing ascetic confessor who has found her lying bruised and bloodied in a cobbled London alleyway. Acting as a kind of one-man Greek chorus, he interjects with musings on everything from fly-fishing and Fibonacci numbers to Zeno's paradox and the devil's interval - perhaps simply because he finds the detail of her story too sordid, but more likely in an effort to attach some meaning to what is otherwise a pointlessly miserable story about lovelessness and degradation. "This is nothing more than a blasphemous retelling of the transfiguration of Jesus on the mountain," he exclaims at one point. By which time, you know he's over-reaching.
But depending on which side of the film's Platonic dialogue you side with, Nymphomaniac is either the thoroughly miserable story of a woman who discovers too late that love is not just a bourgeois construct, and that you can neither entirely validate or entirely negate the self with sex alone; or it is a profane celebration of the human condition and all of its varied glories and bathetic weaknesses. You really can choose to go either way.
Only Lovers Left Alive (15)
***
Dir. Jim Jarmusch; Starring Tom Hiddleston, Tilda Swinton, 123mins
Tom Hiddleston and Tilda Swinton star as the most elegantly louche vampire couple since Catherine Deneuve and David Bowie in The Hunger: he's a depressed rock'n'roll recluse living amid vintage audio equipment in a faded apartment in Detroit while she hangs out with Christopher Marlowe (John Hurt) in Tangiers. They both wear sunglasses at night, and they consume human blood like it's high-grade heroin. This being a Jim Jarmusch film, not a lot happens; the mood and the pop culture references are everything. A big improvement on his previous film, The Limits of Control, it has the hint of a droll smile playing on its bloody lips.
Stranger By The Lake (18)
***
Dir. Alain Guiraudie; Starring Pierre Deladonchamps, Christophe Paou, 100mins
Set entirely at a French lakeshore that is used as a popular gay cruising spot, this confrontational film combines a wry comedy of manners - affecting a sociological detachment, but filmed at crotch-level and with oodles of explicit sex - with a psychological thriller about a young innocent's attraction to a man he knows to be sociopathic killer. You might think it was saying something rather bleak about the risks promiscuous gay men take, if its mood wasn't so sunny and carefree.
Stalingrad (15)
**
Dir. Fedor Bondarchuk; Starring Petr Fedorov, Dmitry Lisenkov, 131mins
The director of this 3D Imax spectacular uses every digital tool at his disposal in order to envision the seige of Stalingrad as a kind of ash-strewn seventh circle of hell. But while it achieves a visual grandeur and has a certain bloodthirsty zeal, its characters are dull, the action is implausible and the morality is simplistic.
A World Not Ours (NC)
****
Dir. Mahdi Fleifel, 93mins
The London-based director Mahdi Fleifel provides a camcordered insider's guide to his - for want of another word - homeland: the 1km2 Palestinian refugee camp Ain al-Hilweh in southern Lebanon, whose inhabitants live in a kind of existentially absurd stasis. It is an intimate, bittersweet documentary full of everyday comedy and life, but streaked with violence and the particular hopelessness of the dispossessed and stateless.
The Godfather Part II (15)
*****
Dir. Francis Ford Coppola; Starring Al Pacino, Robert De Niro, 192mins
Moving forwards from the original in order to watch Michael (Al Pacino) consolidate his position as the new godfather of the Corleone family and expand the reach of his power to Las Vegas and Cuba; and backwards, to watch his father Vito (Robert De Niro) first turning to crime as a young immigrant in 1910s New York, this magisterial, superbly acted, richly detailed and thematically complex film is the Mafia movie as Shakespearean drama.
A New York Winter's Tale (12A)
**
Dir. Akiva Goldsman; Starring Colin Farrell, Jessica Brown Findlay, 118mins
Beginning with the premises that starlight is actually the twinkle of angels' wings and that everyone is allocated one miracle at birth, this earnestly religiose and yet underwhelming fantasy, adapted from the 1983 novel Winter's Tale by Mark Helprin, then intertwines the fates of a roguish foundling thief in New York, his consumptive true love, an Irish demon played by Russell Crowe, a young girl with cancer, Lucifer, who is played by Will Smith, and a magical flying white horse. It asks its viewer to suspend their disbelief rather too far.
Document IND0000020140222ea2m0000g
