{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1824"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
If Salmond believes all this, we're in trouble
Paul Gilbride   
328 words
23 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
14
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
INSIDE HOLYROOD
THE End of Days or Paradise on Earth? That appears to be the stark choice facing Scots as the referendum draws closer. But it is a false choice, one driven by both sides of the campaign as they grow ever more desperate for votes. Though not a supporter, I've never been one of those who thinks an independent Scotland isn't feasible. Economically, socially and culturally, it is.
Yet, judging from some of the shriller claims from supposedly elder statesman, such as George Robertson and Dr Liam Fox, Scotland leaving the UK would be the stuff of nightmares. It needn't be the case.
That said, according to the Yes camp splitting Scotland from the highly integrated nation state that is the UK would have no downsides whatsoever. There are only benefits. Such as larger – and earlier – pensions.
To give us a clue into their mindset, look at some of the mindless drivel they spout.
According to former Scottish Socialist Party MSP Carolyn Leckie, politics would be free of "sexism". And the Jimmy Reid Foundation suggests independence would allow a four–day working week.
Better pensions, a three–day weekend and none of your male oppression. Plus, no nuclear weapons, better funding for the "Arts", more immigration, no cuts to the welfare bill, free childcare, and as much North Sea oil as you want. What's not to like?
No wonder the polls, if they are to be believed, show the Yes support gaining ground among the gullible.
Some people in a fledgling Scottish state might feel good about regaining their "freedom" from the yoke of the oppressive British state come 19th September.
But chances are, if our new leaders really believe this tosh, life is going to get very much tougher for most of us, and our children.
Frankly, I doubt that they'll ever be able to forgive us.
Document THEEXP0020140423ea4n0006a
