{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2607"}
____
  
News
David Cameron wants to stay in the EU on something like the current terms – but he's our only chance of a referendum
By Daniel Hannan   
1,019 words
18 March 2014
12:04
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Any remaining doubt has evaporated. David Cameron and I will be on opposite sides when the In/Out referendum comes. Yet the fact remains: he represents our only plausible chance of getting such a referendum.
It’s now clear that the PM wants to stay in the EU on something very close to the existing terms. He doesn’t want to take Britain out of the Common Agricultural Policy or the Common Fisheries Policy, the EU diplomatic corps or the Common External Tariff. We will still be bound by the EU’s Common External Tariff, which ruinously diverts Britain’s trade from its natural hinterland to a shrinking European market. We shall still be “Citizens of the European Union", with passports and driving licences to prove it. Our Commonwealth allies will still queue with the rest of the world while EU nationals zoom past our immigration officers.
I have absolutely no doubt that the PM will secure all his stated negotiating aims. Indeed it’s clear, looking at them, that the starting point was not “What kind of relationship with the EU do we ideally want?" but “What can we be certain of securing, so that the negotiations can be declared a success?" Hence, for example, the dropping of any mention of repatriating social and employment policy – something we used to hear a lot about.
Sir Humphrey in Brussels has evidently been shuttling around his opposite numbers finding out what they are prepared to concede. “Look here, I don’t suppose we could opt out of some of these regulations that are hurting the City of London? No? How about an end to the Cohesion Fund racket? Too much? Ah. Alright then. What about taking out the words ‘ever closer union’ – just the words, you understand? Yes? Splendid!"
All seven of our declared aims can be secured with, at most, a one-line amendment to the treaties, along the lines of the one inserted at the time of the bailouts. Most of them, indeed, don’t even need that: they can be agreed in the form of a ministerial decision. As Ken Clarke has gleefully noted, there will be no need for a new Intergovernmental Conference, a new treaty or new parliamentary ratifications: ultimate proof that nothing of significance will change.
Obviously, I’d have gone for something much more radical – for the “associate membership" or “privileged partnership" which EU leaders keep saying they’re happy to offer Britain as an alternative to a fundamental redrafting of the treaties. In fairness, though, David Cameron has never pretended to agree with me. He made only two pledges to Eurosceptics – leaving the EPP and allowing Conservative MPs to campaign for Brexit – and he has delivered on both. Ultimately, the question of whether we should remain in the EU won’t be made by him or by me, but by the electorate as a whole.
Several of my angrier UKIP-supporting readers will already be taking to the comment thread to say “You see? We told you! The renegotiation is a farce!" But surely this should make the subsequent referendum easier to win. Had there been genuine changes – an end to tax harmonisation, say, or the right to sign a bilateral FTA with Australia – supporters of continued membership might have had a very strong argument. “Look," they might have said, “we’ve fixed some of the things we didn’t like, and we’ve established the principle that we can reverse bad policies". Instead, the referendum will very clearly be on membership of the EU as we know it.
My countrymen have had 40 years to decide whether they like those arrangements. I have argued throughout my time in politics that people are wiser than their leaders. If, having mulled the question, British voters decide to remain part of what the EU has become, that will be that. But let’s at least give people the chance to vote.
The publication of our negotiating terms does put a number of groups on the spot, though. First, our political correspondents. Will they, as has happened at past EU summits, allow themselves to be spoon-fed by government press officers? Will they credulously write up the “rows" about securing these feeble alterations? Will they fall for the choreography as foreign leaders deliver their carefully scripted complaints that this or that represents a huge “concession" to the British? Or will they see that the meaningful changes were not requested in the first place?
Second, those reformers who have been pushing for a much more meaningful change in the relationship than that now on offer, such as the Fresh Start Group and Open Europe. Plainly, even if the government were to secure all its declared objectives, Britain will end up with a deal well short of the one they have been demanding. Will they now follow their own logic and start campaigning to withdraw?
Third, and similarly, those Conservative MPs and ministers who have been saying “If the referendum were held tomorrow, I’d vote to leave". Well, it’s now clear that the referendum, though it won’t take place tomorrow, will be on much the same terms as if were. Will they stick to their guns?
Ultimately, though, this isn’t about what politicians, think-tankers or journalists want. It’s about the British public. Ed Miliband’s decision to rule out a referendum has made our choice unmistakable: the only chance of getting a referendum is with a Conservative majority. Several of my regular commenters will now rush to explain that this isn’t just about Europe, it’s about not liking Old Etonians or something. Well, fine, whatever’s your bag. If your main objective is to register your dislike of the PM, I’m not going to convince you. But if you want to give Britain a say on leaving the EU, there needs to be a Conservative majority. It really is that simple.
 
Document TELUK00020140318ea3i0033d
