{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"2225"}
____
  
News
NANNYGATE, IMMIGRATION... AND WHY THE TORIES ARE AT WAR
Iain Martin   
2,124 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
15
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
How did a ministerial speech about cheap foreign labour and its impact on Britain come to threaten party unity, asks Iain Martin
When Gita Lima decided that she wanted to become British, one of her bosses did what any good employer would do for a valued member of staff. They signed the papers. The application, made in 2010, was successful, and the Nepalese Ms Lima joined the swelling ranks of new British citizens. She is still working for the family as a nanny at one of central London's smartest addresses.
Unfortunately for Ms Lima, the story doesn't end there. Her bosses are the Prime Minister and his wife, and the Government that David Cameron leads last week launched an attack on wealthy metropolitan types who have benefited from immigration by employing foreign nannies and cleaners at the expense of indigenous labour. In his first major speech as immigration minister, James Brokenshire claimed that it is "ordinary, hard-working people" who have suffered.
Within hours of Mr Brokenshire's comments, Mr Cameron's spokesman was being forced to answer questions about the prime ministerial nanny. Ms Lima was originally hired to care for the Camerons' disabled son, Ivan, after the family advertised with a charity that helps immigrants to escape abusive employers. A furious No 10 denied that Samantha Cameron's support had helped to speed her employee's application through the system. All procedures had been followed correctly, said a spokesman.
But inevitably, questions were then asked about other senior ministers and their domestic staff. Theresa May, the Home Secretary, confirmed that her cleaner was born in Brazil, and it emerged that Nick Clegg employs a Belgian. Danny Alexander, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, grew flustered yesterday when pressed on the radio about his family's own domestic help. Britons, it appeared, were being told by the immigration minister to do as ministers say, not as ministers do.
Senior Conservatives are still trying to work out how No 10 failed to anticipate the scrutiny when they were presented with a draft of Mr Brokenshire's speech by the Home Office last week. Why had the Government shot itself in the foot? A minister said: "The Cabinet is full of people who employ immigrants. For us to draw attention to this while trying to highlight concerns about immigration is not very smart."
It is only a few weeks since the last immigration minister had to quit, when it emerged that his cleaner was an illegal migrant. Mark Harper, until then seen as a rising star in the Tory firmament, had been an enthusiastic supporter of the Government's controversial "Go Home" vans, which featured large billboard advertisements telling illegal immigrants to pack their bags. In the end, it was Mr Harper who had to leave. Now, Mr Brokenshire's career prospects have taken a knock.
His speech, and poor planning within government, certainly helped to create a situation in which Mr Cameron's family and a hard-working nanny - who paid Britain the ultimate compliment of becoming British - find themselves under intense scrutiny.
The row has also delighted Labour because it made the Government look shambolic, although for the most part, the Opposition has stayed quiet, with Ed Miliband adopting the old military principle of not interrupting an enemy when he is making a mistake.
Labour has also had immigration scandals of its own. When Baroness Scotland was Attorney General, in the previous government, she declined to resign after being fined £5,000 for employing a housekeeper who was a Tongan national with no right to be in the UK. The current crop of senior Labour figures also have a reason for keeping out of the row: just like theirTory rivals, many of them legitimately employ domestic staff who are immigrants.
Indeed, as the smoke clears from the Westminster battleground, the war over Mr Cameron's nanny is best seen in the context of the great national divide on immigration - between the metropolitans and those living in less affluent parts of middle Britain, with one side viewing immigration as overwhelmingly positive for the economy, and the other very worried about the impact on employment, public services, housing and social cohesion.
So far apart are these two sides that the protagonists might as well be talking different languages. Metropolitan liberals cannot see why there should be a fuss about everyone having an Eastern European cleaner or getting a loft conversion carried out by Poles, while non-metropolitans marvel at the wholly false notion that everyone in Britain can afford a cleaner and a loft conversion.
The Tory plan - such as it was - rested on the hope that Mr Brokenshire's speech might resonate with the majority of voters, who tell pollsters that they are concerned about the side-effects of immigration. To stand a chance at the next general election, the Conservatives need to convince sufficient numbers of those voters that they are being listened to, particularly those who are thinking about defecting to Nigel Farage's Ukip. Mr Brokenshire's ill-fated speech - written with the backing of Theresa May, who is notoriously hands-on when one of her ministers is thinking about saying anything - had been designed to come across as a piece of straight-talking common sense.
Speaking at the think tank Demos, the immigration minister said: "For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services, but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country."
Mr Brokenshire's intervention provoked fierce criticism from business, with the head of the Institute of Directors so annoyed by what he saw as the anti-enterprise tone of the minister's remarks that he described the speech as "feeble and pathetic". Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat Business Secretary, also condemned those who want to bear down on immigration. Commentators then piled in, eager to deride Mr Brokenshire's alleged naivety.
It also looked to some critics as though the Conservatives had taken to attacking their own voters in the South East, where the fastexpanding economy has sucked in foreign labour in the shape of eager-to-please migrants, many prepared to work hard. In other prosperous pockets outside London, there has been a similar effect, although it is not as pronounced.
The migrants are not just working for Cabinet ministers (there are not enough to go round), and the affluent middle-class voters who employ these new arrivals, to help with child care or to fix a leaky sink, may not take kindly to being lectured to. In this way, the speech by Mr Brokenshire illustrated the extreme difficulty the Tories are having appealing to voters with entirely different experiences of immigration.
However, the more basic problem for the Tory side of the Coalition is the reality that its immigration policy is falling apart as the general election nears.
Mr Cameron came to office promising to reduce annual immigration to a figure in the tens of thousands. This aspiration is now doomed. Although the Government has managed to reduce the number of arrivals from outside the European Union, there has been a surge from within the EU as ambitious migrant workers from austerity-hit southern Europe head for the UK. Last month, the Office for National Statistics confirmed that net migration - the difference between the number arriving and leaving - had leapt to 212,000 in the past year.
Ministers realise, with horror, that there is nothing they can do about this, other than make speeches aimed at reassuring voters that they are on the case. Britain long ago signed away its right to restrict free movement of labour from other EU countries and, short of leaving the EU, any government is powerless. Even restricting benefits is not a useful tool, as the latest wave of arrivals seem intent on working and bettering themselves, which only prompts those who favour an immigration free-for-all to say that they should be welcomed enthusiastically.
The latest influx has also revived the argument about whether or not immigration damages job prospects for those already living here. Last week, the Government was accused of suppressing a report that claimed to show that immigration has done no harm to employment. When it was rushed out, it became clear that the report actually claimed that while it made no difference in a period of strong economic growth, it did impact adversely on the lowest-paid during a recession. As the UK is just emerging from the worst slump in seven decades, immigration will have had a recent impact.
In the Conservative Party, the deep divisions in the country are reflected in Parliament. The Cameroons - supporters of Mr Cameron - have tended to take a broadly positive view of immigration. One Cameroon said that while he did not want to get involved publicly in the row over the Brokenshire speech, he was "disappointed" by some of the rhetoric being used by the Tories as the Conservative leadership attempts to deal with the threat from Ukip.
And that view is not just restricted to enthusiastic supporters of the Prime Minister. Another member of the Government said that the concerns of his colleagues on the back benches are irrational: "In the past few years, immigration has saved the British economy. All these jobs in agriculture and the service sector that British workers wouldn't do have been taken by ambitious immigrants. We should be grateful they are here."
However, other MPs are backing Mr Brokenshire. One of his supporters said that he had been subjected to unwarranted abuse for speaking out: "The extreme reaction shows that this is how anyone who tells it like it is about the elite gets treated."
There is a disconnect between how immigration is viewed by affluent Londoners and by those living in less prosperous parts of Britain, said Adam Holloway, the Tory MP for Gravesham, Kent, since 2005. "The truth is that Cameron, Clegg and Miliband don't know what is happening in this country. My constituency has been transformed since I first came to Gravesham. I don't know where these people have come from."
He added that he does not blame the immigrants who are "here to get on", but he said that successive governments have "completely let down generations of working-class people" by presiding over a flawed education and training system. "If you're an employer, who are you going to take on? These well-educated foreign workers or a less well-educated British worker?"
Mr Holloway said Britain needs to make a decision soon on whether or not it wants to control its borders: "Either we're a nation, or we're not."
His colleague, Stewart Jackson MP, is also concerned about immigration. He represents Peterborough, where 25,000 immigrants have arrived in the past decade and one in 10 homes has no adult who speaks English.
Mr Jackson backed the immigration minister. "James Brokenshire hit the nail on the head," he said. "There's a divide, with Tarquin and Jocasta on one side, in their 4x4, sipping lattes and enjoying having a cheap nanny and builder. On the other side are Mavis and Bert in Crewe, who see their children struggling to get a home and their grandchildren being crowded out of the local schools."
It is not only the Tories who are in turmoil over immigration. There are also divisions on the centre-Left, where Jon Cruddas, Ed Miliband's policy co-ordinator, has long said that Labour needs to pay more attention to voters' concerns about immigration. Mr Cruddas argues that a "race to the bottom" - with immigration encouraged purely to benefit business, with too little thought given to the social consequences - has hit the low-paid. This view is opposed by other members of the shadow cabinet.
Demos - the think tank favoured by recovering Blairites and metropolitan, moderate Lefties, and which hosted Mr Brokenshire's speech last week - is also having difficulties of its own. Its director, David Goodhart, has just stepped aside after his "politically incorrect" views angered some of the organisation's leading supporters. He has since been sidelined and given the title "editor-at-large". Last week, it emerged that Damos has appointed a new director.
What was Mr Goodhart's alleged crime? Last year, he wrote a book that outraged liberal opinion. In The British Dream: Successes and Failures of Postwar Immigration, he argued powerfully that a smug ruling class has grown deaf to the legitimate concerns of millions of Britons who worry about the scale and pace of immigration...
Document STEL000020140309ea390006x
