{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"297"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: ARTS: Feeling the heat: With an impeccable pedigree, The Pajama Game was a surefire hit in the golden age of the musical. As his revival transfers to London's West End, Richard Eyre refelcts on how the songs have haunted him since childhood
Richard Eyre   
1,965 words
10 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
18
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The Pajama Game was the first musical I heard - I say "heard" because until April last year, when I directed it at the Chichester Festival Theatre I'd never seen it, or at least only in the rather unsatisfactory 1957 film starring Doris Day. It was one of the first albums that my sister owned and, like it or not, I was obliged at the age of 12 to listen to the British cast of the West End production until I knew the score backwards. I've been haunted by it ever since. I had never seen a musical in a theatre. I had never seen a play in a theatre. So for a while, until she bought My Fair Lady and West Side Story and I bought Bill Haley, Tennessee Ernie Ford, Buddy Holly and Tommy Steele, the vinyl version of The Pajama Game was the centre of my musical and theatrical universe.
The pedigree of The Pajama Game was impeccable - its collaborators were all, or became, the aristocracy of Broadway: George Abbott, Richard Adler, Jerome Robbins, Hal Prince and Bob Fosse. The dialogue and construction - the "book" - were in the hands of Abbott, who was writer or director and sometimes producer of a host of hits including Pal Joey, On the Town, Where's Charley?, Call Me Madam, Damn Yankees and A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Abbott directed The Pajama Game as well as writing the book. A tall, authoritative, even imperious, figure, supremely well-organised, brisk and unsentimental, he was known universally as "Mr Abbott". While he was opening two shows on Broadway - Leonard Bernstein's Wonderful Town and Rogers and Hammerstein's Me and Juliet - he was drawn to a subject that seemed to his friends about as promising as the plague: a union dispute in a pyjama factory in the midwest.
Abbott based his script on a novel called 7 1/2 Cents by Richard Bissell, who had worked as a manager in the family's pyjama factory in Dubuque, Ohio. The story followed the progress of an ambitious young man from Chicago called Sid Sorokin. Here's how Bissell describes the shop floor of the factory:
It is mighty cheerful in a garment plant going wide open. The lights are bright and the sewing machines are working out themes by Stravinsky; it's warm and lively; the blonde table tops gleam; the needles are punching their way to glory 4,500 stitches a minute. Telephones are ringing, the elevator gate is banging, voices are raised and the whole room is filled with women, all shapes and sizes, fat, thin, possible, impossible, goofy, semi-goofy, happy, sad, bouncing brunette, silver threads among the gold, slap-happy bobby sock kids, old grousers with eight kids, and then the queens, always about two or three queens on each floor.
And here's how he describes Sid - unhappy in his new job - when he comes to the town in which the novel is set:
When I woke up in the morning, even before I had my eyes open, I knew I wasn't in Chicago any more. No, not in Chicago, or South Chicago either, or in Gary or Hammond. These small towns smell different entirely . . . Life, as the man says, is funny. One day you are in Gary High School practising clarinet cadenzas for the orchestra and trying to get a date for the dance with Marie Kowalski of the beautiful dark eyes, and the next thing you know you're standing in a foreign state looking at a window at some crummy old pump factory.
Bissell's writing is acerbic, dry and droll - the thriller writer, Elmore Leonard, cited him as an influence: "He wasn't trying to be funny. That was the main point. I thought that's the way to do it."
If Bissell was the inspiration for The Pajama Game, its godfather was unquestionably Frank Loesser, the composer and lyricist of Guys and Dolls and How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying. Loesser worked in the Brill Building, the New York song factory at 1650 Broadway, where scores of songwriters, music publishers and song pluggers had their offices. In 1950 he brought together two young songwriters who were also working in the Brill Building - Richard Adler and Jerry Ross - and became their publisher and mentor. They were an improbable combination - Adler the son of a concert pianist and a debutante from Alabama; Ross the son of Russian immigrants and former child-star of the Yiddish theatre. Encouraged by Loesser, Adler and Ross started to write for the theatre. Their first effort was an unsuccessful revue, but with their second collaboration, The Pajama Game, they hit gold. Their next show, Damn Yankees, opened the following year and had a similar success, but soon after Jerry Ross died of a lung disease at the age of 29.
I was unaware that Loesser, probably at the behest of his friend Abbot, had written two of the best songs in The Pajama Game - "There Once Was a Man" and "A New Town Is a Blue Town" - without receiving a credit. I'd like to think it was Loesser who was responsible for suggesting that the choreographer should be a young dancer called Bob Fosse, if only because Fosse later returned the favour by saying: "Guys and Dolls is the greatest American musical of all time." True, of course.
But it was actually Abbott who was Fosse's champion. With the confidence of a man who had no need to worry about his reputation, he consistently championed newcomers. When he was working on Me and Juliet with actress Joan McCracken, she asked him to consider Fosse as choreographer of The Pajama Game. She told Abbott that he was very young, very ambitious, and very talented - oh, and she was married to him. Fosse was then 25, on his second marriage, a dancer who had tried to match the early Fred Astaire by working in cabaret as a double act with his first wife, and had then gone to Hollywood to become a director. Instead he had become a frustrated contract player for MGM and had been cast in a small part in the film of Kiss Me Kate. The choreographer for that was Hermes Pan - Astaire's choreographer - who was persuaded by Fosse to let him do his own choreography for a number that he performed in the film with Carol Haney - later cast as Gladys in The Pajama Game.
Abbott was impressed by Fosse and was ready to give him the job, but one of his fledgling producers - a young ex‑stage manager called Hal Prince - needed convincing: "How do we know he can do a Broadway show?" he asked, "He's never done one." It was agreed that, as a backup, Abbott would ask Jerome Robbins to stand by in case things went wrong with Fosse. Robbins, although only 35, had choreographed at least four shows with Abbott and was the crowned king of Broadway dance. He extracted punitive conditions at Fosse's expensive for being his understudy - a handsome royalty and a credit as co-director. "What do I care about the credit," said Fosse, "People will know that I did it."
Fosse's routine for "Steam Heat" - Carol Haney's number - had all the hallmarks of what became his signature style: bowler hats, rolled shoulders, turned in knees and sharply sexy gestures. Although what he did was borrowed from many sources - the cakewalk, burlesque, vaudeville, Jack Cole (the father of "jazz dancing"), Pan and Astaire - the way he put it all together was unmistakably his own. When the show was in previews Abbot wanted to cut "Steam Heat" because he thought it slowed down the narrative. If Robbins made a single contribution to the show it's that he persuaded Abbott to leave the number in.
The show opened on 13 May 1954 at the St James theatre on Broadway. It ran for three years and won countless awards. Apart from Carol Haney as Gladys, Janis Page played Babe, John Raitt was Sid, Eddie Foy Jnr was Hines and Haney's understudy was a young actress called Shirley MacLaine.
In her memoir, Sage-ing While Age‑ing, MacLaine tells this story:
They gave me the understudy job, but I never had a rehearsal. I had thought Carol would go on with a broken neck. Then a few nights later, Carol sprained her ankle . . . When I arrived at the St James, across the stage door stood Jerry Robbins, Bob Fosse, Hal Prince, etc. "Haney is out," they said. "You're on." I couldn't believe what I was hearing. "I'm on? Without a rehearsal?"
There I was, waiting in the wings, when the announcer said Carol Haney would be out and I would replace her. There were boos from the orchestra to the second balcony . . . I did drop the hat in "Steam Heat". I lost it in midair, and said, "Oh shit," right out loud. The first few rows gasped and crossed their legs, but I got through the rest of it without falling into the pit. When the show was over, I took my bows with the other two "Steam Heat" dancers. The audience stood up. Buzz Miller and Peter Gennaro peeled off and left me in the centre of the stage to bask in the audience's appreciation.
MacLaine rang her brother, Warren Beatty, and told him to get some people over because she was on. That's how the movie producer, Hal B Wallis, came to be in the audience that night. He signed her on the spot to Paramount Pictures for a five year contract.
MacLaine didn't, sadly, appear in the lacklustre film of the show that was made three years later. Doris Day, who was then top of the charts with Sammy Fain's "Secret Love", was cast as Babe.
In the mid-50s the songs you'd hear in the theatre were the ones you'd hear sung in the street or on the radio. Rosemary Clooney's version of "Hey There" was at No 1 in the US charts for several weeks, while Archie Bleyer's cover of "Hernando's Hideaway" was at No 2, and Patti Page's "Steam Heat" at No 9. With the arrival of rock'n'roll that easy transfer from musicals to the hit parade started to dissolve and so did the book musical: the new music couldn't carry narrative and character. What's more, the implacable optimism that underwrote the Broadway musical for three or four decades withered in the face of the growing awareness that the US was engaged in a major war in a far away country in Asia, which was causing increasing numbers of soldiers to be sent home in coffins.
The Pajama Game opened in London at the Coliseum on 13 October 1955 and ran for a year and a half. Unlike many of the Broadway transfers of the period it didn't import American stars. Joy Nichols and Edmund Hockridge, Australian and Canadian respectively, led a company that also starred the comedian Max Wall as Hines and a young dancer called Elizabeth Seal in Shirley MacLaine's part. It did the trick for her too: she became famous overnight.
The Pajama Game runs at Shaftesbury theatre, London WC2, until 13 September. shaftesburytheatre.com.
Captions:
The Pajama Game at the Shaftesbury theatre. Below, 'Steam Heat'
Document GRDN000020140510ea5a00002
