{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2028"}
____
  
News
Be proud that Britain is multicultural, says Gove
Christopher Hope   
439 words
29 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
9
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
BRITONS should celebrate the fact that they live in a "multicultural nation" and not look to the past, senior Conservatives have said.
Michael Gove, the Education Secretary, issued the call for the Conservatives to reclaim the term "multicultural" at an Asian Business Awards dinner.
The description is sometimes used as a negative term to describe communities made up of ethnic groups that do not mix with their neighbours.
Mr Gove told the audience that "the answer to how we make our country strong in the future is that we welcome talent from wherever it comes and we celebrate the fact that we are stronger together as a United Kingdom, as a multicultural nation than we could ever be if we looked back to the past".
Research last week found that the Tories had to do more to attract black and ethnic minority voters if they wanted to win next year's general election.
It suggested second or third generation immigrants could lose their "reflex" support for Labour and those moving to traditionally white middle–class areas would be less likely to vote Labour.
The comments from Mr Gove, who is close to David Cameron, the Prime Minister, were backed by other senior Tories.
Alok Sharma, the Conservatives' vicechairman for black and minority ethnic issues, said: "Britain is a multicultural nation and many will regard Michael Gove's comments positively.
"The vast majority of people from ethnic minorities regard a multicultural nation as one in which communities are integrated into the mainstream of British society and adhere to British values, whilst being able to respect their own cultural heritage."
David Green, from Civitas, a Right–ofcentre think tank, said yesterday that Mr Gove had confused "multi–ethnicity" with "multiculturalism". "We have become a multi–ethnic society, but we have been successful because our dominant culture of freedom and democracy allows space for different lifestyles.
"Multiculturalism is the name for the condition in which antagonistic cultures coexist in the same country."
Boris Johnson, the Mayor of London, who is widely expected to return as an MP, said yesterday voters are angry about immigration because of the "massive incoherence" in Government policy.
He told Total Politics magazine that it is a "continual deceit" to suggest that Britain can solve the problem of immigration "whilst remaining members of the EU with free movement".
Dame Tessa Jowell, the former Labour Cabinet minister, has said that her party should not apologise for immigration levels when it was in government.
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, has previously said that Labour "got it wrong" over immigration.
Document DT00000020140429ea4t00077
