{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1451"}
____
  
Labour’s unforced error on the EU is a priceless gift for its opponents; Only the Tories offer a realistic chance of the British people finally having a say on Europe
By Peter Oborne   
1,244 words
13 March 2014
06:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ed Miliband has been a strong, competent leader of the Labour Party in many ways. He has navigated his way through party reform, tackled big business and taken on Rupert Murdoch, braving criticism and mockery in the process.
Yesterday, however, he made by far the biggest mistake of his leadership. As is so often the case, it came about as a direct consequence of one of his great strengths.
Mr Miliband is highly skilled at conciliation, and bringing all sides together to create a common point of view. He has tried to do this with a new strategy on Europe, designed to please both Tony Blair and Ed Balls, big business and the unions. The result is a practical and intellectual nonsense that will delight the Conservative Party, please Ukip and profoundly damage Labour.
Let’s start with the Tories. Mr Miliband’s unforced error is a priceless gift for David Cameron because it amounts to an unequivocal vindication of the Prime Minister’s decision last year to promise a referendum on Europe after the election.
A number of sound reasons lay behind this announcement, and one visceral political calculation. Come 2015, the Tories could counter the Ukip threat by telling voters that only a Conservative vote offered the prospect of European exit. For Eurosceptics, a vote for Ukip is not just useless – it is worse than useless. By taking away votes from the Conservatives, Ukip actually increases the likelihood of a Labour victory, killing all chance of a referendum while advancing the cause of European federalism.
Mr Miliband could have countered this by promising a referendum himself. He has not done so, thus greatly increasingly the likelihood of a Tory victory in 2015. Champagne corks must have been popping in Conservative HQ last night.
Ukip, however, will not be unhappy. It has become increasingly apparent that Nigel Farage’s party is more than just a repository for disenchanted Tories. In particular, many less affluent voters have been dismayed by the way immigration from Eastern Europe has driven down wages and threatened jobs, while putting pressure on housing and public services.
Clearly recognising the threat from Ukip, Mr Miliband has promised to beg the EU to allow him to be tougher on migrants. But there is nothing he can do if this is refused. His decision to install himself as Westminster point man for President Barroso and the European Commission has deprived him of any potential tools to confront the problem in a powerful or meaningful way. Labour will therefore become ripe for plunder by Ukip. I would guess that May’s European elections will provide devastating early evidence of this.
This is not the only problem for Labour, however. Till now, Mr Miliband has done his best to position himself as the leader of an insurgent party, taking on media tycoons and big businessmen on behalf of the small man and the consumer.
There is, unfortunately, a direct contradiction between taking on big business and supporting the EU, which has become the fiefdom of the big corporations and bankers. They set its policies, and their lobbying departments write its directives.
Meanwhile, the European Commission is imposing an agenda of economic uniformity across Europe. As a result, youth unemployment stands at more than 50 per cent in many places. In the eurozone, unemployment averages around 12 per cent, nearly twice the British level.
Mr Miliband knows these horrifying facts extremely well, and if he possessed an ounce of moral passion, they would appal him. Instead, he has allied himself squarely with the political class that has created this nightmare.
To understand the reason for this historic error, it is necessary to look back towards the most traumatic period in the history of the modern Labour Party: the mid-Eighties. Though socialism as an idea was dying, Labour could not find a doctrine to replace it. It discovered the answer almost literally overnight when Jacques Delors, as president of the European Commission, made a celebrated speech to the 1988 Trades Union Congress.
This speech came at the height of a long period of Tory dominance, when Labour’s chances of regaining office appeared desperately remote. Mr Delors explained that it did not matter that the party could not win power democratically at Westminster; it could do so just as well by going over the voters’ heads via Brussels.
The penny dropped. At the start of the Eighties, it was hard to find a Labour MP or activist who supported the Common Market (even Tony Blair fought the 1983 election on a pledge to exit Europe). A decade later, the situation had been reversed. The EU became Labour’s new orthodoxy. Dissent was eliminated, and this continues to be the case. Though Ed Miliband has challenged many Labour beliefs, he has left the EU alone.
Today, only a handful of mavericks such as Austin Mitchell or dinosaurs such as Tony Benn even try to make the sceptical argument. They did, however, have one very interesting and significant ally – the trade union leader Bob Crow, who died of a heart attack this week.
In various ways, Mr Crow was the nearest equivalent Britain has seen to the trade union barons of the Sixties. He was bloody-minded, offensive, proud of his class and background and prodigiously sure of his ground. He was completely authentic and, like an earlier generation of union leaders, very proud of Britain.
Bob Crow felt betrayed by Labour over many things – but one of the most important was Europe. He could never understand why the party had allowed the anti-EU movement to be captured by the Right. This hurt him in particular because he saw the modern European Union for what it was.
He loathed the fact that, thanks to EU law, the contract for Thameslink rolling stock went to Siemens in Germany rather than Bombardier in Derby. He argued that the rise of agency working and the consequent undermining of Britain’s tradition of full-time, secure employment was another consequence of Brussels legislation.
He also hated EU economic policy, which he held responsible for the social and economic disasters in Greece, Spain and elsewhere. “It is the working class across Europe," he said, “that is paying the price for monetary union through savage cuts to their jobs, their services and their standards of living." Above all, he felt no doubt that the working people he spoke for wanted out of the European Union.
Many Telegraph readers will have detested Mr Crow’s political views and resented the inconvenience he so often inflicted. But most of us will also have recognised a man who articulated honestly the opinions of a fair number of our fellow citizens. It is those people that Ed Miliband – who strikingly refused to offer a televised tribute to Mr Crow – turned his back on yesterday.
That is why there has been a seismic shift in British politics this week. A coalition between Labour and the Liberal Democrats, who now share a common policy on Europe, suddenly looks far more likely – and only the Conservatives offer a realistic challenge. David Cameron has been handed the chance to fight an insurgent campaign, against the representatives of a remote and out-of-touch European political class.
Document TELUK00020140313ea3d00233
