{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3824"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
Tories ready to fight election on two fronts
Macer Hall   
680 words
26 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
31
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
INSIDE POLITICS
DAVID CAMERON has ordered his Tory election troops to prepare for war on two fronts over the coming months. The party must ready itself for a "blue–on–red" main offensive against Labour while also carrying out "blue–on–purple" raids into UK Independence Party territory on the Right flank.
Yet on both fields of combat the Prime Minister is convinced the same weapon can bring ultimate victory. He believes that, more than two decades after the calamity of the Black Wednesday currency crisis in September 1992, the Conservatives have at last regained their reputation as the only truly trustworthy custodians of economic wellbeing.
Tory hopes rest on voters recognising that Mr Cameron and Chancellor George Osborne have put the country back on the path to prosperity and steadily rising living standards. Party activists will argue on the doorsteps that putting Ed Miliband and Ed Balls into Downing Street can only mean a return to disastrous financial incompetence.
The strength of the Ukip threat was shown this week with the launch of their Euro election campaign. The anti–Brussels party unveiled some provocative posters that powerfully appealed to concerns about the dangers of unlimited immigration from the European Union.
It is a message that will stick in voters' minds far longer than the latest embarrassment over Ukip members being caught out expressing unpleasant and outlandish views on the internet.
PRIVATELY Tory strategists admit that Nigel Farage's unequivocally anti–Brussels rhetoric will be difficult to counter in the run–up to the Euro elections and are braced for big Ukip gains on May 22.
"In the Euro election game Ukip can always play their joker," said one senior Tory source close to the campaign plans.
Yet Mr Cameron is understood to be optimistic that the Tories can swiftly win back "blue–inclined Ukip voters" once the polls close.
He has ruled out any further tacking to the Right, arguing that the Tory record on tackling welfare dependency in particular is clear evidence that the party is championing core conservative principles of responsibility and self–reliance under his leadership.
Any attempt to directly challenge Ukip on policy issues has also been discounted. Mr Cameron is understood to believe that his Lib Dem deputy Nick Clegg made a huge error in challenging Mr Farage to live television debates. Instead he believes the Tory success in turning around an economy devastated by the financial crash and Labour's crazed spending sprees will prove to be decisive.
"Ukip voters care about the economy too. They don't want to see Miliband and Balls mess it up," the Tory source said.
Tory aides noted that this week's YouGov poll predicts a thumping 27 per cent vote share for Ukip in the Euro elections but that figure falls to 12 per cent when voters are asked about whom they will back in the general election.
Other polls suggest the gap between Labour and the Tories is narrowing as the economy improves.
NOW the Tory leadership is striving to ensure that nothing distracts from the key economic message. Senior figures in Mr Cameron's inner circle admit that the party made a hash of the 2010 general election campaign that led to the hung parliament and the need for coalition.
Voters were confused by muddled slogans that simultaneously claimed the Conservative Party had been transformed into something zingy and new while also offering traditional financial sobriety to turn the economy around. Party chiefs insist those mistakes will not be made again.
Over the next 12 months Mr Cameron's team will relentlessly pound Mr Miliband and Mr Balls on the issue of economic competence and highlight their complicity in Gordon Brown's disastrous regime.
The aim is for that warning to scare voters away from either backing Labour or helping their cause with a protest vote to Ukip.
In Tory high command the belief is that economic credibility is a silver bullet that can slay both the red and purple foes.
Document THEEXP0020140426ea4q0005g
