{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1011"}
____
  
News
Immigrants 'must respect our culture' says minister
Alison Little   
458 words
19 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
4
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
IMMIGRANTS should learn English and respect the British way of life, the UK's first Asian Secretary of State said yesterday.
Bus driver's son Sajid Javid, whose parents came from Pakistan, indicated his frustration with people who could not speak English - even after living in Britain for half a century.
The Culture Secretary's comments, in which he also acknowledged voters' fears over "excessive" levels of migration and backed more border controls, were welcomed by his colleagues as "spot on".
Integrate Conservative MP Mr Javid, who is also Equalities Minister, said he agreed with people who said that immigrants "should come to work and make a contribution and should also respect our way of life".
He added: "It means things like trying to learn English."
The former high-flying banker said most immigrants wanted to integrate into British society and his parents had always been "very proud" of Britain.
But he added: "I have met people who have been in Britain for over 50 years and still can't speak English."
Most migrants seeking British passports have to demonstrate English language skills but there is no fluency requirement for EU migrants.
Mr Javid said: "It's perfectly reasonable for British people to say 'Look, if you're going to settle in Britain and make it your home, you should learn the language of the country and you should respect its laws and culture.'" He also backed "fundamental reform" to EU laws to give the British government power to control European immigration. Welcoming Mr Javid's call for migrants to integrate, Conservative MP Stewart Jackson said: "He's spot on and his background uniquely qualifies him to say so.
"The focus must be on greater cohesion and integration and that means learning and speaking English, shared citizenship and culture."
But Labour MP Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons' Home Affairs Select Committee, was dismissive, saying: "It was a Labour government that introduced an English language test for those who wanted to get indefinite leave to enter the country." ? David Cameron yesterday pledged to continue pursuing his goal of reducing net immigration - the number of people arriving in the UK minus those leaving - to below 100,000 a year by next year's general election amid fears the target will not be met.
OPINION: PAGE 12
YEs: 0901 792 5300 NO: 0901 792 5301 Yes text DXMONYEs to 86611 No text DXMONNO to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight. q Should every immigrant learn English?
Document THEEXP0020140519ea5j0003v
