{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"211"}
____
  
NEWS
Number of foreign nurses up 50pc in a year
By Laura Donnelly and Peter Dominiczak   
1,178 words
14 May 2014
00:56
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
More than 5,000 nurses come to UK from EU, as NHS cuts training for home-grown staff
The number of foreign nurses coming to work in the UK from elsewhere in Europe has risen by 50 per cent in one year, following cuts in the numbers of nurses trained here, new figures show.
Nurse leaders and patients groups said “short-sighted” attempts to cut NHS spending had left desperate shortages on wards, leaving increasing numbers of hospitals to spend thousands of pounds recruiting staff from abroad.
New figures disclosed in response to a parliamentary question show that last year 5,217 nurses from EU countries outside the UK registered to work here - a rise of 51 per cent from the previous year, and the largest rise for more than a decade.
The surge follows cuts to NHS programmes to train nurses in this country, with 10,000 training places cut since 2010.
Over the past year, increasing numbers of hospitals have embarked on recruitment trawls abroad, in trips which have cost up to £10,000 at a time.
Last autumn a survey of more than 100 trusts found one in three had hunted abroad for nurses, and even more had drawn up plans to do so this year.
Hospitals targeted 29 different countries, with the highest number of nurses recruited from Portugal, followed by Spain and Ireland.
Under rules on freedom of labour, staff from the EU are able to register to work in this country without checks on their language or competence.
Regulators are not allowed to set tests, and research has found most hospitals do not carry out checks, despite Department of Health (DoH) advice that they should.
The Royal College of Nursing (RCN) on Tuesday said poor planning by NHS central bodies meant hospitals were paying heavily for “quick fix” solutions to recruit from aboad.
Patients groups expressed concern that nurses were being recruited from abroad despite poor communication skills.
Katherine Murphy, chief executive of the Patients Association said: “Many hundreds of nurses from other countries make a valuable and important contribution to healthcare in the UK. But the current situation is getting out of hand. Why are we cutting nurse training places when there is an acute shortage of nursing staff in the NHS? “
Mrs Murphy called for “an urgent review” of the stituation, and said more rigour needed to be taken in recruiting nurses from overseas.
“There are real issues with nurses from other countries including problems communicating with patients and a lack of understanding of processes and procedures,” she said. “Patients deserve to be treated by nurses who have been trained to the highest standards. If we do employ nurses from other countries, they need to be competent enough in English to effectively communicate with patients.
Dr Peter Carter, chief executive of the RCN said: “Cutting nurse training places is a short-sighted policy which ends up costing more as hospitals are forced to use short-term fixes such as overseas recruitment.”
In 2009/10, 20,829 nurses were trained in England. Since then lower numbers have been trained each year, meaning that in total 10,000 fewer nurses have been trained, the parliamentary response shows.
Dr Carter said the continued trend meant “the worst is yet to come” with more gaps expected in the nursing workforce in coming years.
He said a recent step by NHS chiefs to increase training places was a “small step in the right direction.”
Jamie Reed, shadow health minister, said: “With youth unemployment so high, the Government should be bringing on the next generation of nurses. Instead, Ministers are cutting trainee nurse places at home and spending millions on overseas recruitment.
A Department of Health spokesman said: “There are over 5,100 more nurses on our wards now than in 2010 and 1,000 extra adult nursing training places are being created this year. Nurses from abroad make a valuable contribution to the NHS and recruiting from abroad is nothing new. But local hospitals should only employ them if they have proven their competence and language skills.”
The figures emerged as David Cameron warned that economic migrants fleeing failing eurozone countries like France and Spain are threatening Britain’s bid to reduce immigration.
Mr Cameron insisted his pledge to cut immigration to below 100,000 by next year is still “perfectly feasible” but admitted his Government has not reduced numbers “as much as I’d like”.
He blamed European Union countries with faltering economies for the spike in foreigners coming to the UK.
Figures to be released on Wednesday are expected to show that 30,000 immigrants have come from Romania and Bulgaria alone since the start of the year.
Net migration soared to 212,000 last year.
“I think [the target] it is perfectly feasible,” Mr Cameron told the Commons liaison committee. “We have brought net migration into the UK down by a fifth under this Government – not as much as I’d like.
“The figures have been altered by the fact that in the last couple of years, because our economy has been growing more rapidly than the other European economies, we’ve seen an increase in the number of people coming from EU countries to the United Kingdom.”
Mr Cameron added: “Some of the biggest increases are actually from countries like Spain and Italy and France and the original EU members.
“The target remains, the commitment remains. I want net migration to be down to the tens of thousands. I think it is absolutely achievable.”
Figures from the Office for National Statistics in February showed a huge surge in the number of people coming to Britain from the EU countries which have been hardest hit by the economic crisis.
The number of Italians arriving in the UK last year rose 66 per cent to 44,000. Spain was up by 36 per cent to just under 52,000 and Portugal was up 47 per cent to 30,000 people.
Mr Cameron used his appearance before the MPs to reject claims that his Government’s bid to cut immigration has harmed UK universities.
The Prime Minister faced claims from MPs that foreign students have been put off applying to UK universities because of the crackdown on immigration.
The number of foreign students coming to the UK from India has decreased in recent years. Indian politicians have repeatedly blamed Conservative rhetoric over immigration for the fall in numbers.
However, the Prime Minister accused people of “pretending” that the focus on cutting net migration is “injuring our higher education system”.
Mr Cameron said: “I profoundly believe you have immigration control and get the net migration numbers down at the same time as getting the best international students to come to Britain and the evidence shows that’s exactly what’s happening.
“And so we must not throw out the success in getting net migration numbers down by pretending it’s injuring our higher education system when it isn’t.”
Document TELUK00020140513ea5d007bz
