{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3263"}
____
  
Features; Opinion Column
Migrant worries? Get stuffed, voters
Rod Liddle   
482 words
15 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
11
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
HERE'S a question it won't take you terribly long to answer.
How well is the Government abiding by its "solemn promise" to cut the number of immigrants to this country to under 100,000 per year? The Prime Minister made that pledge shortly before the last election.
He put that incredibly sincere and grave expression on his shiny face and his hand on his heart. And he made a vow to the electorate.
The Tories — deadly scourge of mass immigration! You can trust them.
He knew then — and he knows now — that immigration, along with the economy, is the single most important factor for voters.
So, what's actually happened? The Prime Minister says the figures are heading in the right direction.
But that's true only if you turn the graph upside down. Or stand on your head while reading it. One of the two.
This year, the numbers of people flooding into the country have actually increased. We have had a net gain of a staggering 212,000 people arriving, mostly from Eastern Europe.
Our borders have got even leakier. They are now leakier than a sieve from which someone has removed the bits between the holes.
Not only that, but things don't look much better for the future, either.
Rocket scientists Asked if immigration would be nosing down in the NEXT set of figures, David Cameron came out with the following Churchillian quote: "The figures will be what the figures are."
No kidding, mate. A bit short of a solemn promise now, isn't it? In fact, the next batch of figures are likely to be pretty shocking — because they'll take account of the new influx from Romania and Bulgaria.
All those neurosurgeons and rocket scientists who have turned up since January 1. If you remember, a short while ago, the Left was crowing that hardly anyone had arrived here from those two countries.
And they blamed Ukip for scaremongering when actually everything was tickety-boo, no problem, etc.
Well, the news is that at least 30,000 Bulgarians and Romanians have come to Britain this year. That's hardly a piddling amount, is it? And here's the problem for the voters. The Tories like immigration because it means a short-term boost to the economy and employers can pay their workers rather less money.
That sort of thing is always popular with Tories.
And Labour and the Lib Dems like immigration because they still seem to think that anyone who moans about it is a raaacccissst.
Even Ukip doesn't mind having quite a few immigrants arriving every month, for exactly the same reason as the Tories.
So on this issue — the most important issue as far as the voters are concerned — the message from the parties is pretty much unanimous: Get stuffed.
Document THESUN0020140515ea5f0005z
