{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1977"}
____
  
Features
The splendours of spring in New England
Paul Roberts   
1,118 words
30 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
3
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
NOBLE CALEDONIA
Explore the glories of the USA's north–eastern seaboard on a fascinating small–ship voyage, says Paul Roberts
The north–eastern seaboard of the US provides a living lesson in American history, taught in one of the world's most attractive classrooms. Along this coastline of rocky bays, forested hills, old–world cities and picture–perfect villages, a fledgling nation forged her own identity and stamped her personality on the world.
At Philadelphia, the Declaration of Independence was first penned. At Washington DC, an empty wilderness became one of the world's most majestic capitals. At Ellis Island, America welcomed more than 12 million immigrants and made them her own. At Kitty Hawk, two shy brothers inaugurated the age of the aeroplane.
In some places history can be felt as a living force – at Martha's Vineyard, propelled from rough whaling centre to chic celebrity playground, or Bar Harbor, where magnates from smoking industrial cities created the green paradise of Acadia, one of the country's first national parks.
In others time has stood still, as at Mount Vernon where visitors can step back more than 200 years into the home of America's most celebrated son, George Washington.
The best way to experience these natural and historical riches is to arrive as the original settlers did, by sea – and guided by experts who can give unique insights into every destination.
This is exactly the aim of two tours being organised in May 2015 by Noble Caledonia, under the enticing banner "Splendours of Spring in New England".
For both these trips Noble Caledonia has chartered American Glory, a boutique ship accommodating just 49 guests in a choice of spacious staterooms with large picture windows or private balconies.
She is big enough to offer every amenity, from a large sun deck with putting green to a delightful restaurant where every seat has a panoramic view. But she's small enough to create a friendly "country club" atmosphere – and, on the second cruise, to leave the Atlantic and scoot nimbly up the Hudson River as far as historic Albany.
Everything is included in the price of your holiday, from scheduled flights and all excursions, to full board, drinks with meals, taxes and gratuities.
Each shore trip is led by an expert local guide and on–board experts and historians will enhance your knowledge of the places you visit through informal lectures and discussions.
Both itineraries are designed to provide a real insight into the history, culture and natural beauty of the north–eastern seaboard.
The first tour, the 13–night History and Nature of the American East Coast, begins at Alexandria, the port of Washington DC, on May 8, 2015.
The first excursion is Mount Vernon, overlooking the grand Potomac River and frozen in time in 1799, shortly before Washington's death. Afterwards there's a tour of the city that bears his name, or you could choose to browse in Alexandria's art and craft stores.
In 1903, the sand dunes of Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, provided a perfect and private test–bed for the world's first aeroplane flights. Park rangers at the Wright Brothers National Memorial will recreate all the excitement of those flights which changed our world.
Reaching Yorktown, a drive through the Virginian countryside takes you to the charming 18th–century colonial city of Williamsburg. There's more history the next day in Baltimore, which is also a centre for crab fishing.
After Philadelphia, the cradle of democracy, American Glory dramatically sails past the Statue of Liberty into New York, where an orientation tour takes in the city's highlights. She moors overnight, so you could visit Greenwich Village or take in a Broadway show, perhaps. The next morning, there's a harbour cruise to Ellis Island, where the superb museum gives a poignant insight into the immigrant experience.
Newport, Rhode Island, is the next destination on this endlessly intriguing voyage. A tour explores the vividly painted wooden houses and the oceanside mansions built by 19th–century socialites, culminating in Cornelius Vanderbilt II's pile, The Breakers.
Then there's Martha's Vineyard, with its fishing villages and serene beaches. It's also alive with history. Edgartown is an architectural gem of 18th– and 19th–century sea captains' houses, while the Old Whaling Church is one of New England's finest Greek Revival buildings.
After a scenic cruise though the Calendar Islands of Casco Bay, American Glory arrives in historic Portland in Maine, a city of cobbled streets with a classic 18th–century lighthouse.
Bar Harbor, on a rock–bound coast with pink granite cliffs, is one of America's most venerable resorts. Here you can sail between sleepy islands among eagles and harbour seals, or tour Acadia National Park and Cadillac Mountain with sweeping views over island–studded Frenchman Bay.
The final destination is Boston, "the Athens of America". Here you can look forward to visits to Old North Church – where Paul Revere began his ride in Longfellow's famous poem – Beacon Hill's lovely old houses and the threemasted frigate USS Constitution, the oldest commissioned warship afloat.
The second Noble Caledonia tour on American Glory, called Spring in New England, lasts 12 nights and sails from Boston on May 20, 2015.
It follows the first tour's route to New York, with extra stops at Camden and delightful Nantucket Island, which has a rich seafaring history and striking 18th–century architecture. Pretty Camden is an archetypal New England town with white–steepled churches, narrow streets and stately old homes.
At New York, American Glory leaves the Atlantic for two nights on the mighty Hudson River, beginning with an afternoon in idyllic Poughkeepsie, home town of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt.
Then it's up–river to Albany, one of the oldest settlements in America, before turning downstream again to Sleepy Hollow. This riverside town was immortalised in the works of Washington Irving, creator of Rip Van Winkle. His country home, Sunnyside, retains fascinating memories of the man.
A final 24 hours in New York makes a fitting end to this glorious tour, before guests reluctantly fly home to London.
Fact file
Noble Caledonia's Splendours of Spring in New England, departing in May 2015, costs from £5,995 per person including flights, fullboard accommodation on American Glory, wine, beer and soft drinks with lunch and dinner, shore excursions, Noble Caledonia tour manager, transfers, port taxes and all gratuities. For more information or to request a brochure, call 020 7752 0000 or visit noble–caledonia.co.uk
'American Glory sails past the Statue of Liberty into New York where she moors overnight'
Document DT00000020140430ea4u0002k
