{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"454"}
____
  
Guardian Society Pages
Which way now for public services in Scotland?: In six months, Scottish residents will vote whether to stay in the UK. We asked housing, local authority, charity and public health experts what impact a yes vote could have on social policy
Interviews by Saba Salman   
1,650 words
12 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
34
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Housing policy has been devolved for years. The Scottish government controls budgets for investment and capital subsidy. The austerity axe has fallen heavily on social housing. We would welcome reinvestment to provide much needed affordable housing, at a lower cost to the public purse. The most effective way to remedy the bedroom tax is full repeal. We welcome cross-party support in the Scottish parliament to mitigate the impact of the tax with additional spending. The tax underlines the tensions between social security and housing policy; just over half of all social rents payable in Scotland are sourced from housing benefit, but housing benefit expenditure is much lower per capita because rents are lower here. Policymakers have no control over the means by which people are supported to pay rental costs. In the event of a no vote, we would look for further devolution of powers to enable Scotland to exercise control over how to support housing costs.
 But if there's a yes vote, we would expect a social security system to meet Scottish needs and policy goals.
Enhanced homelessness rights, the abolition of right to buy and fuller rights for tenants are a sample of the measures that signify the divergence between housing policy in Scotland and the rest of the UK. Whatever the vote, housing policy will continue to evolve. That's not to diminish the significance of a yes vote. Taking complete control of welfare and taxation are the two greatest policy levers on offer. With benefits and taxation powers firmly held at Westminster, landlords still dance to those tunes more than those of Holyrood. Whatever the outcome of the vote, there are two certainties - Scotland's immediate need for a new long-term plan on homelessness and to build at least 10,000 new affordable homes each year for the foreseeable future.
The current UK approach to dealing with asylum and refugees is not fit for purpose. It's being dealt with in the broader immigration system, which is another area of public policy that is a toxic debate. Asylum is swept up in that when it is a separate issue that needs to be done in a different way to border control and determining who gets to work here. We're pleased that a number of the suggestions we put forward [for how the asylum and refugee system would work in an independent Scotland] have been included in the white paper on independence. Principally, the idea of establishing a separate agency just to deal with asylum and refugee issues - free from day-to-day political interference. A specific agency separate from immigration, means we will have decisions that will be more based on evidence. It's about restating the fact that claiming asylum isn't a crime - it's part of the international human rights framework.
At a personal level, I am quite fearful that if the vote is yes, all the other issues such as currency, debt and political welfare systems will take precedence, and there will be nothing happening [in migrant rights] for a few years. I know the Scottish government feels that the immigration and asylum situation is all about integration. I believe that integration is a two-way process. In the UK, it's also one sided - "how can migrants fit in?". Integration smacks of "tolerance" and I would much prefer "acceptance".
When you speak to people in local communities, the real story is not about the internal workings of Holyrood or Westminster. It is about the local services that communities need, and giving people a say about what matters locally to them. Effective local democracy is fundamental to the kind of country we want to live in. The opportunities and challenges that we face in different parts of the country require local choices and local accountability. More services are run by distant bureaucracies, and often those services are being done to people rather than delivered with them. Making Scotland a fairer, healthier and wealthier place will not be achieved from the top down. The reality is that improving lives means empowering local democracy and letting local people decide on their priorities, their services, and their spending.
Social work legislation has been separate from England for many years. Although the 32 councils decide on specific social work funding, much recent policy is perceived as increasingly centralised, for example, adult support and protection. It's yet to be seen how social care partnerships may be influenced by the vote. Some very specialist resources are accessed in England such as detox, therapeutic residential care, and secure care - although councils try to avoid this, sometimes there are no facilities here. Also, some charities providing care, such as Barnardo's and Action for Children that are UK-wide with Scottish offices, may review their position in an independent Scotland. Social work delivery in Scotland has been significantly affected by the impact of welfare reform imposed by Westminster. Our members have to deal with people's confusion about universal benefits and the resulting penalties that can leave children and families in increased poverty. There is a view that a yes vote could help repeal some of this legislation. Many of our members want social workers to be freed up to return to their direct role as change agents within communities. A smaller country, either independent or with increased devolved powers, may allow for that debate.
Our roles as campaigners, service providers and community builders will not disappear. There will always be a need to mobilise citizens, whether to help in hospices or put an end to poverty and inequality. Independence will neither help nor hinder the development of the right approaches to keep older people out of hospital, youngsters off the dole or offenders out of prison. What will change for us is the leverage to challenge more and to build the kind of inclusive value-based society and sustainable economy that some of us dream of. With the criminal welfare cuts and the austerity policies of the UK government, the big question is: would high levels of poverty and inequality stand a better chance of being addressed in an independent country? Would it pave the way to build an economic system that works for the majority? With independence, we would expect an immediate turnaround in approaches to welfare - from belligerent harassment to support and empowerment. Voluntary organisations would play a big part in the immediate task of nation building, but whether it's a yes or no vote, there will always be more to do to create a better, fairer society.
Among disabled people in Scotland there is a huge amount of fear about the new personal independent payment (PiP), universal credit and the impact of bedroom tax. Although large [policy] areas are devolved in Scotland, there is a mismatch at policy level. For example, Inclusion Scotland favours homes for life [designed to accommodate people's changing care needs] but the bedroom tax undermines that [as it forces people to move to smaller properties]. We can now meet with key policy and decision makers and give them our account of what is needed - they don't always act but we can talk and get a hearing. There is a challenge in going down to Westminster and getting access to ministers. It is physically possible to lobby [members of the Scottish parliament], which makes achieving political change easier.
Public health is a serious matter for Scotland. Since devolution, the Scottish government has brought in bold initiatives, including the abolition of prescription charges and the provision of free eye tests for all. And let's not forget that we were the first UK country to introduce the smoking ban. Now the Scottish government is pushing ahead with plans for plain packaging on cigarettes and minimum unit pricing on alcohol. These point to a different set of government priorities than those of Westminster. The Scottish government points to cuts in welfare spending brought in by Westminster exacerbating poor health. Independence would give Scotland the power to focus on improving health by seeing health, social care and wider social issues as all part of the same picture.
Devolution has led Scotland down a different path from the rest of the UK with commitments to universal public services, no privatisation and free education. But "mitigating Britain" can't be our future. We are stuck with the unbalanced UK economy and every time Westminster cuts funding from public services, our budgets fall. You saw this recently where Scotland diverted money from other budgets to lessen the impact of the bedroom tax. Scotland is already halfway towards being a different kind of nation. Independence is an opportunity to try and complete the job.
Civil and criminal courts are already within the competence of the Scottish parliament, and Scotland's prison service is separate from England's, so there's no reason for much to change immediately in the realm of criminal justice. However, if we acquire wider powers in relation to social security this might have an impact on criminal justice issues. The reason many people end up in Scottish prisons is tied to poverty. Decisions about how people on benefits are dealt with - benefits being suspended or stopped, for example - affect offending rates. Independence offers greater scope for joined-up government, for welfare policy decisions to be taken in a specific Scottish context rather than being decided by Westminster.
Interviews by Saba Salman
Captions:
Children in Easterhouse, Glasgow; a bedroom tax protester; and a drinker enjoying a pint in a Glasgow pub Photographs: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images; Murdo MacLeod; Alan Gardner
Document GRDN000020140311ea3c0009x
