{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"2103"}
____
  
News
Labour has the big vision for a better Britain
585 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; Ulster
23
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
ED MILIBAND ARGUES WHY LABOUR SHOULD GET YOUR VOTE...
IN the elections on Thursday, we have the chance to show Britain can be better than this.
I know there is deep discontent about problems that go deeper than politics and have lasted longer than just one government.
Millions of families are stuck in the worst costof-living crisis anyone can remember.
Families are worried about bills going through are worried about bills going through fthe roof, wages that don't cover bills, and what the future holds for them and their children.
I know people are asking if any political party and any leader has answers, or a vision big enough, to meet the scale of the challenges ahead.
Labour does. I do. We offer real changes on housing, so that there is a fairer deal for those who rent and there are more homes for people to buy.
Real changes to wages and taxes, so that hard work always pays.
Real changes to jobs, so that people aren't stuck on zero hours or low pay.
Real changes to Europe and rules on immigration, so that it works for working Britain.
And real changes on gas and electricity with a price freeze, so families can better make ends meet.
I hope you will support us on Thursday.
AND ANSWERS SIX KEY QUESTIONS FROM THE QWhat is the appeal of Nigel Farage and F UKIP to those Labour voters who will support him this week? Would you go for a pint with him? AI would have a pint with Nigel Farage - to tell him he is wrong. He promises tax cuts for the rich and massive tax rises for everyone else. He would charge to visit a GP. He would strip away basic rights at work including maternity pay. And he pretends we can leave Europe without destroying millions of jobs.
QYou must be worried Labour's lead in the polls You must be worried Labour's lead in the polls Yhas shrunk drastically. ¦ Are you to blame? APolls go up and down. But most people don't worry about polls. They just know whether they're up or down in their real-life struggle.
QHow can you address inequality when half of UK wealth is owned by the richest 10 per cent? wealth is owned by the richest 10 per cent? ABy making the big changes Britain needs: Reforming our banks, revolutionising education and training for the forgotten 50 per cent who don't go to university and ensuring greater fairness in our economy.
QWhat do you make of the poisonous feud that has erupted between David Cameron and Nick Clegg and their allies over issues like education? AThey both signed up to policies which are draining money out of schools to pay for their pet projects. They are like two peas in a pod.
QYou have admitted that you have made You have admitted that you have made Ymistakes on immigration. How would you do things differently if you were PM? ABetter border checks, longer controls on new countries joining Europe, restricting rights to benefits when people come here, stopping recruitment agencies hiring only from abroad and - most importantly - tackling the exploitative practices like low pay and zero-hours contracts that lead to the undercutting of wages and conditions of workers already here.
QIn four words, why should anyone vote Labour in the local and Euro elections this week? can do better.
ABritain
Document SMIRR00020140518ea5i000hi
