{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"2055"}
____
  
Observer Home News Pages
Ukip candidate backed policy of voluntary repatriation
by Daniel Boffey and Lucy Fisher   
346 words
18 May 2014
The Observer
OB
4
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
The Ukip candidate in a crucial byelection next month is facing fresh controversy after it emerged he has defended the policy of voluntary repatriation of immigrants from Britain.
Roger Helmer, an MEP for Nigel Farage's party who is standing in the Newark byelection, wrote in a book published in 2002 that he could not understand the vehement opposition to the policy within mainstream parties. Voluntary repatriation, in which legal immigrants are given financial assistance to leave the UK, was supported at the last election only by the BNP. The last time the policy was accepted by a mainstream party was in 1970, when it was a cause of the Tory MP Enoch Powell and featured in his party's manifesto.
Helmer has previously provoked controversy for defending those who find homosexuality "distasteful, if not viscerally repugnant". He has also been criticised for suggesting women should bear some responsibility for date rape in certain circumstances.
The emergence of his comments on voluntary repatriation will inevitably raise fresh questions about Farage's party after a series of council election candidates were exposed for holding racist or Islamophobic views. On Friday, Farage's spin doctor attempted to halt a live radio interview as the Ukip leader struggled with questions over Romanian immigrants.
In his book, A Declaration of Independence, Helmer wrote: "I was surprised by the vehemence with which some party spokesmen attacked the concept of voluntary repatriation. It was described in the most intemperate language - 'abhorrent' was one of the milder words used. I have even seen the idea of voluntary repatriation compared to ethnic cleansing. This is a lunatic comparison."
In an interview with the Observer, Helmer also admitted that while those in the public eye are "obliged to take care with the sort of language we use", he "would be extremely upset if the BBC fired" Jeremy Clarkson, following the emergence of a Top Gear outtake in which the presenter was heard to use a racially offensive term.
Document OB00000020140519ea5i00025
