{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3027"}
____
  
NEWS
First Minister's Questions: live
By Ben Riley-Smith Scottish Political Reporter   
1,781 words
8 May 2014
17:52
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Read minute-by-minute coverage as Alex Salmond, the First Minister, faces questions from the opposition in Holyrood.
* Salmond announces Scotland to pilot 'Clare's Law' to tackle domestic abuse
* All three opposition leaders challenge Salmond over A&E waiting times spike
* Johann Lamont attacks Salmond for "complacent" response to news
* Ruth Davidson calls on First Minister to take "responsibility" for decline
* Salmond cites recent NHS investment and attacks Labour's healthcare record
13.00 Early thoughts on FMQs? Here's a quick take.
Who gets the blame? Today was all about A&E stats. A quick look at the figures - revealed in an Audit Scotland report and heavily covered by today's papers - gives you a sense why.
The key stats: The number of Scots forced to wait more than four hours in A&E has almost trebled in five years (up from 36,000 to 104,000); The average A&E waiting time has shot up by almost 30 minutes over the same period; The Government is now further away from hitting its 98 per cent four-hour target than before the election. (Read a full report here .)
Politicians from across the divide have said more needs to be done. But the nub of the issue in purely political terms, as today's FMQs showed, is who gets the blame.
Opposition leaders were catagorical: the latest deterioration happened under the SNP's watch, it deserves to shoulder the "responsibility" (to use Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader's word).
Alex Salmond's rebuttal was twofold: Action taken last year (and a £50 million investment) has helped turn the corner, plus this was a mess inherited from Labour and made worse by Coalition cuts.
There is evidence in the Audit Scotland report that A&E statistics have improved (albeit only a little) over the last 12 months. But is it enough, and shouldn't more be done?
The Scottish Government is lagging behind both its original aim of dealing with 98 per cent of A&E patients within four hours and an interim target of 95 per cent created last year. Riding out this row without taking on any political damage would be quite a feat.
12.45 Here's a selection of reaction from journalists and spin doctors. (All to be taken with a pinch of salt...)
Twitter: alexmassie - Weekly: "Does the First Minister agree independence would be great & the answer to every problem?" question. Astonishgly FM says Yes. #fmqs
Twitter: Peter MacMahon - @AlexSalmond "We'll respond to crisis (in NHS) by investing more" and will be a public service unlike he says, England under Tories #fmqs
Twitter: Scot Lib Dems - . @willie_rennie : the only way people can avoid continuing care charges is to stay in hospital #fmqs
Twitter: The SNP - FM: "We are committed not to fragment or privatise our Health Service - like is happening in England. #FMQ#NHS
12.31 FIRST MINISTER'S QUESTIONS ENDS
12.29 Salmond is asked whether the Government will take its legal battle over minimum alcohol pricing to the European Union. (The flagship SNP social policy has been delayed due to a legal challenge from the Scotch Whisky Association, with a ruling last week referring the case to Europe.)
Salmond points to the policy's successful implementation abroad and says introducing a minimum price for alcohol in Scotland will "help save lives".
12.27 Salmond uses a question about the economy to have a dig at Better Together, the pro-UK campaign. He says the financial crisis was "produced by Alistair Darling" – head of Better Together – and the last Labour Government.
12.23 The First Minister is asked about increased population growth. Salmond says the rise is "very welcome indeed". He adds that Westminster has overseen stunted population growth in Scotland.
Salmond says he can't think of "anything dafter" than educating young people and then denying them the chance to work and thrive.
12.20 Willie Rennie, the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader,cites Audit Scotland's finding that there is a link between spiking A&E waiting times and a lack of hospital beds. He says the number of hospital beds has declined under the SNP.
Salmond says it needs to be acknowledged that more people than ever are visiting A&E, which puts understandable pressure on the health service.
12.19 Davidson also links the A&E stats to the independence vote, asking if Salmond has been "so busy with the referendum" that these changes happened by "accident".
Salmond responds that the SNP is "committed not to fragment and privatise" the NHS, unlike the Coalition. He says facing attacks over NHS management from a Tory "beggars belief".
12.13 Ruth Davison, the Scottish Tory leader, also begins her questioning with the A&E stats. She says this "failure" lands "squarely on the First Minister's desk" and calls on him to take "responsibility".
12.12 Salmond announces that the Scottish Government is to pilot its own 'Clare's Law' to tackle domestic violence. (It is believed the scheme will allow Scots to find out from police whether their partner has a history of domestic violence. England and Wales have already rolled out a similar scheme)
12.11 Salmond says the issue is being treated with the "utmost seriousness". He says there are "more staff, more doctors, more nurses" in the NHS since the SNP took office in 2007. He says it is "entirely reasonable" to cite such information.
12.10 Lamont links the A&E statistics to the independence debate, noting that waiting time targets won't be reconsidered until after September 2014 (the month of the vote). Does Salmond value independence over the country's health service, Lamont asks.
Salmond points to Labour's NHS performance in Wales. Calls on Lamont to stop trying to "rewrite the dismal history of their administration".
12.07 "The degree of complacency in that response is staggering," Lamont says. She accuses Salmond of returning to his "comfort zone" rather than responding to what patients and staff are saying.
Salmond rejects claims of complacency. He calls on Lamont to defend her own party's record when Labour held office before 2007. Salmond says back then the number of patients being seen within four hours slipped to 87 per cent – well below the current rate of around 93 per cent.
12.04 Lamont quotes a medical expert saying the NHS is in the worst state it has ever been. She points to the fact that more than 100,000 Scots had to wait more than four hours to be seen in A&E last year – almost triple the 2008/09 figure of 34,000.
Salmond again defends his NHS record and points to signs that a corner has been turned in recent months.
12.02 Johann Lamont begins on A&E stats. She says the Scottish Government is both missing the original waiting times target and a newly lowered one.
Hospitals are told to aim to deal with 98 per cent of A&E attendees within four hours. The SNP created an interim target of 95 per cent last year. In 2012/13 Scotland's NHS performance was well below both targets. (Full background here .)
Alex Salmond says there has been improvement over the last year.
12.00 FIRST MINISTER'S QUESTIONS BEGINS
11.55 Chris and Colin Weir,Scotland's biggest lottery winners who have given millions to the independence campaign, today issued a call for all sides to improve the tone of the independence debate. Here's a section of the letter they wrote to The Scotsman. (Full story here .)
On September 19, irrespective of the outcome, we all have to live together. That will only be possible if both sides of the campaign, the politicians and the media, take -responsibility for their behaviour and language in the next few months.
They are the ones who will steer Scotland through this challenging period – we can't have the possibility of leaving our country fragmented.
So it is time for all sides to stop the smears and personal attacks before a line is crossed and attitudes adopted that cannot easily be healed. No one – on any side – should be vilified for the views they hold, lest our democracy become the victim of the present debate.
11.45 Good morning and welcome to another round of First Minister's Questions – Scotland's version of PMQs.
It's been a mixed bag in Scottish politics this week, with the independence debate taking a back-seat role as the European Union election campaigns gets going in earnest.
The Scottish Tories launched their campaign on Tuesday, looking to keep their only MEP seat by framing themselves as the only party that can deliver an In/Out referendum on EU membership. Ruth Davidson, Scottish Tory leader, drew comparisons between Alex Salmond and Nigel Farage – they both use "anti-Westminster rhetoric" to win votes, apparently – and claimed a majority of Scots were on the party's side on issues like Europe and immigration.
(The party is also taking the unusual step of specifically linking the independence referendum to the EU vote, appearing on the ballot paper as "Scottish Conservatives – No to Independence". Part of a strategy to convert resurgent Unionist enthusiasm into Tory election support, perhaps?)
On the independence front, new lines emerged on a number of familiar themes. Moody's, the credit rating agency, issued a scathing assessment of an independent Scotland's credit position on Friday. The country would at best start life after a Yes vote two notches below the UK on the credit rating scale, Moody's found – a similar level to China, Bermuda, Taiwan and the Cayman Islands.
The row over a currency union continues to rumble on, with one survey finding just 35 per cent of businesses south of the border think Scotland should share the pound after independence . Impartiality of the civil service also made headlines again, when Sir Peter Housden – Scotland's top mandarin – denied to a Commons committee he was a "cheerleader" for independence, while cybernats are also back in the spotlight .
But this afternoon's session could be dominated by a domestic issue – the alarming spike in A&E waiting times . The number of Scots having to wait more than four hours to be seen has tripled in five years, with the average delay also increasing by almost 30 minutes.
All that and more when FMQs begins at noon.
Click to enlarge: Voters share their views on Scottish independence 
Document TELUK00020140508ea58002uz
