{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2276"}
____
  
News
World Cup alert over migrant fan violence
David Brown; Emily Handley   
426 words
21 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
13
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Police have been told to gather intelligence on areas where immigrant communities gather amid warnings of violence and hooliganism during the World Cup.
Forces across the country have been told for the first time to draw up contingency plans to deal with violence from foreign fans with a "similar drinking culture" to England supporters.
Officers have been told to identify pubs and clubs where foreign supporters congregate and ensure that they have sufficient officers on duty to respond to outbreaks of violence during or at the end of matches.
Fans travelling to Brazil this summer were also told to watch out for attacks by Argentina fans "given our shared history".
The warning from the Association of Chief Police Officers (Acpo) comes after violence from foreign fans, including Poland supporters in Lincolnshire, during the Euro 2012 championship. No England fans were arrested in Ukraine but hundreds of football supporters, including foreign fans, were arrested at home.
Deputy Chief Constable Andy Holt, Acpo's lead officer on football policing, said: "We have written to all forces saying be aware of communities in your area that are playing in the World Cup because they need policing. It is not just England fans; it is all the countries that have people based in the UK." Mr Holt identified London as "a real melting pot" and said there were other areas with large populations from countries involved in the World Cup.
The contingency plans are likely to include matches involving Russia, which could lead to clashes with supporters of eastern European teams, such as Poland and Ukraine, not involved in the competition. Other matches likely to be considered a possible risk involve Croatia, Bosnia, Spain, Portugal, Brazil and Argentina.
David Cameron overruled Home Office objections and allowed pubs to stay open late during England matches starting after 8pm. Senior police officers recommended that pubs should be required to get special licences.
The Brazilian authorities have also warned British police about the risk to England fans from hooligans from neighbouring Argentina. Warnings about the presence of violent Argentina fans will be sent to England supporters by text messages and over Twitter and Facebook.
Mr Holt said he did not believe the Brazilian authorities knew how many Argentina fans would be arriving for the World Cup.
Supporters will also be advised about large-scale political demonstrations involving up to 200,000 protesters, which are considered the main risk to the estimated 5,000 to 10,000 England fans travelling to Brazil.
Document T000000020140521ea5l000ax
