{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1080"}
____
  
Why is Britain such a bad place to be a mother?
By Sally Peck   
885 words
7 May 2014
10:35
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
David Cameron may think the Tories are 'underselling' the work they've done for women but, as the UK comes joint-26th place with Belarus in the World Mothers Index, Sally Peck offers a prescription for a better Britain: good childcare, more female MPs, and income equality.
1. Top-quality state-funded childcare
2. Income inequality
3. Political participation
4. Maternal health
Proper choices for women in Britain
David Cameronhas asked his MPs to unleash a PR offensive on women, to boast of the advancements the Conservative Party has made in the battle for gender equality.
Unfortunately for the Prime Minister, his call came a day after Britain was ranked joint 26th in the World Mothers Index with Belarus .
The UK has the sixth largest economy in the world, in terms of GDP. Belarus is ranked 67th. It is outrageous that we come so far behind when measuring the prospects of our women and children. Angry commenters online like to blame this on immigration. But our problems are universal; it's not a case of one community or another bringing overall rates down.
As a mother-of-two here are the four things I believe have to happen to make Britain a better place to be a mother:
</br>The UK simply does not have this. Countries awarded top rankings in the World Mothers Index – Finland, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, the Netherlands, Denmark and Germany – all offer high-quality childcare to all families. And the offer is taken up.
In Britain, nursery provision starts at age three, when children are offered 15 hours a week at an incredible range of (sometimes incredibly bad) facilities. Standards in early years development must improve, and the way to do that is through well-thought-out programmes emphasising exploration and learning through play, not ridiculous pre-school programmes aimed at stuffing young minds into structured learning before they are ready.
The first five years of life, and especially the first two, are crucial in brain development. We are missing a major trick in Britain. In Finland, which ranked first in the World Mothers Index, families have access to free universal daycare for children aged eight months to five years. This has been in place since 1990. Early childhood education is not mandatory in Finland, but it is taken up by almost everyone.
</br>I thoroughly enjoyed Isabel Hardman窶冱 piece in this week’s Spectator. British men are falling behind, and it’s interesting to note how. Read it, if you haven’t. But even if male cleaners in Swansea were unfairly paid less than their female counterparts, as Hardman points out: “In modern Britain, girls are beating the boys at every stage of life – right up until they leave the workplace to have children.” And then women fall far, and irreversibly, behind. David Cameron may be proud of new figures suggesting that the gender pay gap has fallen since 2010. But in terms of pay and status at work, Britain has lingered for far too long in the 1950s. The gender pay gap stands at 15 per cent, with the disparity even wider in part-time jobs – and, of course, many mothers work part-time.
</br>We’re just average in Britain when it comes to female participation in government. In 2010, 143 women were elected as MPs, making up 22 per cent of the 650 total. Globally, women account for about 20 per cent of parliamentary seats, up from 15 per cent about a decade ago. Nearly a quarter of a century after the exit of Margaret Thatcher, who many see as one of Britain’s greatest modern leaders, why is that still the case?
</br>As many women die in childbirth in Britain today as did 20 years ago – and we’re 23rd on the global league table, according to a 2010 study in the medical journal Lancet . This means that rates of maternal mortality in the UK trail behind countries including Albania, Poland and Slovakia, as well as wealthier European countries. Encouragingly, a more recent studyfound that overall rates of mortality have decreased in Britain, and that for the first time there has been a reduction in the inequalities gap, with a significant reduction in mortality rates among those living in the poorest areas of the nation.
But still, there is more to do.
</br>If we don't change the prospects of women in the country, we will continue to lag far behind our northern European neighbours in terms of the prospects for women.
My daughter is two. In 20 years, I hope that she lives in a country that offers her as many choices as it offers its men.
I would like her to grow up in a country that is dedicated to having more women in government. Do we need quotas? No. But we need more than 20 per cent of our parliamentarians to be women.
Must all children go to a state-run nursery? No. But every study I have seen shows that high-quality early years support for families helps all children.
If we don't prioritise women's lives in Britain, we will continue to slip further and further down the global league tables.
Document TELUK00020140507ea570013f
