{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3697"}
____
  
News
THE SCOTTISH Sun Kick politicians in the ballots
THE SCOTTISH Sun   
395 words
22 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
10
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
CAN you name your Euro MP? We're betting not. Let's face it, who can? Another question: Did you know there's a Euro election today at a polling station near you? No? Don't worry. You won't be alone. Few outside Westminster care what happens. It doesn't much affect Britain. The Brussels gravy train will keep rolling.
But it is significant and useful in one respect. No one likes politicians. Not since the expenses scandal. No one believes a word they say.
And there are specific reasons to loathe all the main parties.
You may hate Labour for borrowing vast sums, spending it like drunks, negligently exposing our economy to the full wrath of the global recession and then refusing to apologise for it.
You may hate them for letting millions of immigrants into Britain without a thought for schools, hospitals, transport and housing.
You may hate the Tories for agreeing with much of Labour's spending back then, and the apparent unfairness of some cuts they've made to balance the books.
Treachery You may hate the Lib Dems for ditching the principles that bought them votes in 2010, and for their self-serving treachery in coalition.
You may hate the SNP because they want to break up the UK without properly convincing you yet how they will make it work.
The most obvious way to give them a kicking is to vote Ukip. Many will.
Even north of the Border, where they have failed to set the heather alight, the SNP admit they are in a straight fight with Ukip for the sixth and final Scottish seat.
But we don't urge you to back Nigel Farage and co.
We have grave doubts about the apparently limitless extremists among the party's supporters and candidates — and Mr Farage's inability to weed them out. To say nothing of his own remarks.
It's rare for The Scottish Sun to endorse no one at an election. Today that is what we do.
It doesn't matter which candidate you put your cross by. But get the anger out of your system.
There are bigger issues ahead, not least the referendum then the Westminster election next year.
To make the right choices then, you'll need a cool head.
Document THESUN0020140522ea5m000fb
