{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1013"}
____
  
News
Farage admits he was wrong over race row
Sam Coates   
424 words
19 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage admitted last night that he was wrong to say that he would be uncomfortable if Romanians moved next door after his party spent 48 hours vigorously defending the remark.
Ukip said yesterday that "any normal and fair-minded person would have a perfect right to be concerned if a group of Romanian people suddenly moved in next door".
Last night, however, in a sign of the chaos inside the party, Mr Farage backtracked. "I regret the fact that I was completely tired out. I didn't use the form of words that I would have liked to have used. I should have hit back immediately and said 'look, understand there is a real problem here'. You can't deny it. Too much criminality from those gangs from Romania has come to London. I could have been clearer. But you know what, in life, sometimes we get things wrong," he told ITV News.
Ed Miliband baffled some party figures yesterday when he sought to make a nuanced judgment about the Ukip leader's comments during an interview on the radio station LBC. The Labour leader said that he did not believe that Mr Farage was a racist, but he thought that the comment amounted to a racist slur. He suggested that he was tempering his language about Mr Farage as part of a political strategy, adding: "I have been careful not to characterise [him] personally as a racist." Mr Miliband's remark prompted Mark Ferguson, editor of the influential LabourList blog, to tweet: "Miliband desperately trying not to call Farage a racist. If it walks like a racist and talks like a racist ... " Mr Farage's party could top the poll in Thursday's elections to the European parliament. A poll for ComRes put Ukip ahead, while two other polls, for You-Gov and ICM, had Labour in front.
Nick Clegg went further than Mr Miliband but also stopped short of calling Mr Farage a racist. The deputy prime minister told The Andrew Marr Show on BBC One: "I think the mask is starting to slip and I think what's being revealed ... behind the beer-swilling bonhomie is a rather nasty view of the world."
The Conservative culture secretary, who is the son of Pakistani immigrants, said that immigrants needed to learn English and to "respect our way of life". Sajid Javid said that people were entitled to expect that immigrants made a contribution to society.
Matt Ridley, Opinion, page 25
Document T000000020140519ea5j000af
