{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2621"}
____
  
Business
The Government must welcome tourists for the sake of the economy
444 words
19 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
2
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
To some, tourism in Britain might evoke slightly corny images of fish and chips by the seaside and open–top bus tours around London but it's big business, as emphasised by a report published today from the World Travel & Tourism Council.
It's such big business, in fact, that it accounts for 10.5pc of the UK's total GDP if you include the benefits to the supply chain. That makes it bigger than industries such as car manufacturing and higher education, according to the WTTC. Why then does it receive so little political support and encouragement compared with its counterparts?
Before the Chancellor steps up to the despatch box this morning to deliver a Budget "to boost business", the WTTC has sent a sharp reminder to Mr Osborne that the Government consistently underestimates an industry which accounts for more than a tenth of this country's income and, crucially, is a major source of jobs for young people.
Pleas to lower or freeze Air Passenger Duty, a tax applied to all departures from a UK airport, have fallen on deaf ears, even though Britain has been ranked by the World Economic Forum 138th out of 139 when it comes to the competitiveness of its air travel taxes and airport fees. Only Chad in Africa fared worse.
Calls from businesses to improve Britain's visa processing regime for Chinese tourists – who spend more than any other global travellers according to the UN World Tourism Organisation – have resulted in some welcome reforms, but they are still limited in scope.
Moreover, the WTTC believes there is still too much tension in Whitehall between policymakers focused on immigration and those who understand overzealous visa policies are putting off perfectly legitimate visitors who want to come here to spend their money in the boutiques of Bond Street and return home again.
The tourism industry may not offer ministers the same enticing photo opportunities as other sectors, such as car manufacturing, but with a global value of $7trillion (£4.2trillion), the Government ignores entreaties to ease the restrictions on tourist–based businesses at its peril.
As Harrods managing director Michael Ward pointed out in these pages last Saturday, the UK does too little to make the tourist's experience a pleasant one. By focusing on improving the experience at both ends of the journey – easing visa requirements and making the task of reclaiming VAT less of an ordeal – the Government could take on European competitors and beat them.
If the UK is open for business it needs to show it.
Document DT00000020140319ea3j0000u
