{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"1108"}
____
  
News
'aving it large with MC Clegg at the Ministry
DONALD MACINTYRE   
519 words
7 May 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
10,11
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News | Sketch
As we emerged blinking from the darkness of the Ministry of Sound, it was hard not to believe that we had been dreaming.
In so far as there is a Liberal Democrat nightclub, this is it, made available for their local elections launch by Lord Palumbo, the party donor ennobled last year. Whether the dance floor is at its thrilling best at 11am is more doubtful. Trance music is a club speciality and a trance is what everyone seemed to be in. Some young activists had stood around sipping juice before the event like reluctant participants in a singles' party, and then applauded politely when Clegg's short speech was over. There were no questions; no ecstasy (in either sense) and no Vince Cable.
An amiable man called Austin Rathe had earlier said his job as "head of members and supporters" was a "good place to be at the moment". But hang on Austin, you cannot be serious! With the polls showing the party at 9 per cent and possibly losing all its European Parliament seats, isn't it a perfectly dreadful place to be? Ah, no. While people may not be voting for the party they are joining it. At the rate of 1,000 per month! Then Austin rather spoilt things by reading out reasons given by the new recruits. "It looked like you needed the help". And, "I've joined everyone else so now it's your turn". And, "The wife".
This showed, of course, that the Lib Dems are grown-up enough not to pretend everything is hunky-dory. Nick Clegg said that the Lib Dems were the one party which didn't take its supporters "for granted". Which isn't hard since there are so few of them.
Beside castigating Labour and Tory councils for their wastefulness, he pointed to the party's steadfast adherence to "unfashionable causes" like the environment and overseas aid. The party supported "all of these", he proclaimed. (Except that there were only two.)
The warm-up had been a naffly amateurish version of Play Your Cards Right, the 1980s game show which wasn't even that riveting when compered by Bruce Forsyth. Austin said it was the press office's idea and that it was a bit of mystery to him why they were doing it. Nevertheless he valiantly persuaded the contestants to guess the scale of various council money-wasting atrocities outlined on giant playing cards. While £26,000 may seem a lot for Labour Slough to spend on "a spy plane with heat-sensitive cameras to find illegal immigrants", maybe that's just the ticket for seeing off Ukip. And the "motivational magician" on which the Tory Cotswold council spent £19,000, is exactly what the Lib Dems now need.
The MP Duncan Hames was present with his infant son, Andrew, in a baby sling. Many decades hence, will Andrew Hames be able to dine out on his presence at one of the first events marking The (second) Strange Death of Liberal England?
Document IND0000020140507ea570000i
