{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"111"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: Theatre: A View from the Bridge Liverpool Playhouse 32/40
350 words
3 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
36
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The one place that A View from the Bridge truly belongs is the hardscrabble Brooklyn neighbourhood of Red Hook - in the words of the lawyer Alfieri, "the gullet of New York, swallowing the tonnage of the world". But if there's a second place, it might be Liverpool, with its close families, its Catholicism and the waterfront from where so many of the immigrants depicted in Arthur Miller's play embarked.
The power of Charlotte Gwinner's production rises, like steam from the sidewalk, through a close observation of community. It's clear that the gullet of America has a rough bite of Sicily stuck in its throat. It is a place of fierce loyalties and even fiercer vendetta, a territory containing too many men and not enough work.
Miller's protagonist, Eddie Carbone, is a sorrowful example of what happens when you overstep the line in such a society. Alfieri foresees it all, "like walking down a darkened passage towards a particular door". The presence of this choric figure (sagaciously played by Bruce Alexander) makes clear Miller's intent to issue Greek tragedy with a pair of dockers' dirty work boots, and Lloyd Hutchinson's hugely impressive Eddie has the implacable fate of the tragic hero, but none of the eloquence to assuage it. It's both funny and horrifying to watch him attempt to put a meaty finger on what disturbs him about his niece Catherine's fiance - the blond hair? The tenor voice? His dress-making skills? - before spreading his cracked palms and conclusively declaring: "The guy ain't right."
Andy Apollo is blithely provocative as the offensively blond Rodolpho; so too is Shannon Tarbet as the guileless Catherine, whose sexuality seems to have sprung upon her one morning as she was applying her makeup. Gwinner's production has been made possible through the Quercus award, which gives a career lift to promising directors. On this showing, it's money very well spent.
Alfred Hickling
Until 19 April. Box office: 0151-709 4776.
Document GRDN000020140402ea430009q
