{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2999"}
____
  
News
Ethnic minority voters will flock to Ukip, says Farage
Laura Pitel   
603 words
9 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ethnic minority voters will flock to Ukip in the next five years, Nigel Farage predicts today as he says that his party "means what it says" when it declares that it is not racist.
In a bold claim, the Ukip leader says that his party will be twice as popular as the Conservatives among non-white voters by 2019. Writing in The Times, he argues that Tories are lagging with black and Asian voters because they are seen as "a snooty party of and for the establishment".
Despite a slew of stories about racist and offensive remarks by Ukip candidates, Mr Farage insists that his party "does not carry such baggage."
He repeats his belief that an event this week with 50 ethnic minority members was a "Clause Four" moment for the party and says that he has witnessed "a surge of support" from non-white communities in recent months. Mr Farage stakes his own claim to be part of the fabric of multicultural Britain, citing Huguenot ancestors who came to the UK from France more than 300 years ago.
David Cameron admitted yesterday that his party would have a "tough" time appealing to voters in this month's European election, with Ukip jostling for first place. However, he said that Britain needed "a sensible, grown-up set of policies and debate rather than a set of slogans with no answers" and claimed that Mr Farage posed a threat to the economy.
While Mr Farage has the potential to deprive the prime minister of a second term in office at next year's general election, Ukip must make huge strides if it is to come close to overtaking the Tories among black and Asian Britons.
The Conservatives polled 36 per cent nationally at the 2010 election, but just 16 per cent among non-white voters. However, research has shown that 99.4 per cent of Ukip's supporters are white. By contrast, 14 per cent of Britons are from non-white backgrounds.
Sunder Katwala, director of the thinktank British Future, said that Mr Farage had "a long way to go" to broaden his party's appeal. "It's welcome that he feels he needs to say that and wants to reach out. But the agenda he's had so far hasn't appealed to minority Britons at all except in very small numbers," he added. All three of the big parties have been reluctant to criticise Ukip's warnings on immigration, conscious of the danger of alienating voters who already feel marginalised from mainstream politics.
Matthew Goodwin, an academic and author of a new book on Ukip, said that its supporters were quite distinct from those who backed the far-right BNP.
He added that six out of ten of the party's voters agreed that non-white Britons were just as British as their white counterparts. "A clear majority of Ukip's electorate, at least in surveys, will distance themselves from the forms of prejudice that BNP supporters might endorse," he said. "This is the first time that British politics has faced a significant radical right challenger that is not very easy to simply discredit as a racist outsider."
A different 2011 study of Ukip supporters, however, showed that they were less tolerant towards migrants, Muslims and ethnic minorities than those who backed Labour, the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats. Ukip continues to be plagued by embarrassing candidates, such as the would-be councillor who said that the comedian Lenny Henry "should emigrate to a black country".
Nigel Farage, page 26
Document T000000020140509ea59000be
