{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3502"}
____
  
Guardian Features Pages
G2: Hideously Diverse Britain: Who does the NHS really belong to?
Hugh Muir   
419 words
21 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
11
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
It's a refrain of this column that we should be having a more meaningful conversation about diversity, and the hot topic of the day: migration. But it's difficult. Well-meaning folk fight shy of talking about the subject because what they say gets twisted. Who wants to jump into a poisoned well?
Perhaps that is why the Sun handled its feature on migrant births at the Homerton hospital in east London as it did? It didn't tell the hospital the feature, over two pages, was going to be about migrant births and the pressures on the NHS. It didn't tell the hospital there would be any nationality or citizenship element to the piece at all. And it certainly didn't tell hard-pressed staff, who generously gave time and attention, and the patients, pictured with their newborns, that drawn from their contributions would be a thundering Sun leader piece.
"The huge influx of immigrants to Britain in the last 13 years has put overwhelming strain on our public services," it said. "Not all negative," it conceded. Many staff are migrants and "work heroically". But the cultural and language barriers are "almost insurmountable". There was a political dig at Labour; the architects, it said, of both a booming migrant population and austerity. How much more can staff and "the health service we all fund stand"?
Would the hospital have collaborated with a migrant bash? Hardly. It was told the idea was a day in the life of a maternity ward. The hospital had no idea it would be dragged into the political arena. "Surprised and extremely disappointed with the tone of the coverage", it has complained.
That's not to suggest those anxious about the scale of migration have no right to critique the phenomenon or monitor its effects. "We were very clear in the piece that the staff and hospital do an excellent job under often difficult circumstances," a Sun spokesman told us. "As a newspaper, we must be entitled to publish our reasonable view of the NHS and the challenges it undoubtedly faces." But perhaps this is why those who might provide context and detail are so often wary.
And here's another thought. If migrants arrive, work and pay tax, as the paper concedes the vast majority do, aren't they are paying for the NHS, like everyone else? On that basis, isn't it also theirs?
Document GRDN000020140421ea4l0000f
