{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3337"}
____
  
News
SO AREN'T YOU JUST A ONE-MAN BAND?
661 words
14 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
2; National
18,19
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
HERE'S what floating voter Grant Davis asked Nigel Farage yesterday: Q You have a much higher profile than your party colleagues. Isn't Ukip just a one-man band?
A Of course I'm the dominant figure in Ukip, but we are seeing more faces on telly. After these elections, I'm going to appoint some of our newly-elected people. I'm going to put someone in charge of immigration and jobs, someone in charge of energy. I'm going to pick the team and give them the responsibility. I'm not going to take a back seat, but I'll leave them to get on with it.
Q Are you worried that in 2015 you might see a bit of a collapse like you did in 2004 and 2009?
A In the past we did well in Euros and not so good in Generals. But over half the people who vote Ukip next week now call themselves Ukip voters — so there's a hardening of the base. But the first-past-the-post system is brutally cruel to smaller parties.
We've got to box clever and target seats that we realistically can win.
People say Ukip is a racist party.
QHow do you combat that?
A That's what the establishment want you to think. No other European country has such good relations with former colonies. We've always had elements of immigration.
Q Would you ever do a deal with the French National Front?
A No, that'll never happen. During this campaign we've had a few idiots, although no more than the others have got. I did a meeting last week and invited our black and ethnic candidates on stage. We've got lots of people from all those backgrounds who say: "We're British".
Q You have taken a lot of stick from the other parties — they said you're spending £3,000 of your allowance on energy bills. Are they trouble making?
A They wanted to drag me into the mire. All I've done is take allowances the EU gives me every month to fund me running an office and being on the road to fight against EU membership. While the EU aren't very keen on that, I do it just within the limit of the rules.
Q Do you think it's time for us to have an immigration policy like in Australia where you have to meet criteria to get in?
A Yes. You have to be under 45, have a trade or a skill, mustn't have a terminal illness and mustn't have a criminal record. What we do now is discriminate against engineers from India and doctors from New Zealand in favour of unemployed people from Romania and Bulgaria. As a result of being EU members, we have an open door to 485million people.
Q When Labour were in power there was an open door immigration policy and now Ed Miliband is saying: "We made a mistake." What do you think of that?
A You can't just blame Ed Miliband because the Tories supported it too. I want people to use these elections to tell the establishment what they think. Our message couldn't be clearer — we want our country back, we want to control all our laws and start having a sensible immigration policy.
QUICKFIRE QUESTIONS: How much is a pint of milk in euros? Nigel: About 85 cents — but it'll be a litre. (Wrong — it's 1 euro).
How much is a litre of beer? Nigel: I don't drink beer over there because they only have lager.
How much is a baguette? Nigel: In the European Parliament about 3.50 euros. (Correct)
GRANT'S VERDICT: I was more impressed with Nigel than I thought I'd be. He's the type of guy you could imagine having a pint with.
Document THESUN0020140514ea5e000at
