{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3203"}
____
  
News
Gangsters use fake cards to fund huge airline ticket fraud
Sean O'Neill Crime   
547 words
10 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
8
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Almost 300,000 airline tickets a year are being bought across Europe with stolen credit cards, an investigation by Europol has revealed.
Flight fraud accounts for 11 per cent of all spending on counterfeited cards, at an estimated annual cost of £136 million.
Organised criminals are heavily involved, using fraudulent tickets to hide their identities when travelling to commit other offences, facilitating illegal immigration and setting up fake travel agencies to sell cut-price flights bought with bogus cards.
Officials say that the scale of the activity could mask a terrorist threat, with passengers sometimes facing stricter checks on their luggage than on who they really are.
Flight fraud has grown with the increase in online booking and the home printing of boarding passes, but the extent of it has only emerged through a joint operation involving police, credit card companies and airlines. A 48-hour campaign, which ended last night, involved police teams at 68 airports across 33 countries with 35 airlines taking part. Provisional figures suggested that 112 passengers had been arrested or detained for interview, but that number could rise.
British police teams were in action at Heathrow, Gatwick, Luton and Manchester airports, with a senior Metropolitan Police officer coordinating activity from Europol's operations room in The Hague.
Investigators say that analysis of flight fraud illustrates how organised crime groups are exploiting globalisation. "One fraudulent airline ticket is a local example of a not-so-serious offence, it's only when you have a concerted international operation that you can see the true scale of it," said Rob Wainwright, director of Europol, the EU police body.
Flight fraud has been hidden in part because of the reluctance of airlines and card companies to share data about losses with police and competitors.
Police in Britain and Romania were in contact on Tuesday to arrange the arrest of three suspected pickpockets using fraudulent tickets en route to Bucharest. Investigators thwarted a gang that commuted on fraudulent tickets between the Czech Republic and Ireland to commit benefit fraud.
Paul Gillen, Europol cybercrime operations head, said: "The indications are that the people using this data to travel are criminals who are carrying out other criminal activities."
Two arrests of passengers will trigger further inquiries into what appear to be bogus travel brokers. Detective Superintendent Ravern Stevens said: "The most valuable part of this operation will be finding out what sits behind this crime — is it being used for human trafficking or drug movements? Are ordinary people buying tickets from criminal brokers online?"
Britons are more likely than anyone else in Europe to have their personal finances disrupted by the crime because they hold 70 per cent of all European credit cards and account for 30 per cent of all spending on cards.
Card crime becoming easier
Credit card details are "skimmed", or copied, at bars or petrol stations, or hacked from businesses' computers and sold to criminals
Corporate cards and "gold cards" are of most value because high volumes of spending make the fraud harder to detect
The UK Cards Association says that card fraud in Britain rose by 16 per cent in 2013 to £450 million, largely owing to online crime
Document T000000020140410ea4a000ay
