{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3418"}
____
  
Features
Charles Marowitz
1,024 words
16 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
50
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Feisty American theatre director who shook up the 1960s London stage with nudity and reworked versions of Shakespeare
The American theatre director, critic and dramatist Charles Marowitz spent much of a notably adventurous and unconventional career in Britain.
His achievements included launching London's first important fringe theatre, the Open Space, and helping to make the playwright Joe Orton's name by staging a reworked version of his Loot, the mischievous comedy that had closed previously during a disastrous pre-London tour.
Notoriously he put a young Glenda Jackson on stage stripped naked. Appearing as a high-class prostitute, she was washed in a tin bath, dressed as a prisoner and ritually humiliated by elderly judges.
Marowitz spent his career doggedly pursuing experimental theatre — at first with the patronage and collaboration of Peter Brook — and was not afraid to rework Shakespeare, even adding his own dialogue. One reviewer described his methods as more akin to surgery than adaptation. As a critic in later life, he once declared, nothing in his contract said "I had to be a sweet fellow."
Tall, bearded and (he said) driven by "unmitigated arrogance", Marowitz had a Mephistophelean look and the charm, wit and devilry to go with it. He was swiftly known for his radical methods. The actress Liz Smith — later the star of The Royle Family — recalled joining the workshop he set up in London that specialised in improvisation: "He didn't pay us anything. We had no scripts or anything like that. We worked together for then a year before an audience was allowed near us. Soon word got about and audiences were queueing around the block. They'd shout a word and we'd do a play around it." He told one young playwright that he wrote like a geriatric, but his students revered him.
His disregard of the mainstream led him once to defend most furiously the work of underground buskers — "pockets of musical jubilation", he said, threatened by "corporation mentality".
Charles Marowitz was born in 1934 — although he often shaved a few years off his age — and raised in New York, the son of Polish-Jewish immigrants who worked in the garment industry. Early on he displayed a love of drama and, aged 17, formed a theatre company; he became, in his words, "the youngest and most intolerant critic" of the Village Voice, New York's alternative weekly.
When military service took him to France he was grateful to leave a mid-1950s America that he felt was "dominated by plasticity and conformity" and regarded him as "a red-pinko-liberalfellow-traveller."
Thanks to the GI Bill of Rights, which provided subsidised education for veterans, he moved to Britain and studied at Lamda. He restaged Loot, a play he thought matched Oscar Wilde for wit and outdid Wilde for craftsmanship, seeing it transfer to the West End and win major awards.
Such bold and startling work won the attention of Brook, who made Marowitz assistant director on one the century's great productions: a fiercely unsentimental Lear for the RSC, with Paul Scofield unforgettably powerful as the king. As Marowitz reported in his diary, he found himself murmuring "keep it in" when Scofield, infuriated by a clicking camera during a dress rehearsal, snarled like the mad Lear and threw his cloak at the unfortunate photographer.
Again with Brook, he then mounted the RSC's "Theatre of Cruelty" season, so-called in tribute to the subversive theories of Antonin Artaud. As well as the Glenda Jackson performance, the programme included performances of Marowitz's version of Hamlet, a collage version of the original designed to show the prince as "the supreme prototype of the conscience-stricken but paralysed liberal — one of the most lethal and obnoxious characters in modern times". It was the first of several similar reworkings of Shakespeare.
In a Tottenham Court Road basement he founded his Open Theatre in 1968 with Thelma Holt, now a leading London producer but then the theatre's manager, co-director and actress — "a witch and a miracle maker", Marowitz once said, who won sponsors and handed out vitamin tablets to actors.
A Times writer described the venue as "the size of two tennis courts with deep blue-painted brick walls and 800 egg boxes glued to the roof for improved acoustics". Here, Marowitz fulfilled his aim, which was to create "an aesthetically driven experimental theatre with a radical bias", by staging new work by dramatists who included Mike Leigh, Howard Brenton, Trevor Griffiths, Sam Shepard and Irving Wardle, then the theatre critic of The Times.
Indeed, the Open Space remained at the heart of London's burgeoning fringe until 1980, when it was terminally damaged by what became known as "the pink bathtub scandal". Marowitz, who had recently married the first of his two wives, was accused in the press of using theatre funds on a bathroom suite in their new flat. Though supported by his board in his denials, he declared himself disheartened and closed the Open Space.
Other notable and typically controversial productions included, in 1965, his adaptation of Marlowe's Faustus in Glasgow. It was cancelled after the first-night audience had taken its seats because he refused to remove a mask depicting the Queen from the actress playing the deadly sin, Sloth. In 1970 a showing of Andy Warhol's film, Flesh, resulted in 33 policemen raiding the Open Space, questions in Parliament but no prosecution and full houses for weeks.
Weary of what he called the "enthronement of mediocrity" in British theatre, Marowitz relocated to Malibu in 1981. He founded a theatre company in a disused church and married his second wife, the actress Jane Windsor-Marowitz, who survives him, as does their son, Kostya. Latterly, he had been suffering from Parkinson's disease.
He published collections of feisty criticism, books about theatrical theory and practice, and a characteristically outspoken memoir, Burnt Bridges, which he dedicated to 44 women who may and may not have been his lovers.
Charles Marowitz, theatre director and critic, was born on January 26, 1934. He died on May 2, 2014, aged 80
Document T000000020140516ea5g00052
