{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"163"}
____
  
FINANCE
Business news and markets: as it happened - April 3, 2014
By Olivia Goldhill and James Titcomb and Ben Martin   
4,293 words
3 April 2014
18:05
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
European Central Bank has discussed using QE and is willing to consider "all unconventional instruments", said President Mario Draghi
European markets close
Russia hikes gas prices for Ukraine by 8pc
US services growth acceleration slows
RBS cuts US first quarter GDP
Osborne's Budget questioned by Treasury Committee
UK services growth lowest for nine months
Mark Carney: Interest rates could rise before election
China stimulus fails to excite Chinese markets
Business agenda: What's on today
China takes new measures to boost economy
Today's business stories
Good morning
• Osborne questioned by Treasury Committee on Budget
• ECB has discussed using QE
• China takes new measures to boost economy
• Vodafone to open 150 new stores and create 1,400 jobs
Latest
Goodnight
16.59 That's where we'll leave it for today, thanks for reading. Go to our finance page for all other breaking updates.
</br>16.48 The FTSE has closed down 0.15pc at 6649.14. Meanwhile the DAX closed up 0.06pc, the CAC rose 0.42pc and the IBEX climbed 1.42pc.
16.47 Here's some more reaction to the Draghi conference from Eimear Daly, head of market analysis at Monex Europe.
Mario Draghi proved his market credibility once again at the April press conference, neglecting to announce new policy easing measures but duping markets into reacting as though he had. An impressive sleight of hand that eased the Euro and pulled money market rates lower.
Draghi stated the Governing Council was 'unanimous in its commitment' to using unconventional measures to tackle prolonged low inflation, and dangled various alternative policy options in front of the market. Although he maintained that deflation risks have not increased and that low inflation was chiefly due to external factors, Draghi is growing concerned that the Eurozone will be stuck in a vicious circle, where the longer inflation stays low, the more belief in deflation will grow.
Despite the heightened rhetoric around alternative policies from the ECB, these will remain nothing more than discussions. Money supply growth is recovering after being temporarily suppressed at the turn of the year and low inflation remains the result of exogenous global factors and not a deflation problem in the Eurozone itself.
</br>16.30 Russia increased the gas price for Ukraine for the second time in just three days to push prices up by 80pc, piling the pressure on an economy already on the brink of bankruptcy.
Ukraine, which has a new International Monetary Fund loan package to cushion some of the blow, dismissed the increase as politically motivated, saying the price was too high and that it should not have to pay for supplies at this level.
Moscow has frequently used energy as a political weapon in dealing with its neighbours, and European customers are concerned Russia might again cut off deliveries in the worst East-West stand-off since the Cold War over Crimea.
The head of Russia's top natural gas producer, Gazprom , Alexei Miller told Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev on Thursday that the price increase was due to the introduction of an export duty on gas.
"The gas price is increasing automatically from April," Miller said.
The latest rise will be to $485 per 1,000 cubic metres - two days after Gazprom announced a 44 percent hike in the gas price to $385.5 per 1,000 cubic metres from $268.5 due to unpaid bills.
Ukraine, which covers 50 percent of its gas needs with Russian supplies, condemned the move as politically motivated.
"The Ukrainian economy should not pay such a price for gas. It is a political price," Ukrainian Energy Minister Yuri Prodan told reporters in Kiev.
</br>15.53 Growth in the US services sector accelerated in March, though the pace of employment slackened for a third straight month to its slowest in a year.
Financial data firm Markit said its final service sector purchasing managers' index rose to 55.3 in March from 53.3 in February, though the figure was slightly below the preliminary read of 55.5 released last week.
Employers in the service sector, which accounts for about three-quarters of the US labor market, continued to add employees, but at the slowest rate since March 2013. The final employment index came in at 51.8 in March, compared with 51.9 in February. March marks the third straight month of slowing in the employment subindex.
15.18 Howard Archer, chief economist at IHS Global Insight, reacts to today's ECB press conference:
The ECB has certainly stepped up the dovish rhetoric big time, but it stopped short of cutting interest rates or undertaking any other stimulative measures at its April policy meeting. In fact, it is hard to imagine how the rhetoric could get any more dovish without the ECB acting.
In talking the ultra dovish talk, the ECB clearly has a sharp eye on trying to bring the euro lower after it recently hit a 30-month high just below US$1.40. This was highlighted by the ECB’s statement specifically identifying exchange rate developments as a downside risk to the outlook for inflation. ECB President Mario Draghi further commented that while the ECB does not have a specific target for the euro, the exchange rate is very important to assessing price stability. There was a plethora of statements indicating that the ECB is very ready and willing to use both conventional and unconventional policy measures to deal with the risk of prolonged too low Eurozone inflation.
</br>15.11 <blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en">RBS slashes US Q1 GDP forecast to 0.6% from 1.2%. Even Spain will grow by more than that,
— MineForNothing (@minefornothing) April 3, 2014
14.32 More on the design of QE- Draghi said it's not easy to design QE on private debt, which is why ECB are firmly behind the development of ABS (asset-backed securities) progamme.
The ECB will present a joint paper with the Bank of England on ABS at the next IMF meeting.
Draghi said ECB are not sure what type of QE is most effective and will work on that in the coming weeks.
14.26 Draghi said ECB briefly discussed at LTRO (long-term refinancing operation, where ECB would offer banks low cost loans).
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"> #Draghi : general LTRO targets liquidity; specific LTRO targets sector in economy (but challenges with design).
— Axel Merk (@AxelMerk) April 3, 2014
The IMF has been of recent extremely generous in its suggestions on what we should do or not do, and we are really thankful for that.
Frankly, I would like the IMF to be as generous as they have been towards us also with other monetary policy jurisdictions, like for example issuing statements just the day before am FOMC (Federal Reserve) meeting would take place.
14.08 Draghi said a QE plan would have to suit Europe's bank-funded economy.
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"> #Draghi presser: we will be reflecting hard on the design of a #QE, because our set up is very different from the #US one.
— Sarah (@masaraht) April 3, 2014
13.58 Draghi hasn't recently mentioned a discussion of QE and confirmed the committee didn't discuss it last month.
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en">*Draghi takes QE out of toolbox, shows it to assembled journalists, puts it back*
— Tom Bowker (@Tom_CB) April 3, 2014
Draghi said the later Easter this year led to lower inflation for March because of the abse effect and may create higher inflation in April.
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en">Mr Mario, you have just restored all your lost confidence by blaming low inflation on Easter.
— zerohedge (@zerohedge) April 3, 2014
13.44 Not very exciting so far.
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en">ECB Draghi giving very little away so far
— RANsquawk (@RANsquawk) April 3, 2014
Draghi said the ECB council is "unanimous" in its commitment to using all unconventional instruments.
He wants the eurozone government to liberalise the labour markets to improve employment.
13.41 Draghi said the recovery is increasingly supported by domestic demand and he expects to see increasing demand for euro exports.
Though unemployment remains high.
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"> #ECB 's Draghi: Risks to Economic Outlook Remain on the Downside. Geopolitical Risk Could Negatively Effect Economic Expectations.
— Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) April 3, 2014
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en">No change again from ECB, deposit rate maintained at 0%, despite weak inflation numbers recently. Am sure ECB p/c will have usual rhetoric
— Douglas McPhail (@DouglasMcPhail) April 3, 2014
</br>12.20 Wide range of topics covered in two hours. Here are some of the key points:
The economy
Osborne admitted that there were some “historic weaknesses in the UK economy” such as investment and manufacturing.
He also agreed that Britain’s export performance was disappointing, with European weakness to blame.
Savings
Osborne claimed the Budget’s focus on saving aimed to transfer the recovery in consumption over to an investment recovery.
He said his budget rewards savings but, “it is not a quick fix job, you have to turn around a supertanker.”
Pensions
The Chancellor said consumer groups believe his pension changes will encourage long-term savings.
He said he expects a third of people will use new measures to take money out of pensions though admitted there is “inherent uncertainty”.
Household debt
On household debt, Osborne said there was a need to be “vigilant”, though better mortgage regulation should help.
“We don’t want to repeat the experience of 2005 onwards.”
Housing bubble
He also said housing bubble concerns should separate out the London market from the rest of the UK, and said there was no evidence that Help to Buy was pumping up prices.
Co-op
Osborne denied that the government put pressure on the Co-op to buy Lloyds branches, claiming that Labour was trying to divert attention.
Unpaid taxes
Osborne denied that granting HMRC the power to take unpaid taxes from people’s bank accounts was not a major constitutional change, but a more modern version of sending round the bailiffs.
FCA
The Chancellor said there would be an independent inquiry into the FCA’s decision to leak sensitive information.
11.54 And that's a wrap! The Commons Treasury committee has finished questioning Osborne, with committee chairman Andrew Tyrie saying he will write to the Osborne with more questions.
11.45 Osborne is now taking questions over the Co-op bank bid for Lloyds branches.
Osborne says the co-op made an application to Lloyd for these branches. Everyone has said there was no undue pressure.
I think you have an example of the system working.
John Mann asks if Osborne discussed the Co-op's application for a waiver with the FCA?
Osborne said we were aware of the discussions the regulator was having with the Co-op.
Osborne said Lloyds told the government that Co-op was the preferred bidder, and we were content with that.
11.35 John Thurso asks: do you accept that the judiciary and the executive should be separated? Why does recommend that HMRC has the power to “dive into people’s accounts” without judicial oversight? “This surely, is one of those mad ideas that should have been strangled at birth?”
Osborne said the vast majority of people pay taxes on time, those that don’t are a burden on everyone else. These are people who have been contacted on average nine times by HMRC. They’ve exhausted all their appeals.
The point we would now go in a bank account is the point we would send the bailiffs around. So instead of physical seizure of property, we’re saying let’s take a more modern approach and take the money out of the bank account. We would give 14 days notice and the bank account must have £5,000.
“It is a massive change in the constitutional arrangement. To slip it through in two paragraphs in the red book – this is a huge change.”
The DWP already has this power with child maintenance, said Osborne .
11.23 Brooks Newmark asks if increasing the personal allowance will be ineffective in helping low income earners, and who will benefit the most?
Osborne said there are 25m people who will benefit. He thinks it’s a progressive tax change.
Newmark asks why Osborne didn’t align income tax and National Insurance. Osborne said he felt changing income tax was a “clearer thing to do”.
Osborne said he has increased the higher rate threshold. “The key thing is, are you paying more or less fiscal tax”? The increase in personal allowance benefits everyone up to £100,000.
11.17 Pat McFadden asked if Osborne is concerned that by writing to the FCA publicly, you might have undermined their authority?
The short answer, Osborne said, is no.
11.10 Not your intention to send the message that people are better off looking after their own money than investing in a pension?
Osborne said no, my intention was to make pensions more flexible and attractive.
Pearce asks what modelling has been done on the impact of pension reforms on buy to let.
Osborne said the Treasury has not done any modelling, as that comes under the OBR's work.
11.02 Osborne asked when he told the FCA no one would have to buy annuity?
“We engaged with them in the weeks leading up to the Budget”, said Osborne.
Are you not giving them a vote of no confidence on their ability to monitor the annuity market?
Osborne said "I have confidence in the FCA as an institution that is able to help consumers and protect consumers."
Twitter: Sam Dale - Osborne: FCA supported Budget reforms because annuity market is not value for money
Teresa Pearce asks if Osborne has an estimate by what percentage pension funds will be reduced?
“There is inherent uncertainty” about how many people will want to buy other products, said Osborne.
The Chancellor's estimate is that a third of people will want to do that.
If you trust people to use their savings as they choose, they will be more likely to want to use these products, he said.
10.59 Osborne is asked about the indicators of a house bubble.
“You would look at headline house prices across the country and try and separate out the central London phenomenon from what’s going on across the country.
“You look at the sustainability of household debt and I guess you look at housing starts", says Osborne.
Have you done any monitoring on the impact of Help to Buy on house prices?
Osborne said he’s not seen any evidence that Help to Buy has pumped up house prices.
Osborne: the evidence is that three quarters of the houses bought by it have been outside London and the South East, that the price has been below the national average and that the vast majority are first time buyers.
Twitter: Arjun Kharpal - George Osborne, UK Chancellor: We have to be vigilant on house prices, need to distinguish between Central London and rest of country
10.52 Labour’s John Mann has accused Osborne of ducking so many questions “he will get into the England cricket team”.
He said he had a bet that Osborne would duck all the questions.
Mann asks how many of the new employees coming into the Labour market will be immigrants.
Osborne said 86% of new jobs are from British nationals.
Mann also asks how much more tax Osborne is raising than Gordon Brown.
Osborne says that, as all good Conservatives know, sometimes when you cut tax rates, you get more tax.
10.44 Osborne is now talking about mortgage standards.
Later this month, changes to mortgage standards will make sure that self-certified mortgages are things of the past, he said.
Osborne asked about concern of the effect of interest rates on highly leveraged households.
Twitter: Sam Dale - Osborne praises mortgage market review as good example of using "micro-tools" instead of a clunkier weapons, presumably interest rate rises.
10.38 Asked if concerned about households building up debt.
Osborne said we now have a body managing levels of debt and there are tools to manage it.
Twitter: Sam Dale - George Osborne on boosting saving: "This is not a quick fix, it's turning around a supertanker"
Twitter: George Eaton - "Martin Wolf and I have not really seen eye-to-eye," says Osborne, rejecting his criticism of the Budget for encouraging "dissaving".
10.35 All recoveries start with consumption and you want to have handover to investment. The Budget is aimed at achieving that.
Osborne said consumer groups say the Budget is one for savours and welcome these measures.
There is a lot of excitement about new savings products, but the OBR is right to be cautious and wait for the proof - that what is said in the budget becomes "the law of the land".
10.28 Ms Leadsom now asks about UK's disappointing trade.
Osborne agrees that Britain's export performance has been disappointing and that the weakness of the European markets are the "most obvious cause".
He points out that non EU exports are up almost a quarter, and exports to China up a third since 2010.
The UK's focus on emerging markets is working, said Osborne. Not trading with China was a big error - Britain cannot borrow money from the Chinese to pay for products the Chinese make, he said. Osborne said that was a route we were going down.
10.23 Osborne was asked about the new member of the Bank of England's monetary policy committe, Nemat Shafik.
“She’s an excellent addition to the top team at the bank", he said.
Osborne said he's "engaged with a number of leading female economists” about trying to make sure women have the opportunity to work in these top jobs.
Andrea Leadsom then asked about the new bank payments regulator. Osborne said the review was suggested a decade ago and is long overdue.
10.17 Osborne said the 55pc flat rate on defined contribution pension withdrawals is likely too high.
“We are going to consult on that 55pc rate but I anticipate it being lower", he said.
He was then asked it the OBR has been over-confident in forecasting rise in investment?
The Chancellor said investment has not disappointed recently but admitted "there are some historic weaknesses in the UK economy”, such as investment and manufacturing.
10.05 There's some questioning about whether the Budget was so well received because it wasn't leaked this year. Last year, the Budget was accidentally leaked by a newspaper, and so this year there was no information released in advance.
“This was the first Budget under this government and the previous Budget that this had not happened."
This moved on to a point about the FCA pre-briefing a newspaper with very sensitive information.
Osborne said he agrees an entirely independent inquiry is needed.
"We rightly demand very high standard of the treatment of very sensitive information."
Twitter: Hugh Pym - Osborne tells Treasury Select Committee there should be full independent inquiry on FCA and botched savings industry review announcement
10.00 George Osborne is due to start giving evidence on the budget to the House of Commons treasury committee.
</br>09.30 The PMI figure for services in the UK is its lowest since June 2013, lower than expectations and suggesting growth slowed down in March ( full release here )
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-partner="tweetdeck">UK all sector #PMI at 9-month low of 58.1 in March, but still signals at least 0.7% GDP growth in Q1 pic.twitter.com/j2BXMdGDHm
— Chris Williamson (@WilliamsonChris) April 3, 2014
The Markit/CIPS Purchasing Managers' Index fell slightly from 53.3 to 53.1 in March, but Ireland hit an 85-month high and France returned to growth, hitting 51.8 (+50 means expansion).
Markit's Chris Williamson said the figures show a broad recovery in the eurozone.
The final PMI data for March round off the region’s best quarter for three years, with the survey data signalling that the economy grew by 0.5pc compared to the fourth quarter.
The surveys also confirm that the recovery is broad-based. The upturn is being spearheaded by Germany, which PMI data suggest grew by 0.7pc in the first quarter. Spain looks set to have enjoyed its best quarter for six years, growing by 0.5pc. Italy meanwhile has enjoyed its best spell of growth for three years, being on course to have expanded by 0.3pc.
France continues to lag behind, but is nevertheless the biggest news story in March with its PMI hitting a two-and-a-half-year high and suggesting the economy achieved modest growth
</br>08.55 The Governor of the Bank of England has told The Northern Echo that he can not rule out a rise in interest rates before the general election, but that he is paying attention to more of the economy than the South East.
On interest rate rises:
We will set policy as appropriate to meet our core responsibility to meet the two per cent inflation target. We haven’t set timing conditions on when that will be.
In part, because we don’t have to. Also, there is still slack in the labour market, you can see that here and right across the country. We need to use up more of that slack before we raise rates.
On the North East:
We are here to make policy for the UK as a whole. It is not just about what is happening in the South East. It’s a big part of the economy, but it is not decisive in our setting rates. We do pay attention to what is happening in regions such as the North-East where unemployment is about ten per cent.
</br>08.35 Asian markets - the Japanes Nikkei and Hong Kong's Hang Seng - have both been boosted this morning by the Chinese stimulus, but China's own stock markets aren't impressed.
The CSI 300 is down this morning as is the Shanghai Composite
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"> #China SHCOMP closed lower by 0.7% at 2043 ...thank God the "stimulus" is supporting every other market pic.twitter.com/QXOd5rf5fg
— Ioan Smith (@moved_average) April 3, 2014
</br>07.30 Here's what's leading the corporate calendar this morning, and what to watch out for over the course of the day
• Online takeaway business Just Eat has announced that it has priced its initial public offering at 260p - the very top of its previously-announced range . This will value it at £1.47bn.
• Kingfisher, the home improvement retailer behind B&Q and Screwfix, has announced that it is in talks to acquire the French chain Mr Bricolage for €275m (£227m).
• Dunelm, the home furnishings retailer, has unveiled a 5pc growth in like-for-like sales in the 13 weeks to March 29. Chief executive Nick Wharton puts this down to increased awareness as a result of an advertising push and more home deliveries.
Economic events:
09.00: Eurozone PMIs for services
09.30: UK PMIs for services
10.00: Eurozone retail sales
10.00: Treasury Select Committee questions George Osborne on Budget
12.45: European Central Bank announces interest rates
13.30: Mario Draghi press conference on ECB interest rates
13.30: US initial jobless claims
14.00: IMF releases analytical chapters of its World Economic Outlook
14.45: US PMIs for services
</br>07.00 The Chinese government has pledged a massive infrastructure spending drive to boost growth as fears that the world's second-largest economy is slowing down refuse to die down.
Li Keqiang, the Chinese premier has said he will speed up railway and housing construction this year, as well as considering tax breaks for small businesses.
China has aimed to drive growth through boosting consumer spending and reducing its reliance on central investment, but today's announcement suggests the economy isn't quite ready.
A survey of services activity in China, meanwhile, has showed the sector picking up slightly. HSBC's Purchasing Managers' Index for Chinese services this morning showed the best growth for four months. The measure rose from 51 in February to 51.9 in March (+50 indicates growth).
However, a contraction in manufacturing, reported yesterday, means the composite PMI, which takes into account all sectors, fell from 49.8 to 49.3 in March.
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en">HSBC China Composite Output Index posted 49.3 in March, down from 49.8 in February pic.twitter.com/dHMkG0ANZ7
— Markit Economics (@MarkitEconomics) April 3, 2014
</br>06.45 Here's what's leading our business pages this morning
• London's house price boom could "unravel" amid a strengthening pound and a rise in interest rates, Deutsche Bank has predicted, as John Ficenec writes
• Vodafone is creating 1,400 new jobs as it opens 150 new high street stores, as Christopher Williams reports
• And Ambrose Evans-Pritchard says that the European Central Bank's deflation paralysis is driving Italy, France and Spain into debt traps
Here's the front page of today's Business section:
</br>06.30 Good morning and welcome to our daily business and markets live blog, your one stop shop for all the breaking business stories of the day.
Document TELUK00020140403ea43004ed
