{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2895"}
____
  
Features
POLLS APART: THE NEW VOTING TRIBES
Josh Glancy   
1,242 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
3
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
By targeting Mondeo Man and Worcester Woman, Labour cleaned up in 1997. But who is in the parties' sights now? Josh Glancy rounds up the groups that could swing it in 2015
If you look carefully enough, the 2015 general election campaign has already begun. The ballot may be more than a year away, but behind the scenes in Westminster there is plenty of activity. Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage fired the first shots in anger last week, when they took to the stage to debate Britain's membership of the EU.
The months before the party conferences in September and October are all about planning. This involves wooing donors and building up war chests. It includes hiring teams of campaigners and consulting veteran party strategists. And it means working out what the parties plan to say and, crucially, to whom they plan to say it.
Politicians achieve this using an approach called segmentation: dividing the electorate into portions that they can target with particular messages. In the past a similar approach gave us Mondeo Man and Worcester Woman, the categories that were used to some effect by Tony Blair and the Labour party in the 1997 election.
As class-based political affiliations in Britain continue to erode, this segmentation is increasingly based on shared values and lifestyles — people who have the same concerns for their children's education, face the same difficulties in paying their household bills, shop at the same supermarket, share views on immigration and feel the same way about where the country is heading.
This technique has its limitations. "Elections are still pretty broad-brush things," says Peter Kellner, president of the polling organisation YouGov. "People still get most of their information through television or radio or newspapers, so whatever message parties are sending out, whether they like it or not, goes to large numbers of people from all sorts of groups. When there is a shift of opinion, there tends to be a shift everywhere."
Nonetheless, dividing the election into groups of people with similar hopes and fears remains an effective means of crafting a winning message — one that takes into account all a party's potential voters and what they want to hear.
Technology will also play an important role in the election. Data-mining and social media campaign techniques borrowed from America will allow strategists to get much better at gathering information on the electorate and tailoring their message to different segments.
Each party has different priorities.
Labour must try to hold on to the leftleaning Liberal Democrats who transferred their allegiances in large numbers when Clegg and co joined the coalition. It must also try to persuade those living in social housing in marginal seats to make the effort to vote for it.
The Lib Dems have lost vast chunks of their support and are starting almost from scratch. As a party of government they will no longer receive much of the protest vote. Instead they will hope to build on their ideological base and to persuade some voters that they are now a group of experienced politicians who can act as a moderating force in another coalition government.
The Tories' priority is to win back the voters they have lost to UKIP. This will require them to override Farage's antiimmigration, anti-Europe message with one of their own. They also need to improve their appeal to younger women, many of whom still think of the Tories as a nasty party. Another group to keep onside is the working families who continue to struggle in austerity Britain.
This is an explosive mixture of priorities, and many analysts expect the coming election to be one of the most brutal and hard-fought in recent memory.
In this uncertain environment, working out who the electorate is and what it wants has become more important than ever.
THE SQUEEZED LIDL ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................l and he kes ns nds the er The just-about-coping class is aspirational and hard-working but often struggles to pay the bills in a sluggish economy. This group makes up a third of the electorate and lives in towns and suburbs mainly throughout the Midlands and the southeast. This is where many of the key battles will be won and lost. So whether it's Nick Clegg's alarm-clock Britain, David Cameron's strivers or Ed Miliband's squeezed middle, politicians of all parties will line up to be on their side.
zed to be milies Do mention Tax credits for working families Don't mention Rising energy bills ng rgy .................................................................................
BUZZFEED BLUES Sold down the river by their feckless babyboomer parents, unable to afford a first home and scrabbling around for jobs. Many of these disaffected Generation Y urbanites voted Lib Dem in 2010, if they voted at all. Teams of newly appointed digital electioneers will be furiously importing youth engagement strategies from the recent Obama campaign in an attempt to win over this demographic.
BUZZFEED BL Sold l down the rive boomer parents, u and scrabbling aro disa s ffected Genera Demin 2010, if th appointed digital eimpo porting youth en th th there r cent Obama wi w n ov o er this demo Do D men e tion Unive Do Do D n' n t mention Un Do mention Universal wi-fi Don't mention University tuition fees TALKSPORT MAN TALKSPORT MAN Mostly over 50, mo m stly red-top readers and less well off than they'd like to be. This group is filled with nostalgia for an older Britain, resentful of the EU and not overly enamoured with this government of all the toffs running the country. This is prime UKIP Dog Mostly over 50, mostly red-top readers and lesswell off than they'd like to be. This group is filled with nostalgia for an older Britain, resentful of the EU and not overly enamoured with this government of all the toffs running the country. This is prime UKIP Dog and Duck territory. The Tories will have to hold on to these votes by winning the right-wing culture wars over Europe and immigration. Do mention An EU referendum Don't mention The Bullingdon Club TEAM MUMSNET If the Tories are to win the next election, they will have to persuade women under 40 that they are cuddly and on their side. Among older men, older women and younger men the Conservatives have enough support to win a majority; it is at the school gates that the numbers fall down. Many young women see Cameron as "pompous and incompetent". Expect to see plenty of the prime minister's sensitive side, with Sam Cam front and centre, on the campaign trail.
Do mention Women in the boardroom Don't mention Cuts to child benefit WAITROSE WEALTHY YCs y mistic, this group has enough mus through the austeterity over-sixties who ara e alary pensions and lair's new Labour but Confident, tolerant and optimistic, this group has enough set aside to keep them in hummus through the austerity years. It also includes many over-sixties who aresitting pretty on their final-salary pensions and expensive properties. Tony Blair's new Labour did well in this demographic, but Miliband's Labour party might find it difficult to persuade these voters that Ed isn't a bit too red. Do mention Lamborghini pensioners Don't mention The mansion tax
Document ST00000020140330ea3u00066
