{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3437"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Front: One in 10 Ukip councillors elected last year have quit role
Rowena Mason, Political correspondent   
604 words
15 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
1
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Ukip has lost almost one in 10 of the county councillors who won their seats when the party made a breakthrough at last year's local elections, research by the Guardian has found.
A year on from the May 2013 poll, the party is down by 12 county representatives out of the 139 who were elected.
The majority of new Ukip county councillors appear to have been working actively in their communities over the last 12 months, with statistics showing they have the best attendance record of any party at more than 92% of compulsory meetings. In many areas, they have fought to limit councillor allowances and perks, campaigned against HS2 and mounted protests against EU flags being flown in town halls.
However, the band of newly elected councillors also appears to have been plagued by a disproportionate number of controversies. They include Peter Lagoda in Cambridgeshire, who has pleaded guilty to benefit fraud amounting to almost pounds 25,000; Matthew Smith in Norfolk, who was charged with electoral fraud earlier this year; and Peter Georgiou, also in Norfolk, who resigned after admitting to shoplifting from Poundstretcher
Among those who have held on to their jobs is Victoria Ayling in Lincolnshire, now a parliamentary candidate, who was filmed saying she would like to "send the lot back". Ayling claimed she had been referring to illegal immigrants.
Others to have left include the Worcestershire councillor Martin Jenkins, who resigned in protest at the party's anti-gay marriage stance and a Somerset councillor, Nigel Pearson, who had "irreconcilable differences" with his local party. A Worcestershire councillor, Tony Baker, died after just five weeks in office and the seat was retaken in a byelection by a Conservative.
Over the year, the party has gained new councillors through defections on a district, borough and town level, with 19 coming from Labour and the Conservatives in London alone. However, its county council losses during the year are many times higher than the other parties, with overall levels of Conservative and Labour councillors remaining almost stable.
Dr Matthew Goodwin, a politics expert at Nottingham University, said this would not undermine Ukip's support and, in fact, the controversies may add to its appeal.
"While it is tempting to think the performance of radical right councillors or members of the European parliament might impact on their support it clearly does not," he said. "With the radical right, and figures like Farage, it is as if voters are willing to give them a free pass - to use them as a vehicle through which they can express their intensely held concerns over Europe, immigration and the state of our politics while overlooking their own failings or those of individual councillors and candidates.
"Indeed the past two months of British politics have made one thing clear; lining up voices in the establishment to denounce or ridicule an anti-establishment revolt does not work. If anything, it simply adds to their appeal."
Ukip's high drop-out rate is mirrored in the European parliament, where it has lost a third of its representatives since the last election for Brussels.
However, Farage has claimed his councillors are coming under unfair scrutiny as other parties trawl through social media. The party has also launched a fightback by highlighting bad behaviour by councillors from other parties, including a Lib Dem borough councillor in Sutton recently convicted of racially aggravated assault.
Ukip did not respond when asked to comment on the number of councillors who have left the party.
Document GRDN000020140515ea5f0000f
