{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1559"}
____
Guardian Home Pages
Voters give credit to Farage in head-to-head with Clegg: Ukip leader condemns EU support for Ukraine Deputy PM protests over anti-Europe scare stories
Patrick Wintour Nicholas Watt Rowena Mason   
1,257 words
27 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
6
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage, the two British politicians with the most passionately held but conflicting views on Europe, traded blow after blow in a debate over Britain's future EU membership - with the first opinion poll suggesting a decisive win for the Ukip leader.
A snap YouGov poll for the Sun of people who had seen the debate suggested a firm Farage win with 57% to Clegg's 36%. Another 7% said they did not know.
The Ukip victory was even more decisive among Conservative voters, by 70% to 26% in favour of Farage, a result that will bolster Ukip's argument that it has become the leader of the Eurosceptic movement in the UK.
Clegg repeatedly accused Farage of making up claims based on fantasy, dogma and falsehoods - insisting that on the issues of jobs, investment, immigration and Britain's laws, Farage simply traded in polemic and distorted facts.
The Liberal Democrat leader confronted Farage with a Ukip leaflet pointing out it warned that 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians may come to the UK, when there are not 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians living in the two countries.
Clegg said: "Let's not scare people by claiming things that are not true which would have the consequence of making us poorer and putting more people out work."
But Farage stunned observers by claiming the EU had "blood on its hands" by supporting the Ukrainian revolution, a view that has previously only been echoed in the Kremlin.
On a wider social issue, Farage lost the audience as he equivocated over gay marriage, and Clegg struck a warm positive note . Overall Farage, starting strongly but sweating by the end of the hour, will be delighted his arrival on the political stage worked as well.
His strongest moment came when he accused Clegg of being very evasive about the reality that 450 million EU citizens had the right to come to live in the UK.
"We have a complete free flow of people," he said. He accused Clegg of trying to change the issue to whether EU citizens had free access to UK benefits.
The debate, organised by LBC and broadcast on Sky and the BBC, is the first of two between the two men, and was seen as a key test of whether Farage and Ukip can withstand sustained scrutiny in May's European elections and at the 2015 general election.
Amid a furious post-debate spin operation, Farage's communications director, Patrick O'Flynn, said David Cameron had "made a catastrophic mistake in refusing to join the debate". He said: "Ukip now represents and leads Eurosceptic Britain. It has been a great night for us."
Labour, which declined to join the debate, dismissed the event as a sideshow, and said it would have little impact bar firing up the activist base of the two parties.
Accusing Clegg of being part of a tired status quo, Farage started the debate saying that if Britain was voting now on whether to join the EU, it would be presented with the offer "to join a club that will cost pounds 55m a day as a membership fee, and there will be thousands of new laws over which our own parliament and you the electorate can make no difference, and mean an open border, unconditionally, to 485 million people from across the whole of Europe - many of them from very poor countries - who can come here to work and live and settle and bring their families".
He said the UK would also be told it would have to cut links with the Commonwealth and other English-speaking countries as a result of joining the club. "I know the result of that referendum: You wouldn't join it."
Farage moved into unexpected territory towards the end of their exchanges, prompting claims that he was siding with Vladimir Putin, when he said the EU had "blood on its hands" over Ukraine. Asked by an LBC listener why the likes of Ukraine are keen to forge closer ties with the EU while the UK appears to be moving in the opposite direction, Farage said: "We should hang our heads in shame. The British government has actually geed up the EU to pursue effectively an imperialist, expansionist - and even Mr [Manuel] Barroso the commission president once said we are building an empire.
"We have given a false series of hopes to a group of people in the western Ukraine. So geed up were they that they actually toppled their own elected leader. That provoked Mr Putin. I think the EU frankly does have blood on its hands in the Ukraine. And I don't want a European army, navy, air force or a European foreign policy. It has not been a thing for good in the Ukraine."
Farage made his remarks after he was challenged by the LBC presenter, Nick Ferrari, to justify his claim that more than 70% of all UK laws come from the EU.
To laughter in the audience, Farage replied: "Well, that is the estimate we have made. We have asked people to count it. If I went for the German figure I would have gone higher."
Clegg said figures compiled by the House of Commons library showed 7% of EU laws are transposed into UK laws. "What we have heard this evening on jobs, on immigration, on investment and now on EU laws - again and again and again - are the wrong facts," he said.
As the debate turned to immigration, one of the most emotive areas of the EU debate, Clegg claimed the NHS would "collapse" without foreign workers.
He said the government had "significantly tightened up the rules" about immigration, and people "can't simply receive benefits, no questions asked" on their first day in the country. Actually people who come to our country, they create wealth, they pay taxes, they help sustain our NHS. To pull up our drawbridge, we would destroy jobs for everybody in this country and that is something I am not prepared to see happen." He added: "For hundreds of thousands of people, working in trades like the building industry, we have had a massive over-supply of labour and you've seen your wages go down over the last 10 years as the cost of living has gone up and that is not fair on working people in this country."
Clegg warned that as many as 3 million jobs were linked to British membership of the EU. Multinational companies would pull jobs and investment out of the UK if it left the EU, he said. "That would be devastating for the UK economy. Why would we pull ourselves out of the world's largest economy when 50% of our exports go to Europe."
Farage countered: "I remember, Nick, you and all your gang - all the big corporates - all telling us 12 years ago that if we didn't join the euro, all inward investment would cease, the City of London would disappear. All I can say is thank God we didn't listen to you, otherwise we would have been in one hell of a mess."
Captions:
Ukip leader Nigel Farage and his Lib Dem counterpart Nick Clegg taking part in the televised debate over Britain's future in the European Union yesterday Photograph: Ian West/PA
Document GRDN000020140326ea3r000bp
