{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"662"}
____
  
NEWS
Crime cases citing human rights increase by a third; Government under increasing pressure to curb 'human rights' abuse of laws by convicted prisoners and illegal immigrants
By Tom Whitehead Security Editor   
786 words
10 March 2014
08:56
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The number of criminals, migrants and others exploiting human rights laws has increased by almost a third despite Government pledges to crack down.
Human rights were cited in a total of 367 court cases last year compared to 283 in the previous 12 months, with the majority involving criminal or immigration matters.
However the figures show that the influence is now spreading to all aspects of law after the number of tax cases which invoked human rights laws doubled.
One leading campaigner on Sunday warned the figures show that wholesale reform of the laws is now needed.
The increase comes as pressure grows on the Government to curb the abuse of the laws by some sections such as convicted prisoners and illegal immigrants.
Ministers have tried to stop foreign criminals and illegal migrants from using the right to family life to avoid deportation but the courts have regularly ignored new rules.
The latest figures, obtained by Thomson Reuters legal business, show the problem continues to increase, with a 30 per cent increase in cases in just 12 months.
Dominic Raab, the Tory MP and campaigner for reform, said: “Anyone who thinks the problem of our skewed human rights laws is going away has their head in the sand.
“The rights inflation, driven by judicial legislation from Strasbourg and the Human Rights Act, is eating away at our law enforcement and deportation capacity.
“We need to grasp the nettle, and overhaul the law."
Chris Grayling, the Justice Secretary, said: "The Convention on Human Rights was drawn up in the aftermath of the horror of the Second World War, with the noble intention of protecting people's fundamental rights – such as the right not to be tortured or the right to a fair trial for example.
"But it seems a bit of a damming indictment of Labour's Human Rights Act that now it is being used as such a ready recourse for people wanting to bring claims for issues that would have been far from the minds of the Convention's original creators."
Last year it emerged that the terrorism suspect who evaded police by wearing a burka was suing the Government for allegedly breaching his human rights.
Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed remains at large but his lawyers are still suing the Government for alleged mistreatment during his arrest and detention in Somaliland in 2011.
Figures in November also suggested that thousands of foreigners arrested in Britain are routinely avoiding deportation.
Theresa May, the Home Secretary, has said the Conservatives will pledge to repeal the Human Rights Act at the next general election.
However, in January, David Cameron, with the help of Labour and the Liberal Democrats, blocked a Conservative back – bench move to toughen human rights laws.
More than 90 Conservative MPs voted for an amendment to the Immigration Bill intended to make it harder for foreign criminals to avoid deportation but Mr Cameron had said the plan was unlawful.
Tom Hickman, a barrister at Blackstone Chambers and human rights expert, said: “There continues to be an ongoing discussion over the Human Rights Act place in the British judicial system and whether it should be replaced by a UK Bill of Rights. It is expected that proposed changes will be debated at the next general election.
“Since the Human Rights Act was introduced it is playing an important role in achieving legal redress increasingly in the commercial field.
“While the use of the Act still leads to controversy with high profile cases such as the right for prisoners to have the vote, in the majority of cases the Human Rights Act is now seen as an accepted area of law by lawyers and the judiciary."
The latest survey showed that the number of tax-related court cases involving human rights claims increased from 12 to 25.
They included a taxpayer who had been fined for submitting their PAYE accounts too late argued that the fine breached their right to property.
Another taxpayer who lied on his tax returns about his company’s sales to reduce his tax bill successfully argued that his right to property meant that HM Revenue and Customs could not recover more than the value of tax he had saved by lying.
Mr Hickman added: “Litigants feel the need to raise every point they properly can so it is not surprising that they seek to develop Human Rights arguments in the area of tax litigation – especially when the sums of money at stake can be very substantial often running into the millions."
Document TELUK00020140310ea3a001e2
