{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"3597"}
____
  
News
England's opened the gate and can't do nothing… buy these girls for £500 each, they will do 20 clients a day no problem
MATTHEW DRAKE   
1,312 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; National
4,5
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
DAILY Mirror INVESTIGATES EVIL TRADE IN ROMANIAN SEX SLAVES
EXCLUSIVE
WITH his arms draped around two pretty young women, an Eastern European Mr Big prepares to sell them off as sex slaves bound for Britain.
Evil Adrian Meder is just one of a network of gang bosses aiming to supply girls and make millions over the EU scrapping of our border restrictions with Romania and Bulgaria.
They aim to flood the UK with thousands of young women sold into a sordid, nightmare life of vice.
Shortly after this picture was taken in a seedy Romanian club, gloating Meder, 31, boasted to our undercover investigators, posing as London pimps, that we could buy both the girls he is posing with for £500 each.
And they would be in the UK by Wednesday, working for us as hookers.
"There is no problems with them going," he said, grinning. "Because in England they have opened the gate. They can't do nothing to you. Romania is in Europe now.
"The girls, they have 20 clients per day, no problem. Romanian girls are good for this because it is the job that they know. They stay in school and then they can't find work and the only solution is to go to work in other countries.
"If you are OK with them and don't beat them they will be good. They work and they know what they do."
By the end of the night Meder would offer our men four girls, just out of their teens, for £2,000.
He said the girls would charge punters £120 an hour but they wouldn't know their pimp would keep £70 of that.
The deal was offered only three weeks after we first made contact with a London-based fixer.
Meder told us he would be driving to Britain this week on business. Yesterday we informed Scotland Yard of our investigation and told them Meder was heading here.
DISAPPEAR
The giggling, starry-eyed girls know a life of prostitution awaits but can have little idea of the brutal reality that may entail.
Once in the UK, the girls disappear into a black market of sleazy backstreet saunas, brothels and relentless escort agency work. Many turn to drugs in despair.
The girls are briefed on how to dupe immigration officials into believing they are entering the country to earn a living as hotel workers, waitresses or cleaners.
Last night a shocked Labour MP Fiona MacTaggart, chair of the All Party Parliamentary Group on Human Trafficking, said of our evidence: "This is clearly horrible exploitation.
"We aren't doing enough to protect young women from around Europe from being sold into sexual bondage like this. It is outrageous."
On Thursday our investigators joined Meder in the Liquid club in the back-streets of Sibiu in Romania's poverty-stricken Transylvania.
After introducing us to one of his muscular henchmen, Meder led us to a VIP area above the dance floor. He ordered bottles of vodka for his table and told the girls to parade for our benefit. He constantly plied the girls with spirits as he auctioned them off.
Introducing a tiny 22-year-old, wearing only a black boob tube and leather trousers, Meder told us she speaks only "a tiny bit of English" but is extremely keen to go to Britain.
Asked if she knew what kind of work she would be expected to do, he grinned and said: "Of course."
A 23-year-old was then shown to the table. We were told she was due to sit an important exam the following week. But Meder said: "No problem. I can speak with people and they will give her pass. She can travel to London next week."
The fixer was at pains to emphasise there would be no trouble importing his girls and making money from them. He said: "This kind of work is between the rules. It's not legal and it is not illegal."
Like many gang bosses throughout Eastern Europe Meder knows the EU policy of "free movement" between member states works well for them.
Immigration restrictions placed on Bulgaria and Romania when they joined the EU in 2007 ran out on New Year's Day, allowing their citizens easy entry to the UK. Watchdogs estimate European crime lords already net £20billion a year from the vice trade. And experts fear that number will continue to soar because of the end of restrictions.
The open borders policy means the movement of sex workers now goes largely undetected by Interpol and the UK Border Agency.
National Crime Agency figures show there were 1,746 reports of human trafficking from 112 countries last year - a 47 per cent leap on the 2012 total.
And in 2010, the Association of Chief Police Officers estimated that up to 12,200 women working in off-street prostitution in Britain had possibly been trafficked. It is little wonder a confident Meder told our investigators: "There will be no problem. If somebody ask (at immigration) 'what do you do here?' Then the girl say 'I work in a hotel' or 'I have a friend.' They have one thousand possible lies. Don't worry about it.
"The Romanian girls are not stupid. They go with identity card now."
Meder also introduced our team to the girls in the picture - one 21, the other 22 - who asked to be taken to England as a pair for safety.
BRAGGED
At one point, Meder pushed the 22-year-old towards our team, desperate to make a sale. She said: "I look forward to seeing you in London next week."
In a vain attempt to justify his sex slaves operation, Meder assured us: "They go because they want to go. I do not have to tell them. They are not forced. It is no longer working like that. They go because they want to go." At a meeting in a restaurant on the outskirts of Sibiu a day earlier, he bragged about the riches that could be made from his stable of women.
"One friend of mine in one year with three girls, he make one million euros," said Meder. "When I meet him in Austria he come with a Maserati. A 350,000 euro car. With just three girls in one year."
He claimed the key to a fortune was shepherding the girls around countries. "If you want to make good money you have to change them," said Meder.
"I have girls two weeks in England and after that I go three weeks with them in Norway and then after that Swiss and after that Ireland. That's how you make good money. Outside the club on Thursday night, Meder rubbed his hands at the thought of another sale. He told our investigators: "You tell me when you want the girl to come. You book the flight and they will be in London on Wednesday." Our team made their excuses and left.
Last night Tory MP Peter Bone, who previously chaired the all-party group on trafficking, said the end of restrictions was "a gift to traffickers". He said: "That's one of the disadvantages of free movement."
Aneeta Prem, of Freedom Charity, feared the numbers were "just the tip of the iceberg".
She added: "This is modern day slavery. The number of people contacting us who have been sexually trafficked seems to be growing enormously. It becomes a nightmare for them. They feel powerless to go back home."
matthew.drake@trinitymirror.com
COMMENT: PAGE 14
When I meet him in Austria friend come with a Maserati. A 350,000 euro car. With just three girls in one year. MEDER ON SEX SLAVE RICHES
Document SMIRR00020140223ea2n000c9
