{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"648"}
____
  
News
Lib Dems are true defenders of British values, claims Clegg
Matthew Holehouse   
726 words
10 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
8
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
NICK CLEGG sang a hymn of praise to Britain yesterday, paying tribute to tea, the shipping forecast and football, as he warned that freedom and tolerance were at risk from a tide of far–Right extremism sweeping Europe.
The Deputy Prime Minister said the Liberal Democrats were the true party of patriots that would defend British values from a "dangerous" trend of hostility to foreigners.
He placed the UK Independence Party alongside Hungary's Jobbik and the French Front National, indicating Nigel Farage was the "acceptable face of blame" while his party offered "anger and bile".
Mr Clegg wants to frame May's European elections as a straight fight between the two parties. It will be a contest of "Great Britain" versus "little England", he said, claiming "We are the guardians of a modern, open and tolerant Britain."
In a speech that echoed John Major's paean to a land of warm beer and green suburbs 20 years ago, Mr Clegg hailed the British traditions of queuing, wearing flip–flops in cold weather and satire as well as same–sex marriage and the rule of law.
He told the Lib Dem spring conference in York: "I love Britain. I love that a country capable of extraordinary pomp and ceremony can still retain a spiky irreverence towards its establishment.
"A country where we line the streets waving our Union Jacks wildly to welcome the arrival of Prince George, and the next moment we're chuckling at Private Eye's front page: 'Woman Has Baby'.
"I love that the shipping forecast is listened to by insomniacs of all ages, right across the country, miles from the sea. I love that we do respond to every problem no matter how big or small with the same thing: a cup of tea."
Globalisation and the rise of China have not brought the promised spread of democracy and liberal values and on the Continent anti–semitic parties that regard foreigners as "filth" are winning support, he warned.
"This is our back yard. The forces of chauvinism, protectionism and xenophobia have been emboldened. And there is no doubt about it: the fight is now on for the future direction of our continent."
He stressed Britain was "lucky" to avoid such extremism but said an "ungenerous, backwards looking politics" is on the rise.
Mr Clegg did not identify Ukip or Mr Farage by name but aides said the speech was aimed squarely at them. The two men will debate whether to withdraw from the European Union on television next month. "Ukip think they love Brit–ain. There's nothing patriotic about putting jobs at risk," a senior Liberal Democrat source said.
Last week Mr Farage hardened his party's anti–immigration stance, claiming he travelled on trains in south London on which no one spoke English.
Mr Clegg's address also follows David Cameron's off–the–cuff defence of "bighearted" Britain at the G20 summit in St Petersburg last year, after it was a dismissed by a Russian official as "just a small island".
The Liberal Democrats have fought to take credit for the Coalition's tax cuts, but yesterday Iain Duncan Smith, the Welfare Secretary, disputed a claim by Danny Alexander, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, that the Tories had to be "forced" into raising the income tax threshold.
"That's not my recollection. If there was a row, it's the kind of row you have around a cup of tea at the breakfast table," Mr Duncan Smith told the BBC.
Best of British Queues, tea and the shipping forecast
What Nick Clegg loves about Britain
Inventions: the telephone, the steam engine, the jet engine, the world wide web, stainless steel, graphene.
The arts: Oscar–winning visual effects; cuttingedge design; theatre, fashion, music, film.
Queuing while abroad.
Our multicultural cities.
The BBC and NHS.
Human rights and rule of law.
The shipping forecast.
Premier League football.
Pomp and ceremony.
How excited we get at any glimpse of the sun.
And finally, the "cliché" that a cup of tea solves every problem.
Full English off the menu
Treat at the Cocoa House
Nick Clegg opted for a chocolate and hot drink at the York Cocoa House on the last day of the Lib Dem conference yesterday morning
Document DT00000020140310ea3a0002w
