{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"359"}
____
  
News
Nigel Farage will pay the price for taking the British public for fools
By Dan Hodges   
1,204 words
1 May 2014
07:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
By announcing that he won窶冲 be running as Ukip窶冱 candidate in the Newark by-election , Nigel Farage hasn’t just bottled it – he’s blown it.
The European elections were supposed to represent a beginning, not an end. They were the moment when the bugles echoed, and the People’s Army began its march to overthrow the Westminster establishment. Instead, the fanfare that accompanies Ukip’s predictably strong showing next month will be the signal for that army’s demobilisation. The tired and exhausted troops will survey the battlefield, count their dead, and start to wonder what all the sacrifice was for. Then, one by one, they will embark on the long, lonely journey home.
Farage had one task in this campaign. It did not involve the generation of publicity, which was always guaranteed. Nor was he required to top the poll, intoxicating though such a result would be for his followers. No, his real mission was to finally drag Ukip into the political mainstream.
For all his ritualistic excoriation of the “Westminster elite”, Ukip’s leader understands that the long-term future of his party and movement rests upon their joining it. He cannot continue to drift forever in the isolated backwaters of Brussels, or regional government. Farage fancies himself as a political showman, and he needs a national stage.
So, over the past 18 months, the building blocks of a strategy to expand Ukip’s appeal well beyond the usual rump of disaffected Eurosceptics was put in place. A well-respected communications director – the former Daily Express political editor Patrick O’Flynn – was hired. A strategic decision was taken to “front-load” the party’s limited resources into the European elections, rather than husbanding them for 2015. And, most fatefully, Farage and his inner circle decided to make immigration, not the broader issue of European governance, the focal point of their campaign.
Almost imperceptibly, that grand strategy has started to fall apart. It began, ironically enough, with the debates with Nick Clegg, billed as Farage’s great triumph. In his first appearance, he performed poorly, appearing badly briefed, bombastic and aggressive. In the eyes of most Westminster commentators, Clegg smoothly bested him. But not according to the polls that followed.
Ukip supporters like to believe that this terrified those who reside within the Westminster bubble. It didn’t. But it did generate surprise and interest – and a renewed realisation that the Farage phenomenon was worthy of serious scrutiny. Unfortunately, this was scrutiny that Ukip was manifestly unprepared for.
First, there were the revelations about Farage’s own expenses. In response, he said he would allow them to be independently audited. Then he backtracked. Next came Ukip’s campaign launch. Unveiling posters warning that 26 million Europeans were preparing to swarm across our borders and snatch the job out from under every honest, hard-working Brit, Farage was asked by the BBC’s Nick Robinson how he justified employing his German wife as his secretary. Characteristically, he attempted to laugh it off. “You try to turn everything into a joke,” Robinson replied. “But you have a campaign that says Europeans are taking British jobs and yet you have a German woman working in your office.”
Then came the scrutiny of his wider party. As Farage himself readily concedes, Ukip has long been seen as a one-man band. But day by day, the voters have been introduced to his backing vocalists. There was Andre Lampitt, who featured on Ukip’s election broadcast, and tweeted: “I was born and grew up in Africa please leave Africa for the Africans lets [sic] them kill themselves off don’t go there.” Or Ukip council candidate William Henwood, who told Lenny Henry to “go and live in a black country”. Or Ukip MEP Roger Helmer, who compared disliking gay people to disliking different kinds of tea.
The party’s strategy had been to use these elections to insert itself into the political mainstream. Instead, it has revealed itself to be uncompromisingly extreme. A ComRes poll yesterday found that 32 per cent of those questioned agreed with the statement “Ukip is a racist party”, compared with 40 per cent who disagreed. Slowly but surely, Nigel Farage is presiding over the contamination of the Ukip brand.
“But look at the other polls,” people cry. “Ukip have got a double-digit lead!” That’s right, they have. Which only goes to underline the point.
There is no correlation between people’s broad perceptions of Ukip and how they intend to vote in the European elections. The party remains nothing more than a mid-term dumping ground for voters’ frustrations at everything from MPs’ expenses, through immigration, to the price of milk. It will end the campaign precisely as it started it – a political ashtray.
This campaign was Nigel Farage’s big opportunity – indeed, his only opportunity – to redefine his party. To recast himself and Ukip as a serious option when people move away from the politics of protest to the serious building of electing a Parliament and a government. And he has squandered it on a grubby, populist, divisive lunge for short-term political glory. A man who claims to be different from the “political class” he so despises has proved himself to be identical to them in every facet. The crude calculation, not to say base prejudice, that lay behind his decision to turn the Euro elections into a referendum on immigration. The naked hypocrisy of his stance on his own expenses claims, and his decision to employ his own foreign-born spouse while claiming no British worker could possibly fulfil the role. And now, the self justifying double-speak as he attempted to rationalise his decision to run away from Newark.
“I would just look like an opportunist,” said the man who stood in Itchen, Test and Avon in the 1994 European parliamentary elections, the Eastleigh by-election in the same year, Salisbury in the 1997 general election, Bexhill and Battle in 2001, South Thanet in 2005, the Bromley and Chislehurst by-election in 2006 and Buckingham in 2010.
Nigel Farage ran away from Newark because he was scared. Scared that he wouldn’t win, and scared that even if he did prevail, he’d be stuck with an unwinnable seat in 12 months’ time.
Not so long ago, the Ukip leader was a mildly eccentric – but fresh and interesting – addition to the British political scene. But he’s made two fatal mistakes. The first is to believe his own publicity. The second is to take the British people for fools. When he says that “the ordinary voters who are worried about immigration aren’t racist”, he’s right. But when those voters look at the likes of Andre Lampitt and William Henwood, then at themselves, they know how to spot the difference.
Nigel Farage and his army will have their victory in a couple of weeks’ time. There’s even a chance that their fraying banners will be carried across the field in triumph at Newark. But then they will begin the long march back into political obscurity.
Document TELUK00020140501ea510008d
