{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"323"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Farage scrambles for cover as Ukip is beset by racism allegations: Party leader hit by egg on the campaign trail: Candidates under fire over social media postings
Rowena Mason, Political correspondent   
820 words
2 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
17
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Nigel Farage has accused the left of orchestrating a taxpayer-funded "storm of hatred" against Ukip, as he was egged by a protester and the party was hit by new allegations of racist language by its council candidates. Farage went on the campaign trail for the May elections on Thursday amid renewed signs that the party is struggling with its attempts to weed out "embarrassing Walter Mitty characters".
One candidate suggested that Asian boys stab, rob and bomb "innocent white people", another's Facebook page showed a "like" for a group devoted to the British National Party, while a third suggested that the Stephen Lawrence case received too much media attention compared with killings of white women.
Ukip said it was investigating the claims, and Steven Woolf, the party's economics spokesman, hit back at coverage of the allegations, saying the mainstream media and rival parties had encouraged physical attacks on Farage by branding his organisation racist.
Ukip has also complained that little coverage has been given to reports about the backgrounds of other parties' candidates, such as Sutton Lib Dem councillor Stephen Fenwick, who resigned before pleading guilty to racially aggravated assault, Conservative councillor Peter Moseley, a former BNP member, and Tory councillor Danny Mayzes, who said a film featuring violent vigilantes offered a good way of dealing with immigrants.
After being egged in Nottingham, Farage accused "some on the left" of whipping up a "kind of storm of hatred" against the party over injudicious comments from a "handful" of its members. "They're organised, they're taxpayer-funded and they're chasing me around trying to stop us from getting our message out," he said.
The egging came three months after Farage was bashed over the head in Margate with a placard reading "Nasty little Nigel". He has had to take cover in an Edinburgh pub after being confronted by a mob and now travels with a security detail.
The latest incident happened while Farage was on the campaign trail for the European Union and council elections, and as some of the party's candidates came under scrutiny over social media postings. A tweet by James Elgar, a 19-year-old Ukip candidate in Runnymede, with the hashtag #ThingsAsianBoysDo - which attracts cutting but mostly amiable banter - read: "groom and rape underage white girls, stab and rob innocent old white people, bomb innocent white people".
He told the website Get Surrey the comments had "not been put into context - they just seem to be extracts, not showing the whole conversation".
"Some comments are just quotes from films, some are over a year old, and some of these comments are not even recognised by me as my own. I am no way supporting racist, sexist or radical views - far from it. My views are moderate when it comes to subjects such as immigration, taxes and crime."
However, the party said the quotes were deplorable and that it was investigating how Elgar was allowed to stand as a candidate when his membership lapsed in January.
Meanwhile, the Evening Standard reported that Gary Port, standing for Ukip in Greenwich, admitted his Facebook page shows a "like" for a group devoted to the far-right British National Party. He told the newspaper: "I don't think it's that clear whether the BNP are racist."
Matt Pavey, a candidate in Lewisham, suggested that the case of Stephen Lawrence had received disproportionate media attention compared with the killings of two local white women. He told the Standard he had not intended to cause offence and denied being racist.
On Tuesday, Enfield candidate William Henwood resigned after saying on Twitter that comedian Lenny Henry should "emigrate to a black country".
Despite the controversies, a ComRes poll for ITV puts Ukip on 38% of the vote for the European elections, compared with 27% for Labour and 18% for the Tories. Ladbrokes have suspended betting on the Liberal Democrats winning no seats.
As he launches the Conservative party's European election campaign today, David Cameron will promise to deliver a referendum on the EU, urging doubters to judge him on his record as prime minister. "Others talk about acting in the national interest or standing up to Europe. I do it, time and again - often in the teeth of opposition in Brussels and with a backdrop of uncertainty about whether it can really happen at home [. . .] I have a track record of delivery, and believe me, I will deliver this referendum. Labour won't. Ukip can't. I will."
Captions:
Nigel Farage after being hit by the egg. 'They're organised, they're taxpayer-funded, and they're trying to stop us from getting our message out,' he said Photograph: Mark Fear/Newsteam
Document GRDN000020140502ea520003j
