{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"745"}
____
  
NEWS
Benefit cheats face higher fines and losing their homes
By Tim Ross Political Correspondent   
813 words
5 April 2014
22:45
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Iain Duncan Smith hails £50 billion of welfare savings but ministers plan a new crackdown on benefit cheats after £3.5billion was lost to fraud and error
Welfare cheats will be forced to sell their homes and pay higher fines to reimburse taxpayers for the money they have wrongly claimed, under plans to tackle benefit fraud.
Hundreds of thousands of pensioners who fail to declare their full earnings from private pension schemes will also be targeted as fraud investigators trawl through HM Revenue & Customs records.
The plans form part of a major campaign from ministers this week to publicise reforms to the welfare system, which the Conservatives regard as among their most popular, vote-winning policies.
Ministers will highlight the scale of savings to taxpayers, announce a tougher stance on fraud and detail further action to limit welfare for migrants. Polls suggest that even Labour supporters now regard state benefits as too generous.
Writing for The Telegraph, Iain Duncan Smith, the Work and Pensions Secretary, promises that his reforms will have saved taxpayers £50 billion over the course of the Coalition’s five years in power. The welfare budget forms the biggest part of public expenditure. The Government spent £166 billion on benefits and state pensions to more than 20 million people last year. However, £3.5  billion was “lost” to fraud and payments made in error, an increase from £3.3 billion in 2010.
Ministers aim to reduce the proportion of benefits lost to fraud and error from 2.2 per cent in 2010 to 1.7 per cent by next March.
So far, the proportion of welfare spending lost to fraud has fallen to only 2.1 per cent, while more money is now lost to fraud than four years ago.
This month’s package of plans represents the Government’s last realistic chance to meet its goal. The reforms include:
:: A drive to recover debts owed by fraudsters. Ministers will work with private debt collection firms “to make greater use of bailiffs to seize assets” and “force house sales where appropriate”, officials said. The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) expects to recover at least £414  million as a result of the initiative.
:: Higher fines for cheats caught committing benefits fraud. Officials can already impose a £50 spot fine on individuals who mistakenly and carelessly provide inaccurate information in their claims, and fraudsters face a minimum fine of £350 as an alternative to prosecution. Plans this week are expected to set out new financial penalties.
:: A publicity campaign, including posters urging claimants to report those whom they suspect to be cheating the system, and letters warning individuals to check they are not receiving too much.
:: Existing claimants will be cross-checked against HMRC records to catch pensioners who are receiving extra income than they have declared from private schemes, while also claiming pension credit, a means-tested benefit.
:: A benefit fraud division will be set up within the DWP. The service will pursue people who make false claims, including housing welfare from councils, tax credits from the HMRC, and other DWP payouts.
Officials estimate that fraud by pensioners failing to declare their full income cost taxpayers £170 million last year, up from £140 million in 2012 and more than the £150 million lost to jobseeker’s allowance fraud by those falsely claiming to be out of work.
The investigation into HMRC records will also identify workers who are paid more than they have declared to benefits officers.
Officials expect to find 300,000 pensioners and workers who are claiming benefits to which they are not entitled because they have not declared their full income. The system will be tried out this month.
In a speech this week, Mr Duncan Smith will hail the progress he has made in reforming the welfare system over the past year. Writing for The Telegraph, he rejects claims that his reforms will condemn thousands to a “Dickensian” way of life.
“If you’d listened to the scaremongers, you’d be forgiven for thinking we were ripping up the welfare state and telling people to fend for themselves. In fact, what we are doing is returning the welfare state to what it was meant to be: a safety net, not a way of life.”
Mr Duncan Smith’s speech will be followed by further announcements on limits to welfare payments for new migrants.
David Cameron has sought to address public concern over immigration by imposing limits on welfare for citizens of other European Union countries. Measures include a ban on unemployed migrants claiming housing benefit, which is due to come into force this month.
Migrants from other EU countries will be banned from receiving housing benefit if they are already receiving jobseeker’s allowance, worth up to £71 per week.
Document TELUK00020140405ea45005ei
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	22/02/2014 to 05/04/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or London Evening Standard Online Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,848
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 16:48
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
