{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3416"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Ukip official gave Jobs to illegal migrants
Billy Kenber   
602 words
16 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
1,2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip official employed seven illegal migrants
Ukip's small-business spokesman has been accused of hypocrisy after his restaurant employed seven illegal immigrants last year.
Ukip have regularly attacked the government's immigration policy for allowing "huge" numbers of foreign workers to come to the UK and failing to put "the British people first".
However, Zouk Tea Bar and Grill in Manchester, which Amjad Bashir, 61, set up with his two sons, Tayub and Mudassar, was raided by immigration officers on June 1, 2013.
Three days later, Mr Bashir resigned as a director of the company which owns the restaurant and a sister branch in Bradford. He remains a major shareholder and has continued to take a role in the running of the restaurant.
Mr Bashir, who has also been described by Nigel Farage as Ukip's immigration spokesman, is highly likely to be elected as an MEP in next week's European poll. He shared the stage with Mr Farage in Sheffield last month as the party launched a poster campaign depicting an unemployed British worker "hit hard by unlimited foreign labour".
A Home Office spokeswoman confirmed that seven people were arrested "for a variety of immigration offences" and a civil penalty notice was served after the raid.
Those arrested were primarily waiters and bar staff and several were Pakistani and Indian nationals, according to one of the illegal workers. The civil penalty notice served on the business carries a maximum fine of £70,000, although it is unclear what sum was levied and whether it has been paid. One of Mr Bashir's sons, Tayub, said that they were appealing against the notice and had not yet paid a fine.
He said the restaurant conducted immigration checks on all employees and vigorously denied any wrongdoing. The restaurant, which opened in February 2009, has served Indian and Pakistani cuisine to celebrities such as the singer Rihanna and the footballer Mario Balotelli.
It featured in Ukip's latest party political broadcast which was shown by the BBC and ITV last month.
In the footage, Mr Bashir, who is second on the party's regional list in Yorkshire and the Humber, could be seen supervising the cooking and talking about the challenges of starting a business in the UK.
Yesterday, a receptionist said that Mr Bashir was in the building but that he was not available to speak. His son later said that Mr Bashir had left the company and had "nothing to do with the running of my business".
Edward McMillan-Scott, Lib Dem MEP for Yorkshire and the Humber, said: "Forget the obvious hypocrisy; employing illegal immigrants is exploitative and against the law. Not only are Ukip whipping up ill-feeling towards immigrants, they are supporting a man who has made money off the back of illegal workers."
Donations to Ukip have soared in the run up to the May 22 election. Ukip received £493,000 in donations in the first three months of this year, compared with £74,150 in the same period last year and less than £619,000 in the whole of 2013, according to the Electoral Commission.
Christopher Mills, a hedge fund manager, gave £50,000 to the party, having previously given the same sum last year, and the party treasurer, Stuart Wheeler, contributed almost £200,000.
The Times revealed this week that two leading MEP candidates, including Mr Bashir, and the partner of a third, donated or lent Ukip tens of thousands of pounds around the time that they were selected for safe seats.
Document T000000020140516ea5g000ca
