{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2988"}
____
  
NEWS
Cameron: I'll debate Farage
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
589 words
9 May 2014
13:47
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Prime Minister says he is ready to debate Nigel Farage on television in the run-up to the 2015 general election as he attacks 'incompetent' Ukip
David Cameron is ready to debate with Nigel Farage ahead of the 2015 general election.
The Prime Minister has confirmed that he would share a stage with the Ukip leader as part of next year’s leadership debates.
In a fresh attack, Mr Cameron said Ukip are “incompetent” and unable to control their “unpleasant” candidates.
People who want to leave the European Union should vote Conservative because they are the only party who can offer an in-out referendum, he said.
However, Mr Cameron was unable to say, when challenged, how many rough sleepers and beggars from the European Union had been deported since a pledge was made on the issue in November last year.
In the 2010 general election leadership debates were held on television for the first time, with Nick Clegg, David Cameron and Gordon Brown appearing three times over three weeks in the run-up to the ballot.
Mr Cameron favours a different format, which would see all party leaders take part.
The leader of the Green Party should also appear in the debate with Nigel Farage, while a separate confrontation would see Mr Cameron go head-to-head with Ed Miliband.
Unlike in 2010, the debates should take place outside of the four-week campaign season, Mr Cameron said, to allow him to get around the country.
He said: “We should have one debate with all the parties in so that everybody can have their say, and perhaps we need a debate where the two people who could actually be Prime Minister debate directly with each other.
“You could have a debate where you have all of the parties. I don’t think you can have a party like Ukip without an MP if you don’t have the Greens who have got an MP.”
On the timings of the debates, he said: “I thought last time they rather took the rest of the life out of the general election. I actually like getting out to schools, hospitals and public meetings and work places and talking to people, not just appearing in debates.”
Mr Cameron declined to say whether he believes – as he has previously said – that Ukip is “racist” but said there are serious questions of competence raised by the remarks of some candidates.
Mr Farage has insisted he has done his upmost to weed out extremists, despite a string of candidates embarrassing the party with racist or sexist remarks.
Mr Cameron said voters support the party because they are “frustrated” after a recession and at the pace of immigration and welfare reform, but they must consider who will best represent them in the European Parliament.
He said: “We have seen some extraordinary statements - in many cases very, very unpleasant statements - from Ukip financial backers and candidates and I think it does go to the issue of the competence of the party.
“What on earth are they doing selecting people and allowing people like this to be in their party?”
“You’ve got to, when you think of voting, think about the competence of people who you’re going to send to Strasbourg and Brussels ; the competence of people that are going to run your local council and if they can’t control what they’re saying then that does raise a very big issue of competence.”
Document TELUK00020140509ea59001s0
