{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3799"}
____
  
News
Your cash will be safe with us in the Treasury
COSMO LANDESMAN   
1,689 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
5
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The 'robot' husband and his controller are on the stump for UKIP and despite being haunted by past accusations of sleaze, he dreams of being chancellorNEWS REVIEW INTERVIEW
Iknow what you're thinking: oh no, not them; the dreadful Hamiltons! Mr Sleaze and Mrs Battleaxe. Cash for questions (him) and cash to appear on tacky celebrity shows (her).
Well, knocking the Hamiltons is too easy and too out of date. Today, I meet the new Neil and Christine, who in their own words are "squeaky clean" and very suspicious of the press. The reason I am here is because Neil is now deputy chairman of UKIP — and Christine is the chairwoman of Neil. "I'm a robot under her control," he cries.
This matters because with the European elections next month and UKIP on track to do alarmingly well, the Hamiltons are back; if not at the centre of British political life, then a bit close for comfort.
These days they are constantly on the campaign trail, crisscrossing the country and giving speeches. We meet in a room dominated by pinkish leather chairs, a zebra-striped rug and Christine, who keeps interjecting: "Don't go there, darling!" and, "Watch out for that headline!"
I suspect the new caution is due to a series of recent controversies that have come UKIP's way. There was last week's furore over its campaign posters — with their suggestion that immigrants were after British jobs — that provoked the usual accusations of "racism".
"It was nothing of the sort," spits Neil. "It simply gives the reality of a situation politicians don't want to talk about."
What about the builder who appeared in the party's TV election broadcast who had his membership suspended last week after inflammatory racist posts on Twitter? Or the matter of the UKIP leader, Nigel Farage, employing his German-born wife as his secretary when UKIP's key message is that those pesky European immigrants are after your jobs. The stench of hypocrisy is heavy in the air — but not in this house in south London. "No one could do a 24/7 job like that as well as Kirsten. It would be impractical to have anyone else," Neil says in defence of Mrs Farage.
Still, it is a damning picture, particularly since UKIP's central appeal is that it, unlike that bunch in Westminster, is not sleazy or out of touch. Could it be that Farage and his party are just like the rest? "That's what the media want you to think about Farage. That's what all these attacks are about," says Christine. Ah; the old it is the media-wot-dunnit line of defence. Some things never change.
It is not easy for Neil Hamilton to defend his party from associations with sleaze. In 1997 he lost one of the safest Conservative seats, Tatton in Cheshire, after allegations that he accepted cash from Mohamed al-Fayed, the owner of Harrods, for asking parliamentary questions. He was trounced by the former BBC reporter Martin Bell, who stood as an "anti-sleaze" candidate.
Reports last week claimed Hamilton had been sacked as head of UKIP strategy because his past would compromise his ability to defend the party. "Complete nonsense," Neil says. "There was no demotion. I was only set to do that job for five months. It was always intended that I should go out on the road in the period up to the election, which I'm now doing."
That damn "cash for questions" issue still lingers around Hamilton's name; the sleaze stain that will not wash out. When I ask if he is still haunted by it, he does not flinch. "Normal people never mention it, it's only journalists who do. And it's just not true! I have been vindicated by the Inland Revenue. They scrutinised my financial affairs over a period of 10 years and they concluded there had never been cash for questions." Christine pipes up, "And we got a refund!"
So much of the Hamiltons' public life has been dogged and dominated by controversy. In 1984 the BBC's Panorama programme claimed that Neil was part of a gang of right-wing extremists who had infiltrated the Tory party and that Neil had been caught giving a Nazi salute. He successfully sued the BBC.
As we talk, Max Clifford is in court, charged with various sexual assaults. "We're the only people to have sued Max Clifford successfully," Christine says proudly. In 2001 Clifford was the go-between for a woman who falsely accused the Hamiltons of rape in a story in the News of the World.
I ask Neil why these things keep happening to him. "How do we explain human existence at all? Some people are born lucky, some aren't," he says feebly.
Yet still he clings onto public life. You do not have to be Dr Freud to wonder whether this man has a death wish. Even Christine admits that his sense of humour is always getting him into trouble.
What never gets mentioned in the Neil Hamilton story is what makes this man tick: he is first and foremost a conviction politician. For 50 years Hamilton has been campaigning against Britain's involvement with Europe. As a schoolboy of 15 — he was the only Tory in a small Welsh mining village — Neil joined the Anti-Common Market League. His other great cause is the belief in free markets, something he was advocating long before Margaret Thatcher. I suspect this is why when I ask him if UKIP came to power what position in government he would most like to have, he says: "Chancellor of the exchequer." An ambition which, I suspect, is unlikely to worry George Osborne.
And that is why instead of returning to the Tories, in 2011 he joined UKIP. The story goes that in 2004 Neil and Christine were wooed over a boozy lunch by Farage, who asked both of them to stand as MEPs in forthcoming elections. Neil, who was bankrupt at the time, did not want to go back into politics until he got his finances sorted out. So why had Christine turned UKIP down? "I couldn't stand the idea of running for anything. I hate the confrontational nature of politics."
But why UKIP? Hamilton says the Tories will never leave the European Union and their promise of a referendum is one big "fraud". He is full of paranoia: "Cameron is lying to the electorate over Europe. His referendum will not be free and fair, it will be rigged."
Even Cameron's Christianity is under attack. "He has no serious religious conviction whatsoever. He's just saying what headlines require."
How does he know that? "I know," he says unconvincingly. As for his former party, the 65-year-old Hamilton says with a wry smile: "I can remember the days when it was full of Eton schoolboys."
UKIP's success, Neil says, is because "so many issues are off the agenda because British politicians can't do anything about them; like immigration — we don't control our own borders. The environment is another issue. All those windmills going up and consequently millions are in fuel poverty. The widow who struggles to pay her electricity bill is having such a struggle because she puts money into rich landowners' pockets like Cameron's father-in-law Sir Reginald Sheffield, who gets £1,000 a day for windmills on his land! This is what outrages me!" Christine believes that the political class has simply "lost touch with ordinary people".
Neil chips in: "[People] can see we're not a party consumed by spin and manipulation."
If only that were so. UKIP's pretence that it is the party that speaks its mind is rubbish. For example, Neil is happy to tell you he is a libertarian. But ask what this means in practice — that is, does he believe the individual should be free to choose to take drugs and consume porn — and he says he does not "want to go there", fearing bad headlines.
And when I ask him whether UKIP is a party of the right, Neil says: "These are meaningless and unhelpful terms. UKIP is neither a party of the right or left."
This is intellectually disingenuous; a classic politician's cop-out. And when you listen to them discussing UKIP policy it all sounds so reasonable, so sensible, that you forget that they are a populist party of the right. The couple's talent for spin is right out of the Lord Mandelson school.
I try to point out to Neil that you cannot have it both ways — you cannot say we are the party of politically incorrect mavericks unafraid to go off-message and speak our minds — and then say, oh, by the way, I don't want to talk about that. But the Hamiltons will not budge.
As the interview progresses, bits of the old off-message and indiscreet Hamiltons pop out. They have been together for 45 years — and married for 35. They met at a student conference in Yorkshire. "I looked across the room and he was so good-looking in those days with his Byronic sideburns."
"They were torn off in a moment of passion," says Neil.
Christine tuts and rolls her eyes.
When she says he was studying for a degree, he says: "It wasn't my brain she was interested in!" "Oh, darling, for goodness' sake!" cries Christine.
They are something of a comic double act. She plays the bossy battleaxe to his hen-pecked husband. Their years together have had some bad bumps but life with the Hamiltons has never been boring.
UKIP boogie
Cabaret
Liza Minnelli
The Laughing Policeman
Charles Penrose
Smoke Gets in Your Eyes
Eartha Kitt What a Wonderful World
Louis Armstrong
La Vie en Rose
Edith Piaf Listen to Neil and Christine Hamilton's exclusive Sunday Times playlist at spoti.fi/thehamiltons. If you're not on Spotify, visit thesundaytimes.co.uk/playlists
Document ST00000020140427ea4r000n1
