{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3043"}
____
  
News
Singletons living alone doubles in four decades
John Bingham   
371 words
8 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
16
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE speed at which the singleton lifestyle bemoaned by Bridget Jones is taking hold in Britain is exposed in research showing that the number people living alone is growing 10 times faster than the overall population.
Estimates drawn from government studies suggest that the number of single households in the UK has more than doubled in the past 40 years to almost nine million. The study, commissioned by Liverpool Victoria, the insurer, also concludes that young people will spend 50 per cent longer living alone than members of their parents' generation.
A typical Briton currently in their 20s is now likely to live alone for an average of 15 years during their lifetime, instead of the 10 years those currently approaching retirement might experience.
The shift is the result of a combination of people marrying later and living longer as well as being more likely to divorce.
Together the trends amount to a transformation in the shape of British households within a generation as working–age people increasingly embrace the single lifestyle rather than traditional family life.
Yet the research also suggests that those living alone each pay an average of £1,800 more on housing, utilities and other expenses than people with partners.
The estimates compiled by analysts using a combination of projections from the Government Actuary's Department and data from the Office for National Statistics suggest that the number of single households has increased from 3.8million in 1974 to 8.7million now, a rise of 129 per cent.
During that time the overall population has grown by 13 per cent.
It suggests that while mass immigration and the recent surging birth rate have compounded pressure on Britain's housing supply, transforming lifestyles have had an even more dramatic effect.
The most recent census showed that although the number of pensioners has grown by 10 per cent in a decade the number of widows and widowers actually fell in that time.
The growing number of people in their 20s and 30s opting to live alone have been nicknamed the Bridget Jones generation after the character in the books by Helen Fielding, later adapted into films starring Renée Zellweger.
Document DT00000020140508ea580003d
