{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2278"}
____
  
News
Business investors 'scared off by Labour and Ukip'
Sam Coates   
535 words
21 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Labour and Ukip are forging a new anti-business consensus that makes Britain less welcoming for global investors, George Osborne will say today. Both parties want to tell voters that Britain can "stop the world and get off", suggesting it is possible to recreate the Britain that existed before the rampant globalisation of the past 30 years.
The chancellor will be speaking at the CBI dinner where Sir Mike Rake, the president, will say that Britain is becoming a more risky place to do business because of the actions of all the political parties.
Mr Osborne will try to steer the criticism onto Ukip and Labour, casting both in the same, inward-facing, protectionist mould in a pre-election battle cry.
In the same speech he will also say "Our task to secure our country's economic future is not even half done", amid signs that the scale of cuts in the next parliament may be bigger than those in this one.
The Conservatives are increasingly keen to use Labour's opposition to the Pfizer takeover of AstraZeneca as further proof they are anti-business, while they are linking this with business's dislike of Ukip's opposition to immigration.
Mr Osborne will say: "Political parties on the left and the populist right have this in common: they want to pull up the drawbridge and shut Britain off from the world. They want to constrain foreign investment in our economy, and deprive us of the British jobs that it has created in industries from car manufacturing to energy.
"They want to set prices, regulate incomes, impose rent controls, wage war on big business, demonise wealth creation, renationalise industries, and pretend that they can re-establish control overall aspects of the economy. "Whether from the left or the populist right, we now see a deeply pessimistic, depressing, anti-business agenda."
Their joint endeavor would harm the economy, he will say. "It takes advantage of the understandable anxieties of a population unsettled by the pace of globalisation, and peddles a myth that Britain can stop the world and get off.
"It portrays the changes to the international economy that have lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, and opened vast new markets for Britain, as nothing more than a race to the bottom.
"But price and incomes controls, renationalisations, and erecting the government as the enemy of business and wealth creation will lead Britain down a path of relative economic decline."
The CBI president will echo the call for Britain to remain open for international business. Sir Mike will say: "Business is in no doubt that the UK must retain and secure its global future, trading and investing. Open markets are an essential part of our open economy.
"We cannot be our best when in isolation, we have to face outwards: keep connected to the world and embrace the opportunities afforded to us by being based in the EU.
"It's a fact that economies and businesses are globally interconnected: by goods, services, finance and people. And the growth and jobs we need depend on that connectedness, it makes us more resilient, more dynamic."
Document T000000020140521ea5l0008f
