{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"1365"}
____
  
Features
THERE WILL BE NO WINNERS IN THIS SQUABBLE
BY THE MAIL ON SUNDAY COMMENT   
570 words
2 March 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
25
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
One of the firmest and truest rules of politics is that divided parties lose elections. So how very unwise of George Osborne and his allies, and of Boris Johnson, to engage in unseemly jostling over the future leadership of the Conservative Party. There is no vacancy for this post, and there will only be one if Labour wins in 2015. By then there will be plenty of time for infighting, as there always is in the wilderness.
Voters want competent, clean government and effective action to rescue the economy, along with serious, realistic policies on immigration, justice and education. Mr Osborne and Mr Johnson should concentrate their energies on these things. Successful delivery of good policies is the only worthwhile road to No 10. Mischievous briefing and counter-briefing lead straight to the Opposition benches.
The payday loan companies smilingly insist that they perform a valuable social function. They maintain that they do not take advantage of desperate or ignorant clients, and that they help people through major crises rather than luring them into long-term debt.
Mail on Sunday reporter Ben Ellery, who worked undercover for one such firm, Cheque Centre, found out that these claims are simply untrue. Clients are repeatedly lent cash at appalling rates. Far from waiting for business, lenders actively leaflet areas where they think they may catch customers.
People who are drunk, and people who are mentally unstable are not turned away. Goods that may well have been stolen are accepted as pledges, behaviour that could encourage crime.
Then there is the shocking power given to lenders through the Continued Payment Authority - a legal right to reach into the debtor's bank account many times a day and remove what is there.
It is hard to believe that borrowers fully understand the ruthless reality of this arrangement when they first take out their loans. Given the fierce competition for this very lucrative business, it is also hard to believe that Cheque Centre is alone in its practices. It is the duty of the Government to protect the weak against exploiters of this kind.
It is no longer good enough to accept the lending companies' own account of themselves. They must be fully investigated, then vigilantly regulated to ensure that they keep to civilised rules. If they cannot prosper without this sort of ruthlessness, then they do not deserve to prosper at all.
Eye-test dummies
Many things improve with age - but eyesight is certainly not one of them. Reaction times, reflexes, hearing and general alertness also tend to suffer.
So there was always good sense behind the requirement to renew driving licences at the age of 70, and then to check up every three years after that. It relies quite rightly on the driver's honesty and sense of responsibility, and reminds him or her that it might be time for an eye test.
We are told that 60 is the new 40, and there is no doubt the baby-boom generation are living longer, healthier lives than their parents. But that does not mean that we have discovered the elixir of eternal youth. The DVLA should not abandon this sensible precaution just because the number of 60-year-old drivers is increasing. The price could end up being much bigger than any short-term savings.
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140302ea320000p
