{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1018"}
____
  
News
'Farage is a hero who says what people are thinking' -KURT WALKDEN 20, STUDENT
TREVOR Kavanagh   
1,205 words
19 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
2; National
6,7
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
IS UKIP LEADER VOICE OF NATION..OR BIGOTED MENACE?
SNAKE-OIL SALESMAN OFFENDS... & SEDUCES
'I wouldn't want that racist to represent Britain'- CARL IANGFORD , 28, PARTNER
NIGEL FARAGE electrified politics by raising a foaming pint to the great British public — and two fingers to the Tories, Labour and Lib Dems who kowtow to Brussels.
He transformed Ukip from a ramshackle crew of "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists" into a nationwide movement which this week threatens to change the landscape of modern Britain.
But is this former City trader truly the voice of common sense and reason? Or just a beguiling snake-oil salesman who hit a nerve with angry, voiceless voters?
I have shared a drink with Nigel Farage and can see why his saloon bar rhetoric cheers millions who feel betrayed and abandoned by the Westminster political elite. Most Sun readers share his anger over mass immigration and the complacent arrogance of an unaccountable European superstate.
I cheered his venomous attack four years ago on Europe's deeply unimpressive new president Herman Van Rompuy. It's still a must-watch on YouTube.
"I don't want to be rude," mocked Farage. "But you have the charisma of a damp rag and the appearance of a low grade bank clerk. The question I want to ask is: Who are you?"
Whack! Farage hit the nail on the head. Who chose this petty bureaucrat to run a totalitarian regime with control over laws governing 500million people? It was the beginning of a surge of support for this virtually unknown British MEP and the launchpad for Ukip as a galvanising force in British politics.
Today the party stands potentially on the threshold of game-changing elections for the European Parliament.
If the polls over recent weeks are right, Ukip will sweep to victory on Thursday, embarrassing Labour's Ed Miliband, humiliating PM David Cameron and exterminating the Lib Dems.
Party bosses can only pray that millions of defectors who want to cock a snook will come home in time to stop Ukip translating this triumph into real seats at Westminster. But some of those polls have begun to shift. Three of them show Tories ahead of Labour in the past few days. In one, possibly a rogue, the Tories are even ahead of Ukip on Europe.
Such an outcome would kill Farage and his Ukip insurrection at a stroke. We must wait until the weekend to see if this is a temporary wobble, or signs of doubt about a one-man band with too many oddball supporters.
I am always besieged by decent ex-Tory and ex-Labour voters if I portray Ukip supporters as less than fully sane. And indeed there are oddballs, crooks and deviants in all parties.
But for a small party, Ukip has more than its fair share, some of them quite nasty. As for Nigel Farage himself, I have my worries. He runs the party as his personal fiefdom. It is hard to imagine him as a collegiate Cabinet minister, still less as Prime Minister. If he fell under a bus, Ukip would go with him.
Is he racist? He is married to a German which suggests he is far from xenophobic. But he too often sounds like it.
He has been accused of — and denies — using the N-word in private. The key to his success is playing on our fears and prejudices, not our generous good natures.
Voters will never forgive Labour for opening the floodgates to five million and this is a rich seam for Ukip. Farage is entitled to argue hard-working Brits have been sidelined as a consequence.
His remarks about Romanians offended many. But few would have disagreed if he had specified Roma, whose gangs of thieves and beggars give Romanians a bad name. As for his policies on the economy, law and order, the NHS and education, he has taken most of these off the peg to fit all sizes.
Many find this package genuinely seductive. Others could not care less. They just want to give a kicking to the the Tories, Labour and especially the peevish and increasingly shabby Lib Dems. And who can blame them?
THE KEY policy of Ukip is to see Britain regain control of our borders and immigration — and it reckons that is only possible by leaving the EU.
Nigel Farage's party wants to cut foreign aid and bring in a points-based visa system, and insists that anyone who does move here must financially support themselves and their dependants for five years.
But how do voters view their leader? We asked around the country if he is a HERO or a VILLAIN...
HERO: I agree with everything he says. I can understand what he said about Romanians living next door — it could be intimidating. I am worried for my children and grandchildren.
— Retired teacher Pam Adams, 73, Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwicks
VILLAIN: Being a black person, even if you haven't lived in this country for that many years you still count. It makes you think he's a racist in the back of your mind.
— Teaching assistant Jerome Foster, 27, Battersea, S London
HERO: He is without doubt a hero. He is sorting the country out and it is long overdue. He is careful with what he says and he says what people are thinking.
— Student Kurt Walkden, 20, Sutton Coldfield, West Mids
VILLAIN: He's like the school bully — he's the one who nitpicks the small things and makes things more personal. I don't want a bully running the country.
— Hairdresser Suzan Kucukaltan, 28, Leeds, West Yorks
HERO: Look at all the complaints about immigration and no one is doing anything about it, but he promises to. The country needs a wake-up call. It's not the place it used to be.
— Pensioner Jeanette Hill, 69, Wimbledon, SW London
VILLAIN: Britain is a country built on multi-culture. We've learned to get along with each other and respect each other — and someone like him just undoes all that work.
— Company boss Nav Noora, 27, Leeds, West Yorks
HERO: I'll be voting Ukip. It's not that Farage is racist, he wants the best for people. It's the Government that makes people racist by letting in too many people.
— Unemployed Joanne Openshaw, 53, Bolton, Gtr Manchester
VILLAIN: I don't want him representing our country, it wouldn't be right and I think he is racist. He shouldn't and won't be the man to take us forward — I hope not anyway.
— Painter Carl Langford, 28, Walsall, West Mids
HERO: He speaks out and is brave enough to stand by his convictions. He does put his foot in it sometimes, but he usually has an explanation so I trust he could sort things out.
— Administrator Sarah Mowbray, 39, Cheam, Surrey
VILLAIN: I am not saying he is racist but he leaves a lot to the imagination. There is a veneer of respectability to him, but I am not sure he is respectable deep down.
— Call centre worker Wes Saxton, 34, Newcastle
Document THESUN0020140519ea5j000au
