{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1419"}
____
  
News
Ukip says it's not a racist party. So why is it channelling the ghost of Bernard Manning?
By Damian Thompson   
558 words
3 March 2014
14:35
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
I've just got off a plane from the States – where my luggage still is, thank you, American Airlines – and caught up with the latest accusations of Ukip "racism": that is, the furore over the after-dinner speaker who told the sort of jokes about foreigners that were embarrassing even in the 1970s. (Anyone remember the sitcom Mind Your Language?) Dan Hodges reckons Ukip has become a racist party. I disagree. For the time being.
I know Nigel Farage; he's not a racist. And I don't believe that his advisers are racists, or most of his activists. I've seen no evidence that Ukip candidates run the sort of sotto voce race-baiting campaigns that the mainstream parties dabbled in until the 1980s (though, who knows, perhaps something will come to light: CCHQ has a file on this topic).
But Ukip's new focus on immigration is a dangerous one. While Farage is clear in his own mind where the boundary lies between legitimate concerns and racism, he seems unaware (or not to care) that the ears of younger, more liberal voters are picking up a dog whistle. For example:
“The question here, it isn’t just about money, it isn’t about GDP; I think it’s about community, it’s a sense of who we are as a people and what we belong to."
Farage said this in the course of an interview in which he deplored the effect of uncontrolled immigration on the job market. Fair enough. But expressing fears about "who were are as a people"? Doesn't he realise how easily that remark can be reinterpreted? Many people who don't like blacks or Asians will hear it and think: "Ukip's the party for me".
I can't understand why Farage is so laid back about the damage to his party's image. What the hell was Ukip doing, booking some moron to make jokes about foreigners and Muslims at a gala dinner? And why did it defend that woman activist who was filmed saying she'd like to "send the lot back"?
I admire Farage for refusing to have anything to do with the Marine Le Pen's Front National – anti-Semitism is in its DNA, he says, and he's right. But his determination not to give in to "political correctness" is leading him astray. The rhetoric and ideology of PC is indeed ghastly. But I've never met a British racist who didn't justify his or her attitudes by invoking "political correctness gone mad" or some such formula.
Ukip is convincing when it argues that it's anti-EU but not anti-Europe; the hijacking of Continental culture by a dirigiste, neo-imperialist elite is a historic tragedy.
But it's less convincing when it argues that it's anti-immigration but not anti-immigrant. At the moment Ukip is looking like a party that's channelling the ghost of Bernard Manning, whose grotesque stand-up routine I once saw live in his Manchester nightclub. Just imagine if Bernard were still with us; I suspect that's one celebrity endorsement Nigel would have in the bag.
 窶｢ Dan Hodges: Ukip is now a racist party 
 
Document TELUK00020140303ea330059a
