{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1952"}
____
  
NEWS
Abu Hamza trial: American follower tells terror trial about US jihad training camp
By Our Foreign Staff in New York   
780 words
30 April 2014
23:51
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
James Ujaama describes how he helped set up a terror training camp in Oregon and delivered a teenage British recruit from Hamza’s Finsbury Park mosque to Afghanistan
A key American aide of hate preacher Abu Hamza suggested setting up a terrorist training camp in the United States so British Muslims could learn to fire guns and practise warfare tactics
“Shooting is illegal in the UK and I thought they could then go from America to Afghanistan,” James Ujaama told the New York terror trial of the one-eyed cleric.
“I told Sheikh Abu Hamza about this because we had talked about this before.”
Ujaama drove nine hours from his home in Seattle to tiny Bly, Oregon, to check out a potential camp where he said the arid mountainous terrain was similar to parts of Afghanistan.
Asked by the prosecution about Hamza’s views on religious warfare, Ujaama said: “His views on physical jihad training was it was obligatory – every Muslim should engage in it.”
Ujaama became close to Hamza after visiting his Finsbury Park Mosque in 1999 and discovering they shared the same views on American involvement in the Arabian Peninsular.
“His view was that the United States foreign policy in regards to Muslims was very bad and disruptive,” Ujaama said.
“He felt that the US was not wanted there and they should be removed from the area.”
Asked how, Ujaama said: “By violence if necessary, by any means necessary to remove them.
“He said violence was necessary to remove the United States military and it was justified.”
Ujaama said that he ran Hamza’s website, helped set up the jihad training camp and ultimately delivered a teenage recruit and cash to Afghanistan.
After the American government had declared the Taliban a terrorist organisation, Ujaama said Hamza’s “view was they (Taliban) were a good government and a proper Islamic government that should be supported by Muslims”.
Ujaama received six years jail in the US for his role in setting up the alleged jihad training camp in Oregon and delivering Feroz Abbasi, a young British follower of Hamza, to the front lines in Afghanistan.
He told the court he agreed to testify against others in exchange for a shortened jail sentence.
Looking nervously at Hamza, who is appearing in New York Federal Court minus his trademark hook, he told how he became close to the cleric while working for him between 1999 and 2001.
He said he moved from Seattle to London to run Hamza’s Supporters of Sharia websites and magazine and taught other young radicals how to download and edit material including Hamza’s speeches and sermons.
Mr Abbasi, then in his late teens, was one of his students and Ujaama said he agreed to take him to the Afghan front line before the September 11 2001 terrorist attacks.
“Abu Hamza gave me the order,” he said. “He ordered me to take Feroz Abbasi to Afghanistan.
“He told me to take him to a sheikh who was a front line commander – someone who was like a general on the battlefield.”
Mr Abbasi was detained in late 2001 by US forces and held for four years at the Guantánamo Bay detention centre, but was later released without charge. Now back in Britain, he continues to protest his innocence.
Ujaama was also asked about events in Yemenn. “I recall Abu Hamza mentioning a satellite phone he wished he had sent after a friend of his son was sent over there,” he said.
Hamza is accused of providing financing and a satellite phone to hostage takers in the Yemen in 1998. Three British tourists and an American died as rescuers tried to free them.
Grey-haired, bespectacled Ujaama said that he first met Hamza when he travelled to London and listened to his sermons and speeches at the Finsbury Park Mosque.
“My relationship with Abu Hamza became very close between 2000 and 2001, prior to that I was establishing a very close relationship with him in 1999.”
Asked how he was paid, Ujaama said: “I was permitted to take money from the collections and use that for living and travel expenses.
“There were collections for an immigration fund, for people to immigrate to the Islamic country of Afghanistan.
“The money was raised through collections at the mosque and in jars distributed throughout London and by way of donations by members of the mosque.”
Hamza, who was extradited from Britain in 2012, has pleaded not guilty to 11 terrorism charges and faces life in jail if convicted. The trial continues.
Document TELUK00020140430ea4u0050m
