{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2545"}
____
  
NEWS
The truth about immigration and the economy; Immigration dominates British politics and will continue to do so in the build-up to next year's election, but according to the experts, foreigners are good for the economy
By Peter Dominiczak   
687 words
6 March 2014
10:22
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Immigration is the most contentious issue in British politics.
Net migration is rising, leaving David Cameron with an uncomfortable problem ahead of next year's general election.
The Prime Minister promised voters he would get net migration down to the "tens of thousands" by the time the polls open in May 2015.
It is looking increasingly likely that he will not hit that target.
Meanwhile, unruly Conservative backbenchers complain that the Government has not been tough enough.
They say Mr Cameron should have slammed the door shut on Romanian and Bulgarian migrants in January - rather than simply announcing a series of measures designed to put them off coming to Britain.
On the face of it, the figures appear to back up claims that immigration is out of control.
The Office for National Statistics released figures earlier this month that showed a net flow of 212,000 migrants to Britain, up nearly 60,000 year-on-year.
The previous year there was a net flow if 154,000 migrants.
But the total number of migrants walking in and out of Britain does not necessarily tell the whole story.
The - sometimes uncomfortable - truth about immigration is that it really is good for Britain's economy.
Last year, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, a respected think-tank, suggested immigration means the UK deficit is up to £16 billion smaller than it would be if we relied on homegrown workers alone.
The OECD estimate for the impact of immigration on the public finances excluding pensions - showing a 1.02 per cent GDP contribution.
Interactive chart: Fiscal impact excluding pensions
The OECD has found that international migration is making a positive difference to Britain’s public finances.
According to its number crunchers, the Government’s deficit is smaller that it would have been without the presence of immigrants in the UK.
The Treasury’s Office for Budget Responsibility regularly predicts that if immigration falls dramatically the public finances face a new £65 billion black hole because of lost tax revenues.
The Treasury itself puts 0.25 percentage points of annual GDP growth down to immigration. - that’s a bit more than £4 billion.
And a study last year by economists at University College London calculated that recent European immigrants pay £8.8 billion more in tax than they consume in public services.
Simply put: The recovery would not be going as well as it is without immigrants.
British taxes are lower, spending is higher and the deficit is smaller – in part thanks to foreigners.
But a lot of people are worried about immigration.
As this graph below by Ipsos Mori shows, even foreign-born people are getting increasingly concerned about immigration.
The study found that long-time immigrants are almost as concerned about immigration as people born in the UK
The longer foreign-born people have lived in the UK, the more likely they are to be less keen about immigration.
The study found that 70 per cent of people who came to live in the UK before 1970 believe that immigrations needs to be “reduced a lot" or “reduced a little".
Do you think the number of immigrants coming to Britain nowadays should be increased a lot, increased a little, remain the same as it is, reduced a little, or reduced a lot?
So despite the fact that immigration appears to be good for the economy, all the evidence shows that many people are concerned about what they see as the negative aspects about foreigners moving to the UK.
Which is why the Government is working so hard to get net migration down.
And why Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, is succeeding in making life so hard for Mr Cameron by constantly talking about the issue.
Despite all the economic evidence, the truth is that immigration is just too complicated to be explained just by the numbers.
Document TELUK00020140306ea36002sd
