{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1698"}
____
  
News
Britain is being invaded. Close the borders!
Ben Macintyre   
951 words
18 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Not since the Vikings have so many foreign species colonised our lands. But - truth be told - many should be welcomed
The Japanese knotweed is already on the march along the banks of the loch near my Scottish home, its bright green alien fronds shooting upwards at the rate of a metre a month and proliferating like some strange horticultural plague. The knotweed was imported to Britain by Victorian gardeners as a decorative pond plant. Now it is rampant.
And where the knotweed ends, the common rhododendron starts, smothering the hillside, killing everything beneath it. When it flowers the rhododendron will spread a hideous Barbara Cartland pink across a landscape that should be painted in subtle browns and greens. Imported from Asia as ground cover for game, it is one of the nastiest weeds in Britain.
The sight of the knotweed and rhododendron, two alien foreign invaders fighting for space in a place where they should not be, depressed me, so I went for walk in the oak wood and then home for a comforting bowl of leek and potato soup — a walk among one non-native species and lunch on two more.
For most British oaks are not really British, but mainly Spanish; oaks were wiped out in the last glaciation, and reintroduced from the Iberian peninsula. Leeks arrived in this country with the Romans. (What did the Romans ever do for us? Vegetable soup: cabbage, onions, garlic and celery, along with chickens to make the stock.) The first potato was domesticated in Peru 10,000 years ago and only arrived in Europe towards the end of the 16th century.
We are hopelessly confused in Britain about what is and what is not native to this country. The outcry against alien invasive species frequently takes on a weird xenophobic tinge.
We fulminate against the imported grey squirrel (so much less cuddly than our home-grown Squirrel Nutkins), but largely ignore attractively striped zebra mussels from Russia, which appeared about a decade ago and are now causing billions of pounds worth of damage to water plants. The sturdy privet hedge is a symbol of suburban Britain, but comes from Japan.
There is a tendency to assume that non-British species are, by definition, dangerous, when some of the most invasive and ecologically-disruptive plants are native, such as bracken. The vast majority of incomers have arrived, settled down peacefully and become happily absorbed into British biological life.
The parallels with the immigration debate are striking. Our ecological heritage, like our human population, is a fabulous hodgepodge, a fascinating intermingling over the centuries brought about by nature, accident and trade. As in the furore over human immigration, there is a tendency to focus on where new arrivals come from or what they look like, rather than what they will do, for better or worse, when they get here.
The giant African snail provokes media hysteria, though as an invader it is both slow and controllable. Meanwhile, the stealthy intrusion from Europe of infected ash trees that could devastate the native ash passed unnoticed until too late.
The latest survey found 1,875 nonnative species of flora and fauna in Britain, most of which have been happily assimilated. Of these, 282 are classed as "invasive", but of those only a few can be considered truly dangerous, brutal, implacable colonisers — the Viking plunderers of the natural world.
These are the enemy interlopers that should be repelled with the full force of law and science. The need to eliminate certain hostile plants and animals was recognised this week by the Commons environmental audit committee. It called for an overhaul of laws on invasive species and injected a note of solid good sense into an issue often muddied by hysteria, anthropomorphism and a sort of biological racism. "We have to be smart and pick the fights that we know we can win," said Joan Walley, who chairs the committee.
The laws on species invasion are hopelessly antiquated. Last month the Grey Squirrels (Prohibition of Importation and Keeping) Order of 1937 was quietly dropped from the statute book: this had imposed a £5 fine for anyone who failed to report the presence of the animals on their land. Few people had ever done so and none had been fined.
The committee urged new legislation to ensure that landowners who fail to tackle notorious invaders are forced to pay for eradication measures carried out by government officials without their permission.
Any ship found to be in British ports with ballast tanks containing invasive organisms (which is how the zebra mussel hitched a lift here), should face heavy fines. England and Wales should follow Scotland in giving officials greater powers to impose "species control orders", enabling the eradication of invaders before they become established.
Destroying knotweed is not hard, but it is expensive. Some £1.5 billion was spent last year on battling this aggressive and unproductive colonist. That expense and effort would never have been necessary with proper controls in place.
There is no pure ecological Eden to which Britain can somehow return; biologically this has never been an island unto itself. There are friendly biological immigrants, and parasitic ones; there are species that come to settle and contribute to a rich heritage and others determined to take over and take advantage of our accommodating climate. As with humans, it is perfectly possible to spot the difference: to welcome one, and put a stop to the other.
The Roman leek can stay; the Japanese knotweed must go.
Our oaks are not really English and the leek was originally Roman
Infected ash trees rather than African snails are the danger
Document T000000020140418ea4i00009
