{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3714"}
____
  
News
Prince Charles stirs diplomatic row over Putin comments
CAHAL MILMO   
410 words
22 May 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
14
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News
Prince Charles yesterday faced a call to "abdicate" and was blamed for a renewed chill in Anglo-Russian relations following his apparent comparison of Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler over Russia's annexation of Crimea.
The heir to the throne found himself in political and diplomatic hot water after a former Polish wartime refugee who met him in Canada said that during a private conversation he had likened the Russian President's actions in Ukraine to the expansionist actions of Hitler's Germany.
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg came to the Prince's aid by saying he believed the Prince was entitled to express his own views and that members of the Royal Family should not be expected to enter into a "Trappist vow of silence".
Speaking on his LBC Radio phone-in, Mr Clegg said: "Prince Charles should be perfectly entitled to express views in the confidence that he's expressing them privately."
The Prince had discussed Nazi Germany's invasion of countries while he spoke with Marienne Ferguson, who escaped wartime Poland, at the Nova Scotia immigration museum where she works. Asked about their conversation, Ms Ferguson said Prince Charles, who is due to meet the Russian President for the D-Day commemorations in France next month, had suggested Hitler's actions were "not unlike… what Putin is doing" in annexing Crimea.
The Prince is known for his strongly held and sometimes uncompromisingly expressed views on issues from architecture to homeopathy.
A senior Labour MP said it was incumbent on the heir to the throne, who is assuming more of his mother's duties as part of a "gentle succession", to steer clear of issues that are the domain of elected politicians.
Mike Gapes, a member of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, said: "If Prince Charles wants to make controversial statements on national or international issues, he should abdicate and stand for election... Monarchy should be seen and not heard."
While a spokesman for Mr Putin declined to comment on the reported remarks, they brought a frosty response from the Moscow media.
Moskovskij Komsomolets, a popular daily paper, wrote: "The heir to the British throne, Prince Charles, risks triggering an international scandal and complicating the already not unclouded relationship between Britain and Russia."
Clarence House said in a statement: "The Prince of Wales would not seek to make a public political statement during a private conversation."
Document IND0000020140522ea5m00020
