{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2604"}
____
  
Tories are in 'open warfare' over their 'Eton mess'; Jon Ashworth, the shadow Cabinet minister, says that the 'open warfare' in the Conservative party over its future leadership and Eton will cost it dearly
By Jon Ashworth Shadow Cabinet Minister   
630 words
18 March 2014
11:29
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
George wants to stop Boris becoming leader, because he wants to be leader himself. Michael wants to help George. Dave backs Michael, because he's afraid of Boris. But Michael doesn't want to seem too close to Dave, so he reminds everyone that he didn't go to the same school as Dave and all his friends.
Boris, who went to the same school as Dave, is furious with Michael, but not as furious as Dave is. Boris' dad wants to change the rules to help Boris. And Sayeeda tried to help Michael, but forgot that Dave is her boss and that nobody is friends with her because she didn’t go to the same school as any of them.
The open warfare we are now witnessing in the Conservative Party’s upper echelons sees the party turning inwards and focusing on itself at a time when the country wants to see a focus on the cost-of-living crisis that’s been growing over the last four years. It’s a self-obsession we’ve seen over and over again, during the 1992-97 Parliament and repeatedly during the Tories’ period in opposition. And it shows us three important things.
First, it shows that this is a Party in which discipline has broken down because it doesn't believe it can win – after all, why manoeuvre for the leadership if you don't expect there to be a vacancy?
Second, it shows that this is a Party which has never liked its leader very much. David Cameron's promise to his Party – vote for me, and I'll deliver victory – was broken at the moment the Conservatives were forced into coalition.
David Cameron’s MPs might forgive him breaking his promises to the public on the NHS, the economy and immigration, but he breaks his promises to his own Party at his own peril. They would tolerate David Cameron if he was a winner. He’s not, and so they don’t.
Most importantly, it shows that being out of touch matters. The criticisms of Michael Gove and Sayeeda Warsi of the Old Etonian elite at the top of the Conservative Party could be laughed off if they weren't true. The trouble is that David Cameron has chosen, freely, to surround himself with people from the same background as him.
They look like him, they think like him, they go to the same dinner parties. Astonishingly, David Cameron, his chief of staff, his minister for government policy, the head of his policy unit and the Chancellor’s chief advisor all went to the same school. And that has an impact on the policies they have chosen.
Wages are down an average £1,600 a year since David Cameron became Prime Minister, but the people he’s close to, the people he governs for, don’t feel it. That’s why he and George Osborne are happy to crow that the economy has been fixed – and why most people in the country listen to their complacent boasts with disbelief.
Prices are rising faster than wages for most people, but bankers’ pay is streaking ahead again, and bonuses have rocketed. If all the people you associate with are feeling better off, then it’s difficult to see the problem. And David Cameron and his insulated inner circle have done their best to help their friends. You might not be benefiting from the cut in the 50p top rate of tax – but people earning over £150,000 a year are.
Document TELUK00020140318ea3i002xp
