{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2145"}
____
  
News
What's the differencebetween Romanians moving in next door.. or Germans?[...]
STEVE HAWKES   
434 words
17 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
2; National
9
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
UKIP FARAGE IN RACE STORM
NIGEL Farage was branded a racist yesterday — for saying Brits would be concerned if Romanian men moved in next door.
Furious officials at the Romanian Cultural Centre in London said it was the worst comment any political leader "could possibly make".
The Ukip chief stood by his view, given in an earlier interview, that he would be concerned if he had Romanian neighbours.
He said: "I was asked a question, if a group of Romanian men moved in next to you, would you be concerned. And if you lived in London, I think you would be." He went on to declare: "We want an immigration policy based on controlling not just quantity, but quality as well."
And he claimed the Metropolitan Police have produced "eye-watering" crime statistics on Romanians.
His remarks came during tetchy exchanges with presenter James O'Brien on LBC radio yesterday.
At one point, O'Brien said: "And what about the line about not wanting to live next door to Romanians. It's perfectly acceptable for people not to want to…" Farage: I didn't say that. I was asked, if a group of Romanian men moved in next door to you, would you be concerned. O'Brien: What about if a group of German children did? What's the difference? Farage: You know what the difference is.
O'Brien: No I honestly don't. In the car crash radio interview, Farage insisted his party did not like to be linked to the Far Right.
Languages And he defended previous comments that it was uncomfortable to hear so many foreign languages on the London Underground.
Mr Farage also said he had no problem with his German wife or kids speaking German — as they also speak English.
Last night Romanian Cultural Centre chief Nicolae Ratiu said his countrymen coming to London would be "horrified" to hear Ukip's views. He told The Sun: "It's the most racist comment he could possibly make."
Last week, Mr Farage attacked the political class and the media for reporting "stupid or offensive" comments by Ukip candidates.
Yesterday, it emerged Gloucestershire council candidate John Lyndon Sullivan had once asked on Twitter what would happen "if we shot a poofter. Would the rest turn straight?" Challenged about the comments, Mr Farage said: "People say silly things." He then added: "I haven't heard of him."
Last night PM David Cameron said some of Mr Farage's remarks were "pretty unpleasant".
steve.hawkes@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUN0020140517ea5h000gm
