{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2234"}
____
  
Features
Push on and we'll all get a good school
ELEANOR MILLS   
1,403 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Not everyone won the school of their choice last week but middle-class parents priced out of private education and immigrant ambition are finally driving up standards
Well, the sun is shining, and as we bask — finally — in some longdeserved warmth and brightness, there is another reason to celebrate too. Last week brought National Offer Day — that crucial mark on the calendar, hanging over many of us for months, when we finally found out where our offspring would be going to secondary school.
For some, including Michael Gove, the education secretary, the news was good. Gove Jr won a place at Grey Coat Hospital school, a (smart) comprehensive in Westminster, London. That makes Gove, incredibly, the first Conservative education secretary to send a child to a state school. Gulp. Given the number of public school-educated blokes clustered around our prime minister (more Old Etonians than women at the last count) I suppose we should count our blessings.
While the Gove family is celebrating little Beatrice getting her first-choice school, for half a million other families whose offspring didn't win the place they wanted the week wasn't quite such a happy one. In Bristol, for instance, demand for places was up 8%, in London 5% — with the result that 31% in the capital got rejected by their preferred school. The education arms race is in full swing; for the grammars, academies and the new free schools, in particular, competition for spaces has been intense. At Tiffin School in Surrey, 1,863 boys tried for 160 places. At the grammar where my own daughter won a place last week there were 2,000 applications for 93 spots. This is set to get even worse as the latest baby boom population bulge takes effect.
Rows about immigration have raged in the past week, particularly about whether or not it damages the economy. Yet what is clear from the London experience is how much value immigrant families put on their children's educational achievement and how that desire to learn is boosting the system. In the queues for the grammar school open days it was striking how the vast majority of aspirant families were of African and Asian background. Sure there was a sprinkling of sharpelbowed middle-class whites in the mix — yes, I plead guilty to that — but I hardly saw a single white working-class family.
It isn't just me. At the London Academy of Excellence, a free school in the borough of Newham, east London, which opened in 2012 and recently got six pupils into Oxbridge, all but a handful of the intake were from immigrant families. So much so that the school has just launched an initiative to target white working-class children (white working-class boys do worse than any other group in British schools and the situation is so bad that the Commons education select committee has devoted sessions to tackling it).
It is not just the educationally voracious children of immigrants driving up standards in the capital. When the head of Ofsted, Michael Wilshaw, was headmaster at Mossbourne Academy in Hackney, he pioneered an approach called the London Challenge, where outstanding schools such as his mentored and helped to improve standards in others. Wilshaw intends to replicate this programme in areas of chronic educational underachievement around the country including Norfolk, Suffolk and coastal Kent (described to me by one senior educationalist as "education deserts").
The expansion of the academies and the free school programme has also helped to improve choice for parents and the demand is intense. The West London Free School, for instance, had 1,124 applicants for 120 places. Also significant in the raising of the bar has been Teach First, a programme which began in 2002 where the brightest graduates spend a couple of years teaching in tough schools. One chief executive I know, whose child attends an academy with a flotilla of Teach First teachers, was so impressed by the sparky young people inspiring his son that he wished he could hire them for his own company.
The real proof that the English education system is finally going in the right direction is Wales. While England has embraced the idea of diverse kinds of schools, devolving more power to head teachers, making it easier to get rid of poorly performing staff, using rigorous testing and Ofsted inspections, Wales remains un-diverse and has scrapped testing and league tables. The result? It has plunged down the Organisation for Economic Development's Pisa league tables from 29th to 38th out of 59 countries for reading, and to 40th from 33rd out of 67 countries for maths. Only 25.8% of children entitled to free school meals in Wales obtained good GCSEs, compared with 38.1% in England.
I have a theory that the invasion of Britain by the global super-rich is also boosting state schools by sending a flock of middle-class parents into their fold. Just as bourgeois Brits have been priced out of London areas such as Chelsea, Fulham and Notting Hill or posh parts of the Cotswolds or Cornwall by bankers and billionaires, so the expense of independent schools is beyond them, too.
At the beginning of the year Tatler magazine produced its first guide to state schools — signalling a shift in attitude among the chattering classes in regard to private education. Partly it is born of necessity. Fees at independent schools are now four times as expensive in real terms as they were in the 1980s — costing between £15,000 and £30,000 a year a child. When you go round them, as I have been doing recently, it's striking how international they are. At one top boarding school there were only a handful of British girls in the sixth form.
With some top universities actively recruiting students from the state sector, many cash-squeezed, privately educated parents are wondering whether it is even worth the sacrifice required to educate their children at an independent school. As one businessman said: "Who needs the old school tie when you've got LinkedIn? Most high-flyers in business these days went to good comprehensives and non-Oxbridge universities and are judged on what they can do, not where they came from. It's much more meritocratic."
That view is borne out by Sutton Trust research into social mobility which shows that while the professions are still overwhelmingly the preserve of the privately educated (the law, media and politics being some of the worst offenders), business leaders are more socially mobile. It also comes down to what we want for our children. Personally, I want them to be the kind of people who can go both to a council house and a palace and not only know how to behave but also not feel intimidated. I certainly don't want them to fall prey to the "silent epidemic", as The Times put it recently, of anxiety and eating disorders. Being in more of a social melting pot, rather than a moneyed social pressure cooker, must be good for that.
So, well done, Michael Gove, keeping it real(ish) in the poshest government we've had for years; and good luck to all of you lodging appeals or making the best of not having got the school you want. Hopefully with an education secretary with some skin in the game, all our schools will continue to improve.
? Once upon a time there was a prince who flew helicopters and a duchess who said she would do without a nanny and look after her baby herself — not so hard as she didn't have a job and had a house full of servants. Then the prince quit working as an RAF search-and-rescue pilot in Wales, the duchess jetted off to Mustique, then hired a nanny, left the baby behind and went off with her husband to the Maldives to stay in an epically swanky hotel. Their subjects scratched their heads, wondering what had happened to the grounded couple they had fallen in love with. I fear that this story may not have a happy ending.
Do you agree? Email me at eleanormills@sunday-times.co.uk or tweet @eleanormills
Michael Gove is the first Tory education secretary to send a child to a state school
Document ST00000020140309ea39000bt
