{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"1345"}
____
  
Features
Four artists, writers and composers whose work defined the war
Patrick Bishop   
2,134 words
2 March 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
6,7,8,9
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The First World War was the first conflict to spawn a wealth of artistic output from those who fought on its battlefields. The Somme alone saw more writers take part than any other battle in history, including Siegfried Sassoon, Robert Graves, JRR Tolkien and Edmund Blunden. There, and on other fighting fronts, a new breed of well-educated soldier vividly chronicled their first-hand experiences through words, art and music.
Some were killed in action, bright lights of their generation such as the composer George Butterworth - another Somme casualty - whose creative promise would never be fulfilled. The "luckier" ones were left forever with a survivor's guilt that darkly permeated their future work. All leave an invaluable legacy, whether through poetry, memoirs, fiction or art, that helps future generations to understand the reality of war.
Here, Patrick Bishop selects four artists, composers and writers (and their key works) who experienced the conflict first-hand and whose works have not only come to define the war; they changed what came after.
OTTO DIX: TRENCH WARFARE (1932)
Dix was a 23-year-old art student in Dresden when the war broke out and he enlisted enthusiastically in the German Army. He fought as a machine-gunner on the Eastern and Western fronts, took part in the Battle of the Somme, won the Iron Cross and left the trenches only after being shot in the neck a few months before hostilities ended. His experiences were to haunt him for the rest of his life and inform some of his darkest and most brilliant work. The results are exemplified by his 1932 painting Trench Warfare (below), whose macabre imagery and charnel-house palette evoke a medieval atmosphere of suffering and evil. Dix was determined to confront the public with the reality of the war, but his honesty was unwelcome and the picture caused an outcry when first shown in Cologne. The "unpatriotic" message of pointlessness was not lost on the Nazis, who included it in their 1937 exhibition of degenerate art.
PAUL NASH: WE ARE MAYING A NEW WORLD (1918)
No human figure inhabits this 1918 landscape (left). Nash seems to be saying that they are all gone, subsumed in the churned, polluted earth, stagnant water and shattered tree stumps, which the rising sun will never restore to life.
Nash was a public schoolboy, the son of a successful London lawyer. In 1914 he was at the Slade School of Art, one of a brilliant batch of students that included Stanley Spencer, Ben Nicholson and CRW Nevinson. He volunteered first for the Artists Rifles and arrived as a subaltern on the Western Front in February 1917. He was sent home after injuring himself in an accident but returned that autumn as an official war artist. His work did little to popularise the cause. As he declared in a letter to his wife, he was "no longer an artist, interested and curious", there to observe and record, but a "messenger" bent on bearing witness to the horrors of trench life. He succeeded triumphantly. Over the years, the flat colours and bold shapes of his wartime paintings have embedded themselves in our consciousness. When the next war broke out, Nash served once again as an official artist, creating images that are perhaps less bleak but equally unforgettable.
WYNDHAM LEWIS: A BATTERY SHELLED (1919)
Wyndham Lewis perhaps knew more than any of his artistic contemporaries about the business of war.
He was in his thirties when the conflict began; and had already established himself as a leading light of the avant garde as the founder of the cubism-inspired Vorticist school and the author of its short-lived but hugely influential journal, Blast.
As an gunnery officer, he was intimately engaged in the artillery duels that did most of the killing on the Western Front. As well as commanding a battery, he acted as spotter, operating from exposed forward observation posts to call down fire on the enemy.
A Battery Shelled (above) is a mysterious construct. A group of soldiers, one of them apparently Lewis, look out with seeming indifference over a sterile landscape of bunkers and geometric trench lines peopled by robotic stick men.
Vorticism did not survive the war and subsequently Lewis applied his questing energy to writing and criticism, much of it contentious.
COMPOSERS
GEORGE BUTTERWORTH
The Banks of Green Willow (1913) Shot through the head by a sniper on the Somme in August 1916, Butterworth is a symbol of the budding talent that was burned up in the holocaust of the war.
Born into the Victorian upper-middle classes, he went to Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, and was a friend of Ralph Vaughan Williams. He made his name with settings of AE Housman's A Shropshire Lad and an interpretation of a folk song, The Banks of Green Willow — often played during commemoration ceremonies on the Somme. This "idyll" summons up a prelapsarian image of the English countryside, evoking birdsong, a stream dimpled by rising trout and the scent of fresh-cut hay.
Few of his comrades knew of his musical accomplishments. He was thought of instead as an outstandingly brave soldier. By the time of his death aged 31, he had been mentioned in dispatches and won the Military Cross.
MAURICE RAVEL
Le tombeau de Couperin (1914-17)
Ravel was established as one of France's leading composers when the war began through such works as the score for Daphnis et Chloé, written for Diaghilev's Ballets Russes. He hoped to do his bit for his country as an aviator, but was considered too old (39) and too short (5ft 3ins). Instead, he served as a driver on the Verdun front. The appalling toll that the war took of French manhood hit everyone and Ravel was no exception. He memorialised six of his dead friends in Le tombeau de Couperin, a suite for solo piano in six movements. The final part is dedicated to the husband of his favourite pianist, Marguerite Long.
ARNOLD SCHOENBERG
Variations for Orchestra (1926-28)
Initially, at least, the brilliant Austrian-born composer and musical theorist saw the war as an opportunity to overthrow what he regarded as the bourgeois decadence of established French music. The German military assault would also be a symbolic attack on the "mediocre kitschiness" of the likes of Ravel. The mood did not last long. Drafted into the Austrian Army at 42, Schoenberg resented the disruption to his work, which was already well advanced on its revolutionary journey away from traditional tonality and musical organisation. Variations for Orchestra produced a storm of controversy when premiered by the Berlin Philharmonic under the baton of Wilhelm Furtwängler in December 1928. With the arrival of the Nazis in power, Schoenberg's Jewishness and the perceived "decadence" of his music forced him to move to America, where he settled in Los Angeles and taught at American universities. He died there in 1951.
GUSTAV HOLST
Ode to Death (1918-19)
Before the war, the English composer Gustav Holst was a scholar at the Royal College of Music, a professional musician and teacher. Aged 40 when war broke out, he was rejected as unfit for military service and felt frustrated that friends and family were doing their bit, including his wife, who became an ambulance driver, and his close friend Ralph Vaughan Williams, on active service in France. But in the final months of war, Holst had his chance to serve — as a volunteer working with British troops in Europe awaiting demobilisation. Having been told his surname, Von Holst, looked too Germanic, he changed it by deed poll to Holst and became the YMCA's musical organiser in Salonika. His most famous work, The Planets, was written in 1914 before the war had made its cataclysmic impact, but it included a portrayal of the reality of warfare in Mars and became a huge international success after the First World War. On his return from Salonica, he wrote his choral work, Ode to Death, a contemplation on the waste and futility of war, inspired by a Walt Whitman poem.
WRITERS
HENRI BARBUSSE
Under Fire (1916)
The son of a French father and an English mother, Barbusse had a minor reputation as a poet and novelist when the war began. He joined the French Army, serving until the end of 1915, when he was moved to a clerical job after his health collapsed. His grimly realistic, Prix Goncourt-winning novel Under Fire was based on three months of combat and gave an early view of the reality of life in the trenches. Subtitled "the story of a squad", it describes a world of tangled wire, dank earthworks and random death in which the fighters live surrounded by the stinking corpses of their comrades. After his discharge in 1917, Barbusse became a vigorous anti-war campaigner. He also adopted communism and, after visiting Moscow in 1918, married a Russian, becoming an uncritical admirer of the Soviet Union and Joseph Stalin.
ERNST JUNGER
Storm of Steel (1920)
Jünger first saw action as a 20-year-old with the 73rd Hanoverian Regiment on the Western Front in April 1915. By the end, he had been wounded at least seven times and won the Iron Cross and the Pour le Mérite (Blue Max). Jünger's artistic response to combat was unusual. Soldiering was "a good and strenuous life". Far from a ghastly ordeal, he celebrates a quasi-mystical experience and "an incomparable schooling of the heart". These conclusions reached in Storm of Steel seemed to make him a natural supporter of Hitler and Nazism. Yet he kept his distance from them and, despite his fierce nationalism and antidemocratic convictions, defied easy categorisation. His work is an eloquent and stylish expression of a rarely acknowledged truth — war was not hell for everyone. For some it was thrilling and fulfilling, the high point of their existence. He died aged 102, garlanded with honours.
VERA BRITTAIN
Testament of Youth (1933)
The consequences of the slaughter of their menfolk on the lives of the women were immense. Vera Brittain, 20 years old and a middle-class bluestocking when the war began, lost her brother, three close male friends and the man she loved, Roland Leighton, who died in France in December 1915. Brittain, who worked as a Voluntary Aid Detachment nurse in London, Malta and France, described the impact on her life in a cathartic memoir, Testament of Youth. Its message was of grief and loss as she struggled to remake the life she had imagined for herself before disaster struck. It became a classic that resonated down the rest of the 20th century. Despite her fame and success, she never quite escaped from the shadows of the war. When she died in 1970, her ashes were scattered on her brother's grave in Italy.
ERICH MARIA REMARQUE
All Quiet on the Western Front (1929)
Remarque said his aim in All Quiet on the Western Front was "simply to tell of a generation of men who, even though they may have escaped shells, were destroyed by the war". Based on his experiences in Flanders in 1917, it became an international bestseller and was made into an Oscar-winning film. Its extraordinary appeal may stem from Remarque's success in universalising the soldiers' experience — that the war was the same for all who fought. It also articulated the alienation felt by combatants from the societies they were supposedly defending. The Nazis burned the book and forced Remarque into exile. Unable to lay hands on him, they turned on his sister, Elfriede, who was found guilty of defeatism and put to death in 1943.
DAVID BOMBERG: SAPPERS AT WORY (1918-19)
Bomberg was the son of working-class Polish-Jewish immigrant parents and one of the most precocious talents of his generation. He was another product of the prewar Slade but left after disagreements with the surgeon-turned-teacher Henry Tonks, the school's presiding genius who disapproved of his avantgarde approach. Bomberg drew inspiration from cubism, futurism and Vorticism, employing an angular, machine-age aesthetic.
He joined the Royal Engineers in 1915 and his first-hand experience of the most mechanised war in history was to have a profound effect on his artistic development. By the time he painted this picture of Canadian tunnellers burrowing under Hill 50 at Saint Eloi, south east of Ypres, he was moving back to the more naturalistic style that he would employ for the rest of his working life.
Bomberg lost his brother and his friend, the poet Isaac Rosenberg, to the war. His subsequent preoccupation with the colours and shapes of nature can be seen as a response to his own harrowing experiences.
Document STEL000020140302ea3200034
