{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2270"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Cast your vote even if you hold the EU in contempt
1,257 words
21 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
DAILY EXPRESS
THE NORTHERN & SHELL BUILDING NUMBER 10 LOWER THAMES STREET, LONDON EC3R 6EN Tel: 0208 612 7000 (outside UK: +44 208 612 7000)
FINAL ARTWORK TOMORROW British voters face a testing choice when they get the opportunity to take part in what has become one of the biggest elections on the planet. Across the country polling stations are open from 7am to 10pm for selecting the 73 politicians the UK will send to the European Parliament, the only directly–elected body in the European Union.
Crosses marked in pencil on ballot papers here make up just a small part of a vast political process throughout this week in which up to 400 million citizens in 28 countries are eligible to vote.
In terms of sheer scale this is a breathtaking enterprise. Yet for all that the result will be a 751–strong assembly that is seen as utterly detached from the lives of citizens in Britain and across the continent.
The European Parliament is a preposterous institution. Its ludicrous existence is neatly summed up by the farce of its monthly flit between Brussels and Strasbourg at an annual cost of more than £130million.
For all the trappings of accountability the assembly is just one part of a bloated and out–of–touch bureaucracy that has been eating away at our national sovereignty and burdening our businesses with regulations and red tape for decades.
In the five years since the last EU elections Members of the European Parliament [MEPs] have postured and gorged on the gravy train while the eurozone economic crisis has condemned millions of citizens to unemployment.
The Daily Express has always been a champion of democratic institutions and representative government. It is for that very reason that this newspaper wishes tomorrow's election was not happening at all, at least as far as this country is concerned.
The EU is an outdated customs union that Britain should not belong to. Today's poll is being held to elect politicians who should have no right to meddle in the affairs of a free and independent nation state.
Each MEP elected this week will cost British taxpayers £1.79million a year, three times the cost of a Westminster MP.
Our loyal army of readers has supported the Daily Express's crusade for Britain to quit the EU for many years. As far as Brussels is concerned the vote that really counts will come when the people of this country finally win the in–or–out referendum on the UK's EU membership that they have so long demanded.
Yet for the desire to leave this failing European bloc your vote tomorrow can still make a difference to this country's future.
Although it is not a sovereign body the European Parliament is growing in power and is expected to expand its reach over the next five years as European leaders press ahead with closer monetary union and economic cooperation within the eurozone.
SINCE 2009 the assembly has passed 871 legislative acts and voted 23,551 times on 19,213 amendments to 2,790 legal texts. The language may be arcane but many of those decisions will lead to regulations that affect the daily lives of millions of Britons.
Only once every five years do the citizens of this country get the chance to send a direct message to the EU's ruling elite. Millions are yearning to vent their frustration with Brussels as well as making a protest against the political establishment at Westminster.
And across Europe up to a third of votes being cast this week are expected to go to parties hostile to the EU.
It is vital that voters who want to preserve what independence Britain still retains elect MEPs who will stand up for the idea of the nation state against the trans–national behemoth of Brussels.
The question of which party Eurosceptic voters should back tomorrow is a tough call although it is clear whom they should rule out.
Labour and the Lib Dems are fully committed to the European federalist dream of "ever–closer union". Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg appears to be on course for a deserved electoral hiding after declaring the Lib Dems "the party of in" when it comes to the EU.
And like him Labour leader Ed Miliband has repeatedly twisted and turned over the issue of giving British voters an in–or–out EU referendum. Neither party can be trusted to stand up for Britain in the EU. But many voters who ultimately want a referendum as a stage towards a British exit from the EU will be divided over whether to back the Tories or the UK Independence Party tomorrow.
Under the irrepressible Nigel Farage the clamorous Ukip insurgency has electrified the election campaign and frightened the complacent Westminster establishment. The Ukip leader has been an articulate voice for Britain's withdrawal from the European Union and has quite rightly put the issue of unrestricted immigration from other EU countries on the political agenda.
And yet the campaign has also exposed some of the anti–Brussels party's deficiencies. Ukip still has some way to go to become a mature political party rather than a ramshackle protest movement.
It needs to go further in rooting out unsavoury elements within its ranks and proving it is more than a one–man band, albeit an entertaining one with some popular tunes.
IN CONTRAST the Tories under David Cameron cannot boast the same Eurosceptic pedigree as Ukip. The Prime Minister is still hampered by his failed attempt to stop his party "banging on about Europe" and his failure to deliver a referendum on the EU Lisbon Treaty that was shamefully signed by Gordon Brown.
But Mr Cameron does deserve credit for responding in the right way to the anti–EU pressure brought by Ukip, many of his own backbenchers and the Daily Express's crusade for a British exit.
He has made strenuous efforts to protect Britain's welfare system from exploitation from benefit–seeking migrants from other EU countries.
And he has come up with constructive proposals for shielding Britain from "ever–closer union" with the rest of the EU and in the long term for curbing the freedom–ofmovement rules that have bred unrestricted immigration.
Most important of all Mr Cameron has given his word that he will not return to Downing Street after the next general election without a guarantee of an in–or–out referendum. As things stand the Tories will have a strong case that only they can deliver an EU referendum in government.
But the country has not reached that election yet. Rather, tomorrow's poll is a moment when voters can make their voice heard in the EU.
A vote for either Ukip or the Tories will be a clear statement that Britain will no longer put up with the miserable status quo in Brussels and the drift towards a European super–state.
Ultimately it is up to each Eurosceptic voter to make up their mind which party most suits their tastes and expresses their viewpoint.
For the Daily Express the most important thing is to make sure the voices of the millions who want to throw off the domination of Brussels are heard tomorrow.
When the polls open at 7am do not forget that you have a vote – and make sure it counts.
'Millions want to throw off the domination of Brussels'
Document THEEXP0020140521ea5l0001k
