{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"426"}
____
  
NEWS
Anti-racism MP causes storm after posing with son blacked up to look like Michael Jackson; Labour MP and anti racism campaigner Ian Lavery has been criticised for posing in a photo with his son who is blacked up to look like Michael Jackson
By Keith Perry   
720 words
11 March 2014
09:14
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A Labour MP has come under fire for posing for a picture with his son who had blacked himself up to look like Michael Jackson.
Anti-racism MP Lavery, 51, grinned for the camera with Ian Jnr, who was dressed as Michael Jackson in Thriller for a fancy dress party.
The picture which was then posted on Facebook incited racist comments from the 25-year-old’s friends.
One called him a ‘n*****’ and an immigrant, to which Lavery Jnr responded by saying his father must be proud of him. Another friend called him a “liquorice stick".
In the photo, his father, the MP for Wansbeck in Northumberland, held a pint and seemed relaxed about his son’s choice of outfit, which featured a wig, black face paint and him doing a ‘thumbs up’.
The photo emerged weeks after Mr Lavery, who is MP for Wansbeck, Northumberland, threw his support behind a Stand up to Racism and Facism rally later this month. In January he attended a Show Racism the Red Card event.
The photo has caused an outcry among the MPs’ constituents who said they found it offensive and ‘racist’, the  Daily Mail reported.
One said: ‘I was appalled and shocked when I saw these photos of Ian Lavery Jr.
‘These images show him dressed in an appalling racist costume, as well as this he has ‘liked’ every one of the racist comments posted next to the photo by his friends.
‘For the MP to have his photo taken with his son in this costume shows total disrespect.’
A Tory councillor said it was a ‘very public racist act’ and demonstrated the MP’s hypocrisy.
It is not the first time Lavery Jnr, whose Twitter reads ‘Never base your life on other people’s expectations’, has sparked controversy.
Last year he described Katie Price’s son Harvey, who is disabled, as a ‘vegetable’, while making a crude reference to the model.
While Lavery Jnr describes himself as a funky house DJ, from Ashington, Northumberland, his brother, Liam Lavery, 20, has followed in his father’s footsteps and is a town councillor.
He posted the ‘racist’ photograph with the comment: ‘Me and the father’. His friends responded with offensive comments, including ones that he ‘liked’.
One wrote: ‘ha ha f****** mint your dads probably thinking whos the immagrant (sic).’ Another wrote: ‘haha, he must be so proud of u lank’, to which Lavery Jnr responded, ‘must b’.
One other Facebook friend wrote ‘lanky the n****’. The Facebook page has since been deleted.
Councillor Peter Jackson, leader of Northumberland Conservatives, said: ‘There is a total hypocrisy with this very public racist act.
‘It seems the comments that go with it confirm that it is a racist act.
‘Ian Lavery as an MP is a very vocal and is always trying to take the moral high ground, this is a demonstration of his total hypocrisy.
‘The Labour candidates up here seem to think they can get away with any type of behaviour and they can get away with it.’
At the time of his ‘vegetable’ comment on Twitter, Katie Price, 35, criticised Lavery Jnr and his father, who is patron of brain injury charity Headway.
She said: ‘This makes me sick to my stomach. Not just that someone could be so vile as to think such a thing, but also could think it clever to repeat to the world on Twitter?
‘What kind of father, what kind of MP, is Ian Lavery? He’s the patron of Headway - yet he brings his son up to think and act like this?"
Mr Lavery, 51, said at the time: ‘I’m absolutely appalled by it but I cannot police my kids and I have no intention to. They have to learn how to behave in the big wide world like I did.’
Lavery Jnr eventually he said he was ‘ashamed’ and apologised ‘unreservedly’ to Katie, adding: ‘I feel so stupid. I didn’t actually find it funny.’
Mr Lavery and Mr Lavery Jnr declined to comment.
Document TELUK00020140311ea3b0028p
