{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3130"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Ofsted hunt for radical infiltrators 'harrowing': Academy shaken by probe into Trojan Horse says head: 18 schools in Birmingham inspected for extremism
Helen Pidd   
529 words
24 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
13
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
A Birmingham headteacher whose school was among 18 in the city inspected as part of an investigation into alleged infiltration by Muslim fundamentalists has described the experience as harrowing.
Christine Quinn, the executive principal of Ninestiles academy, in Acocks Green, confirmed that Ofsted inspectors commissioned by the education secretary, Michael Gove, had visited the school before the Easter break.
She said the inspectors had insisted they had not received any complaints or concerns about the Birmingham school, which received Ofsted's highest rating of "outstanding" last October, but that she understood it was in the context of investigations into Operation Trojan Horse, an alleged Islamist plot to take over schools in Birmingham. The visit was a surprise, she said, and "somewhat harrowing, in that it was unlike any other inspection".
The inspectors checked whether the school taught citizenship and sex education, she said. "They were trying to establish whether we had the mechanisms in place to know if elements of radicalism or extremism were in our school, and whether we knew how to recognise it, and that we had an extensive policies on citizenship, personal, social and health education - those sort of things - to counteract any such elements."
Inspectors also wanted to know how Quinn could be sure that any guests invited to speak at the school were bona fide and that teachers could not "sneak them into a lesson unnoticed". Quinn said she had yet to receive the inspection report after the inspectors' visit.
Other schools investigated in recent weeks have complained about the behaviour of Ofsted inspectors.
Officials at the Department for Education, and Ofsted, are under investigation over leaks in the Trojan Horse inquiry.
Birmingham council's leader, Sir Albert Bore, said the Cabinet Office was investigating the unauthorised release of information to a newspaper. He spoke after reports in the Telegraph claimed that six city schools were to be put into special measures following the Trojan Horse inquiry.
In a letter sent to the Guardian this week, Mohammed Ashraf, a governor at Golden Hillock school, said inspectors had asked strange questions, such as "if a child said he was gay what would the school do?" and "who leads your Friday prayer?"
Roger King, the National Union of Teachers executive member for Birmingham, said at the weekend that some NUT members had complained that the inspectors had asked inappropriate questions, such as "asking the staff, 'are you homophobic?', asking the girl pupils who didn't happen to be sitting next to boys, 'are you made to sit in different places?'"
Birmingham's city council leader, Bore, yesterday confirmed the names of 18 schools inspected by Ofsted in recent weeks at Gove's behest. All were in central or east-central Birmingham, which has a high concentration of south Asian immigrant families. Many were judged outstanding last time Ofsted inspectors visited, before the claims of an organised plot by hardline Islamists called Operation Trojan Horse that boasted of "taking over" schools in Birmingham and running them on "strict Islamic principles".
Document GRDN000020140424ea4o00026
