{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"1544"}
____
  
Features
YES, THE SUN'S OUT... BUT THIS BUDGET IS PREDICTING STORMS
BY JAMES FORSYTH   
1,178 words
16 March 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
37
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
AS GEORGE Osborne sits at the kitchen table in his Downing Street flat today writing the Budget speech on his Mac (the gadget-geek Chancellor is no fan of PCs), he may from time to time look out on one of the finest views in London: a blooming St James's Park.
But on Wednesday he won't be welcoming the arrival of an economic spring. Instead, he'll warn there is much to do to build 'a resilient economy', one that can withstand the squalls ahead.
His speech will be downbeat, to remind voters that the job of fixing the nation's finances is far from done -and to make them think this isn't the time to take a risk on Labour. He wants the country to see the prospect of a Miliband government as a dark cloud threatening the recovery.
Osborne will allow himself to be more positive when it comes to jobs, the Coalition's great economic success story.
Tory strategists believe that if David Cameron and Osborne go on about GDP or the deficit, it will be easy for Labour to accuse them of being out of touch with real people's lives.
But it is far harder to make that charge stick when they're talking about the 1.6 million private sector jobs that have been created under this Government.
Miliband will respond to the Budget speech with a full-throated attack branding this 'a recovery for a few, not for you'.
The Tories know their greatest vulnerability remains this view that they are a party of the rich, for the rich. That is why they are so keen to ensure that they - and not the Lib Dems - get the credit for increasing the tax-free allowance to £10,500.
This has been a major source of tension at the top of the Coalition in recent weeks. The Lib Dems are furious the Tories have publicly taken ownership of the policy while privately trying to exact a pound of flesh from them for endorsing it. The Tories, for their part, complain that Nick Clegg got his sums wrong and considerably underestimated how much this tax cut would cost.
Osborne, though, will not deliver the tax cut that many Tory grandees have been agitating for: a significant increase in the threshold for the 40p rate, helping the 1.4 million workers who've been dragged into it under this Government.
THE most he is prepared to do is increase the threshold by one per cent, which - because it is lower than the rate of inflation - means even more people will be hit.
The Chancellor does not share the alarm of some Tories at how many people are now subject to this rate. Indeed, he has been heard to remark privately that the more people who pay it, the more Tory voters there will be.
A key part of Osborne's plan to build a more resilient economy is to have more companies sell their wares overseas. He'll announce that small businesses will be able for the first time to access Government export credit. He'll also announce a reduction in the carbon price floor - which determines the industrial cost of energy - to try to help manufacturers.
It wouldn't be an Osborne Budget, though, if it did not set some traps for Labour. He'll announce new rules designed to reduce the deficit, limit welfare spending and dare Labour to vote against them. If they do, he'll damn them as recklessly spendthrift.
The night before Osborne speaks, Cameron and his campaign manager Lynton Crosby will address Tory MPs with a clear message: stick to the script. They know that the Tories cannot afford to squander the opportunity the Budget gives them to get the political debate back on to their turf.
 
HOW TO RESCUE THE MIDDLE EAST? SEND IN BAYWATCH'S PAMELA
EVEN world leaders are curious about who has stayed in the same hotel as them. So, in Jerusalem last week, David Cameron consulted the guest-book to see the previous occupants of his room.
He expected to read a roll call of those who had come to promote peace in the troubled region. He was unsurprised to see Angela Merkel's name - the German Chancellor had been in Israel just last month. But the next entry gave him a shock: Pamela Anderson, left. The Baywatch actress is not someone usually associated with Middle East diplomacy.
But given that her old co-star David Hasselhoff likes to boast of playing a role in bringing down the Berlin Wall, perhaps Anderson wants to go one better and claim credit for bringing peace to the Holy Land.
 
 
 
NIGEL Farage was bombarded all last week with awkward questions. He had to deny accusations from ex-UKIP MEP Nikki Sinclaire that he had an affair with a party aide and that, as she writes so witheringly in today's Mail on Sunday, he is a bullying, preening 'show pony' (see Page 20).
The UKIP leader's problem is similar to the one Nick Clegg had after the TV debates in the last Election. Having vaulted to prominence, Farage is subject to a whole new level of scrutiny. But those close to him are confident the Farage bubble will not burst like Clegg's. They say that as long as UKIP keep talking immigration, they'll stay on top of the biggest issue in May's European elections.
How Farage - who has a notorious temper - handles the pressure will also be crucial to the General Election. If UKIP score anywhere near the 12 per cent they are polling, it will be impossible for the Tories to win. And so far, the Tories have had scant success in stopping them, even with Cameron's promise of an in/out EU referendum. But take Farage out of the equation and the electoral maths look an awful lot easier for the Tories. So there'll be no let-up in the barrage against Farage.
 
£1MILLION BALONEY ON UNION DUES
 
THERE is a fierce row raging in Whitehall over the Tories' desire to end 'check-off', the system by which departments automatically deduct union members' dues from their salaries and pass them on to the organisation.
Recalcitrant civil servants are busy throwing up obstacles to try to put Ministers off the idea. In the Department for Work and Pensions, it was claimed that the cost of abolishing the system would be more than £1 million. But when challenged by Ministers on this figure, officials were forced to concede: 'The figure was a rough calculation . . . It was neither an exact figure, nor precisely or extensively researched . . . The figure was provided in good faith, but it is accepted that given the timescales and following further research this is not a scientific, robust, accurate assessment of the true costs of ending the check-off facility in DWP.'
In other words, it was baloney.
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140316ea3g0000v
