{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"133"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Victory for Farage as TV debate turns nasty
Steven Swinford; Christopher Hope   
1,027 words
3 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
1,6
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Clegg accused of wilful lies, Farage of belittling catastrophes
NIGEL FARAGE accused Nick Clegg of "wilfully lying to the British people" and warned that the European project could end in bloodshed during the pair's second debate last night.
In a heated and confrontational televised debate the leader of the UK Independence Party warned that extremists would resort to "violence" unless the European Union "ends democratically".
Early polls showed that Mr Farage won the debate comfortably, securing 68 per cent of public support in a YouGov poll and 69 per cent according to ICM.
Following the debate, Mr Farage said: "I'm very pleased with the result and surprised about how dishonest Nick Clegg's argument was. I didn't think I'd have to get personal, but he is trying to lie and deceive the British people and after 40 years we have had enough.
"I am now going to have a sherbet and thoroughly enjoy myself."
During the debate Mr Farage said that uncontrolled immigration had been beneficial for people who wanted to "take in servants" but led to the development of a "white underclass" which had been left behind.
He repeated his controversial defence of Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, saying he had "outwitted and outclassed you all" and accused Mr Clegg of being "hell–bent" on war with Syria.
Mr Clegg suggested that Mr Farage and his supporters had "shunned the modern world" and were promoting "dangerous fantasies about a bygone world that no longer exists". He said he "loves modern Britain", a nation that is "compassionate, diverse and outward facing".
The debate, which was broadcast on BBC Two and chaired by David Dimbleby, was significantly more personal and aggressive than the pair's first encounter last week.
Mr Farage said that he wanted the European Union to come to a "democratic" end, but warned that the rise of extremists could mean it ends "very unpleasantly".
He pointed to a neo–Nazi party in Greece that "looks certain to win seats at the European Parliament". He said: "We see in Madrid, we see in Athens, very large protests, tens of thousands of people, a lot of violence.
"You take away from people their ability through the ballot box to change their futures, then I am afraid they tend to resort to aggressive means."
Mr Clegg said that he had heard similar doomsday suggestions for 15 years but did not believe them. "It hasn't happened," he said.
In the most aggressive confrontation of the debate, Mr Farage accused Mr Clegg of "lying to the British people" after he said that 7 per cent of Britain's primary legislation comes from the EU.
Mr Farage said that the real figure was closer to 75 per cent, and may even be even higher. "You are lying willingly to the British people about the extent we have given away democracy," he said.
Mr Clegg responded by describing Mr Farage's figures are "fictional" and having "no bearing in reality at all". "I don't think you should start making things up," he said. Mr Farage replied: "You've done well at it so far, haven't you."
On foreign policy, Mr Farage warned that the European Union wanted its own navy, air force and army and was pursuing a "dangerous" foreign policy.
He defended his praise for Mr Putin, saying he has "outwitted and outclassed you all", and said Mr Clegg and the Government had been "hell–bent" on war with Syria.
Mr Clegg said that Mr Farage's comments were "absolutely indefensible" and accused him of turning a "terrible human catastrophe" into a "pub issue". He said that Mr Farage's comments about the European Union's foreign policy were "simply not true". "I wouldn't be surprised if he tells us the Moon landing was fake," he added.
Mr Farage said: "This country has had enough of getting involved in endless foreign wars, there is no evidence that our intervention is making life better. I don't want to be part of a European foreign policy."
In response to a question on immigration Mr Farage warned that a city equivalent to the size of Manchester would move to Britain from southern Europe within the next few years.
Mr Farage said this level of migration had left a "white working class effectively as an underclass" in the UK.
He added that large–scale immigration was "very good for people to take in servants" but it was not good for people were at the lower end of the social scale.
Mr Clegg came out fighting, pointing to what he said was a Ukip leaflet that likened Britons to American Indians fighting European settlers in the 19th century. Mr Farage said he did not recognise the leaflet.
He accused Mr Farage of "pontificating from the sidelines" while enjoying his taxpayer–funded job as an MEP in Brussels.
On energy, Mr Farage warned that the European Union's "unilateral" approach to climate change was damaging businesses by pushing up energy bills.
He said: "The Chinese and Indians have gone for coal on a scale we can't fathom, the US has gone for shale and we have gone for wind energy."
Mr Clegg replied that the "over reliance on oil and gas from Nigel Farage's friend Vladimir Putin" is pushing up energy bills. He suggested EU countries needed to work more closely together.
Mr Farage said that many leading politicians who were significant landowners benefited from the wind industry. "Scrap wind energy, scrap the subsidies, get shale," he said.
In his concluding statement, Mr Farage said that an "elite club of career politicians" was denying the British people a say on a referendum because "they think you might give the wrong answer". "It's about time you have your say," he said.
Mr Clegg replied that a referendum should only be held when there is a significant transfer of powers to the European Union. He said: "I think a referendum now would put the economic recovery at risk."
Editorial Comment: Page 21
Document DT00000020140403ea430006y
