{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3306"}
____
  
NEWS
Adolf Hitler's house could become immigrants' centre
By Justin Huggler in Berlin   
469 words
14 May 2014
19:24
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The house where Adolf Hitler was born could be turned into language school and integration centre for migrants
The house where Adolf Hitler was born could become a language school for immigrants, under new plans being considered by the Austrian government.
From the outside, the former guesthouse at 15 Salzburger Vorstadt could be just another historic building fallen on hard times. The town where it lies, Braunau am Inn, is a tiny backwater near Linz, where nothing much tends to happen.
But on April 20, 1889, Adolf Hitler was born here, and the debate over what to do with the house is so politically charged, it has gone all the way to the Austrian interior ministry.
"For us, given the meaning this building has, it's important to use it in a way that benefits people," Alexander Marakovits, a spokesman for the interior ministry told The Telegraph.
The ministry has been locked in discussions for over a year with the owner of the building, a retired local woman who insists on remaining anonymous.
According to local press reports, she has rejected suggestions the house be made into an anti-Nazi memorial, and even refused the town authorities permission to put a plaque on the building, for fear it could provoke attacks from neo-Nazis or anti-fascists.
Instead, a small memorial stone on the street outside records the fact that this was Hitler's birthplace.
Until two years ago, the building was used as a day centre for people with learning difficulties. The interior ministry carefully vets all prospective tenants to ensure it doesn't become a neo-Nazi shrine, and the possibility of residential use was rejected in case it attracted Hitler admirers.
Now, after talks in Vienna dubbed the "Birthplace Summit" by Austrian newspapers, the interior ministry is optimistic it has found a solution acceptable to all parties – and one that seems a fitting response to Hitler's racist policies.
Under the plan, after extensive renovation, the building would be used as a language school and integration centre for migrants.
Hitler spent the first three years of his life in the house. At the time, it was a modest guest-house where his parents rented rooms while his father was working as a minor customs official at the nearby border with Germany.
After his father was posted to Passau in Bavaria, the family moved away.
In 1938, after the Anschluss with Austria, huge crowds watched as Hitler returned to Braunau in triumph.
His private secretary, Martin Bormann, bought the house at 15 Salzburger Vorstadt for four times its market value, with the intention of turning it into a shrine.
In 1954, the former owner bought it back for a fraction of the price.
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e004xu
