{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2200"}
____
  
As Tories stumble, Labour is quietly preparing for office; Conservatives should look in the mirror and ask themselves how badly they want to win
By Matthew d’Ancona   
1,251 words
8 March 2014
18:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nick Clegg’s speech to the Lib Dem Spring Conference in York is intended to position his party as the unequivocally internationalist, pluralist alternative to Ukip. He and his strategists have limited ambitions for the European elections in May, seeking only a two or three per cent bounce: after nearly four years in the abattoir of unpopularity, it would be folly for the party to aim much higher at this stage.
As Nigel Farage grows ever more rhetorically fiery, Clegg believes that there is an electoral group of “soft Tories" to be harvested, Conservative-inclined voters who wish David Cameron would confront Ukip wholeheartedly, instead of wavering between appeasement and polite disagreement. The Lib Dem leader’s speech has been crafted as an appeal to them, as well as to his own tribe – a celebration of Britain’s traditions of compassion, decency, and outward-looking magnificence.
The principal Lib Dem attack on Labour, on the other hand, is an unusual one: namely, that Ed Miliband’s party is “silent". The Shadow Cabinet would noisily dispute that claim, of course, citing the speeches, policy announcements, Today interviews, cabaret performances, supermarket openings, tombola afternoons, visits to retirement homes and game-show appearances that have kept them clamorously busy. But there is something to the charge of “silence", too.
In addition to the daily round of Opposition – shouting at the Government and scorning Cameron on the airwaves – Labour has stepped up a gear in its preparations for office. All parties out of power have to go through the motions of readying themselves for government, speaking to senior civil servants, as Labour has been entitled to do since last month (according to the convention established by John Major that such contact may begin 15 months before the end of a Parliament).
Much may happen in the remaining 14 months: Labour’s unity may crumble, the statistical recovery may become palpable to voters, the public may ascribe this happier economic context to Conservative measures, ever-closer scrutiny may do for the Eds. Yet, as I write, the polls suggest that Miliband is heading for an 84-seat majority in May 2015. Quietly, the party is readying itself for this. This week, the Institute for Public Policy Research publishes a fine essay by Liz Kendall, the shadow minister for care and older people, and one of the party’s rising stars, which makes the case for localisation of public services and a bold march by Labour into the terrain once marked out by Cameron as the “Big Society".
As Kendall argues: “Preventive, integrated and personalised support cannot be achieved via diktat from Whitehall." True: but how to release that grip? This has always been one of the great psychological problems facing Labour, and Kendall’s exploration of the theme suggests a party – or at least some within it – preparing to face these dilemmas in practice as well as in theory.
Nobody on the Labour side likes to talk about this prospect much: Tony Blair taught Labour that complacency was electoral poison, that a politician should never confuse his own conviction with successful persuasion. Dig a little, however, and you will see much subterranean activity, as the party readies itself for the possibility of an unexpectedly early return to office.
The most public strand in this process is the zero-based review of public spending, disclosed by The Sunday Telegraph in September 2012, in which Ed Balls and his team claim to be examining how every penny of public money is spent. Obviously, this exercise is intended to have electoral force: evidence, like the party’s promise in June 2013 to stick to Osborne’s spending plans until 2015-16 and to impose a three-year welfare cap, of Labour’s fiscal credibility.
Parallel to this runs the policy review headed by Jon Cruddas. All Opposition parties have a policy review, if only to prove that they still have a pulse. What distinguishes this one is the person leading it: Cruddas, a politician of real intellectual sinew who represents the so-called “Blue Labour" tradition of home, family and community that resists the commodification of humanity and often reaches conclusions that are hard to distinguish from moderate Toryism.
The least public, but most intriguing side of the triangle is the steering group headed by Lord Falconer of Thoroton, which is exploring the process and forms of government itself. Its purpose is, as one senior source puts it, “to ensure that we hit the road running rather than just hit the road." The appointment of Falconer last October was in itself striking: he is, after all, a former flatmate of Blair who called publicly for a change in leadership in the dog days of Gordon Brown’s leadership. That Miliband, notionally a Brownite, should entrust the task of “planning and transition" to such an arch-Blairite suggests that this Labour leader is serious in his ambition, declared by Brown but never realised, to head a “government of all the talents".
Before 1997, Labour had been out of office for 18 years. Shadow cabinet members read Gerald Kaufman’s How to Be a Minister; prospective Downing Street aides leafed through Marcia Falkender’s Inside Number 10. This time, it is very different. There is help at hand from the independent Institute for Government, and from colleagues who were carrying red boxes less than four years ago.
Falconer – aided by Lord Adonis and Brown’s former PPS, Jon Trickett – has been studying a range of issues: in particular, the role of “the Centre", and the best way in which No 10 and the Cabinet Office should drive through change. They have been exploring the correct role of the permanent civil service.
There is, I am told, a developing blueprint for administrative reform to ensure that Miliband’s reforms are enacted. My strong hunch is that the relative positions of No 10 and the Treasury will figure in these calculations. It would indeed be farcical if the catastrophe of the Blair-Brown feud repeated itself under the next Labour government.
None of this, of course, means that Labour’s scouting groups are drawing the right conclusions. It does mean that the party’s alleged “silence" is not necessarily a sign of inaction. Miliband’s party still has a great mountain to climb but it is clearly determined to do so.
Meanwhile, the Tory party seems determined to make a fool of itself over immigration and the identity of its next leader. As the PM works the phones to prevent war in the Crimea, is this really a good moment to start a briefing war over who should succeed him? At this stage of the electoral cycle, every Tory muscle should be strained to keeping the incumbent Prime Minister where he is, and dismissing angrily all talk of runners and riders, Boris Johnson’s plans, or who the “stop Boris" candidate will be. All ministers should memorise James Brokenshire’s unspeakably terrible speech on immigration as the Platonic ideal of election-losing rhetoric.
They should look in the mirror and ask how badly they really want to win this thing. A wise Cabinet veteran of the Major years told me last week that he felt his own party was going back to its constituencies and preparing for Opposition. He wants to be wrong. Is he?
Document TELUK00020140308ea38005sp
