{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1402"}
____
  
News
Johnson will play key election role, say Tories as they deny 'civil war'
Steven Swinford   
612 words
3 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
12
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
BORIS JOHNSON will play a "key role" in the general election despite claims of a bitter row with George Osborne, his potential leadership rival, the chairman of the Conservative Party has said.
Grant Shapps said the Tories would be "crazy" not to deploy Mr Johnson during the election campaign, adding that it was up to the London mayor to decide whether he stood as a candidate at the next election.
It was reported over the weekend that the Chancellor was trying to persuade Mr Johnson to stand as an MP so that he is "tied in" to the 2015 election result.
According to the Mail on Sunday, allies of Mr Johnson responded by claiming that he was being dragged into a "dirty tricks" plot to wreck his hopes of becoming Conservative leader and accused Mr Osborne of lying.
A source close to Mr Johnson yesterday distanced the mayor from the reports, insisting that there was "no civil war" between the two men and that Mr Johnson had yet to decide if he would stand in 2015.
Mr Shapps yesterday told the BBC's Andrew Marr Show that Mr Johnson would "absolutely" play a leading role during the election campaign.
He said: "Boris Johnson is a guy who's able to communicate incredibly well. Of course, it would be crazy for him not to be part of that message because people in this country want to know that we are on their side, that we're dealing with those long–term problems, that we're making sure that we're continuing to cut the deficit but whilst dealing with the big issues like immigration and welfare.
"We all think Boris is a fantastic London mayor and he's got a lot to offer. He's doing a brilliant job in London; his term runs till 2016, so he's got a little way to go." The source close to Mr Johnson suggested that in the run–up to the election he would spend two days a week outside London, and also appear alongside David Cameron to promote his message. Mr Shapps added: "What Boris does is up to Boris – we just think he's got a great contribution. He's part of what we're trying to do as a government … Boris Johnson's got a big future in the party; I want him to be an important part of our campaign."
Mr Osborne and Mr Johnson are seen as potential rivals for the party leadership after any 2015 defeat. One source told the Mail on Sunday that when it was suggested that Mr Osborne had approached him about standing in 2015, Mr Johnson replied, "B––––––t. There has been no such conversation. They are trying to tie me in." Mr Johnson has been public about his desire to return to the Commons, but the timing is seen as a crucial factor in the Tories' election strategy.
A close friend of the mayor played down reports of a feud at the weekend, telling the Press Association: "Boris's focus is on London – it was in 2012, when he stood for a second term. It will be in 2016 when he finishes that term.
"In between, only two things matter to Boris – delivering for London, and ensuring we have a majority Conservative government led by David Cameron after 2015. Boris will be out and about doing all he can to make sure that happens."
Boris Johnson: Page 20
'Boris Johnson has a big future in the party; I want him to be an important part of our campaign." '
Document DT00000020140303ea3300097
