{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2609"}
____
  
Nigel Farage: Ukip would strip Christian weddings of legal status
473 words
18 March 2014
18:13
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage says Ukip would strip traditional Christian wedding ceremonies of their legal status and keep same sex marriage
Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, has said that the traditional Christian wedding ceremony should be stripped of its legal status.
Mr Farage suggested that couples who want to wed in church should have to undertake two ceremonies, one recognised by the state and one a religious ceremony.
He also said he would not abolish same-sex marriage, despite having campaigned forcefully against the bill before it came into law.
His call for French-style reforms of the marriage system came after similar proposals by Simon Hughes, the Liberal Democrat justice minister.
In an interview with PinkNews Mr Farage urged gay, lesbian and trangender people to join his party.
He said: "We propose an augmentation of the civil partnership awarding it equal status to marriage and enabling it to be available to all. We would rather the legal and religious endorsements of wedlock are separate.”
He also said that Ukip could oppose foreign aid to countries which have poor records on human rights for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender people.
However, he defended a former Ukip councillor who said the government's decision to legalise gay marriage was to blame for the floods.
He said that while his comments were “certainly eccentric, and to many unpalatable” they were the opinions of an individual councillor not the Ukip party.
Despite Mr Farage's comments, the website still sets out the reasons for its opposition to gay marriage.
It states: “We believe that the Government must not take this step too far and risk the grave harm of undermining the rights of Churches and faiths to decide for themselves who they will and will not marry.
“There is, apart from a small but noisy minority within the gay community, no strong demand for this.”
Michael Fabricant, the vice chairman of the Conservative Party, said he “questioned the motives” of Mr Farage as he was so “bitterly opposed” to same sex marriage just months ago.
He said: “Are they just jumping on the bandwagon now all the fuss has passed? I do wonder what the military blazered, cravat wearing average UKIP supporter will think of this new change of policy.”
Lib Dem peer Baroness Barker told PinkNews she was “unconvinced” of the move, and asked whether UKIP will stick to its new commitment on the issue.
She said: “Whatever Nigel Farage now says, UKIP appear to have gained significant support by appealing to prejudice on many levels, particularly against immigrants and against same-sex marriage.
“When LGBT people were fighting for equality, the silence from UKIP was deafening. This change of tune is unconvincing and we cannot trust them to safeguard our rights when the going gets tough.”
Document TELUK00020140319ea3i002lk
