{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3472"}
____
  
NEWS
Father wins damages after social worker falsely accused him of abusing daughter
By Miranda Prynne News Reporter   
777 words
22 April 2014
09:48
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A father was arrested and banned from seeing his six-year-old daughter after a social workers falsely accused him of child abuse
A father was awarded £86,000 in damages after a social worker falsely accused him of abusing his daughter, it was revealed.
Jonathan Coupland was arrested and questioned for ten hours after Suzi Smith reported seeing him sexually assaulting Jessica, then aged six, according to the Daily Mail .
The social worker made the claims after becoming annoyed when Mr Coupland criticised her handling of his custody battle with his former partner.
The 53-year-old was handcuffed and led away to a cell in front of his horrified neighbours.
Mrs Smith later retracted the accusations and the Children and Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass) were forced to pay the single father £86,000 in compensation and offer him a formal apology.
Mrs Smith has since been sacked but Mr Coupland wants to see her prosecuted for misconduct in public office.
He is also suing the police for false arrest and false imprisonment.
Speaking to the Daily Mail, the father from Spalding, Lincs, said: “I was manhandled by three policemen and dragged out of my house in handcuffs.
“It was humiliating. My neighbours saw and parents at Jessica’s school turned on me.
“It was a completely false story of lies but my daughter could have been fostered and I could now be in a paedophile wing of a major prison because of this social worker. I won’t rest until she faces justice for what she has done.”
The former painter and decorator bought up his daughter alone after being granted custody shortly after she was born in December 2005.
Jessica’s Thai mother, Kajchi Jiraekkaphob, an illegal immigrant, has fought him through the courts ever since.
Cafcass worker Mrs Smith visited Mr Coupland’s home in January 2012 to draw up a report which was read during a custody hearing the following week.
Mrs Smith’s initial write-up was full of praise for the father but just four months later she reported seeing him touch his daughter inappropriately.
Mr Coupland believes this was in retaliation after he asked for her to be removed from the case because he felt she had acted unprofessionally by contacting one of his character witnesses during the custody proceedings.
He was detained by police a week later, on suspicion of sexual assault.
His daughter was visited by social services at school and interviewed by police.
Officers told Mr Coupland Jessica would be placed in temporary care but he begged them to allow her to stay with her grandmother.
He was bailed but told he could not contact his daughter.
A day later, police said they were dropping the investigation as Mrs Smith had retracted her allegation.
He reported the social worker to police but the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) decided not to take action against her.
Mr Coupland plans to challenge the decision not to prosecute Mrs Smith at the High Court.
She was sacked by Cafcass for gross misconduct, but only left work six months after making the false allegation.
Mr Coupland said: “In the meantime she was still working in the courts, affecting children’s lives.
“It is disturbing that this person is paid to look after the welfare of children. She has done the opposite and got away with it.”
He said parents at his daughter’s school remain suspicious of him and many will not allow Jessica to visit their children at home.
“Friends have turned on me...I’m still being treated like I’m a paedophile,” he added.
“I thought the law in this country was “innocent until proven guilty” but I feel like I have been branded guilty until I prove myself innocent. It will be that way until Suzi Smith is taken to court and proven to be a liar.”
Mrs Smith confirmed yesterday that she was dismissed by Cafcass six months after making her allegation against Mr Coupland.
She added: “Jon Coupland is a very complicated individual who I believe feels a great injustice has been done to him.”
A Cafcass spokesman said of the incident: “We regret that on this occasion our practice procedures were not followed.”
An internal investigation by Lincolnshire Police found its officers were justified in arresting Mr Coupland.
Detective Chief Inspector Nigel Storey said police were ‘duty bound to investigate’ Mrs Smith’s allegation, adding: “It later transpired that the allegation was not as originally reported to us. The male was released without charge.”
Document TELUK00020140422ea4m00107
