{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"91"}
____
  
NEWS
Judge refuses whiplash damages as he criticises Britain's 'compensation culture'
By Claire Carter   
587 words
26 March 2014
14:50
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A High Court judge has dismissed the claims of two women for whiplash as lies as he said Britain's compensation culture, which costs billions every year, is getting out of control
Britain’s compensation culture is a “national phenomenon,” a High Court judge said as he refused to grant damages to two women to “stem the tide” of fake insurance claims.
The women, both immigration officers, took at least a week to report any pain from the crash, described as a “little bump” by others.
Mr Justice Mostyn dismissed the claims as inaccurate and evasive, based on “an improper pecuniary motive.”
Paula McIntyre and Louise Hennessy made the claim against the Home Office after the work car they were in hit a bollard as it drove out of Seaforth Dock in Liverpool in October 2008.
After the crash a colleague heard Miss McIntyre say: “My neck, my neck, I can make a compensation claim."
The court heard it took 18 days for her to complain to her GP about any pain, and Miss Hennessy waited a week before she went to her doctor to report any injury as a result of the impact.
"It is proper that I should go on to record that I do not accept the evidence of either of them, which I find to be inaccurate, evasive, partial and advanced for an improper pecuniary motive,” said the judge.
"This is yet a further example of the national phenomenon of false whiplash claims being made and it is in an attempt to stem the tide that I do not shrink from making firm adverse findings against them".
Mr Justice Mostyn said expert medical evidence which appeared to back up the accounts of both women was so similar it cast doubt on the professional objectivity of the expert. In identical terms, medical reports said both had suffered “nervous shock and psychological trauma” and endured “recurrent obtrusive memories of the accident and obsessional thoughts as to how she might have been seriously injured.”
Both reports, prepared by a consultant physician, said the women had described their physical symptoms as “severe and constant”, having taken many months to clear up.
However the court heard that there was no visible damage to the car after the accident and neither woman reported any injury at the time or asked for time off work.
Mr Justice Mostyn added: "Obviously it is, in terms of probability, almost inconceivable that each of these women would have suffered physically or mentally in precisely the same way.”
The court heard Denise Withey, the driver of the Skoda Octavia, had described the accident as minor and her account was backed up by Raymond Stevens, a front seat passenger.
Miss Withey had taken photographs of the car which showed no damage was caused by the impact, and Mr Justice Mostyn described her as a “completely honest witness.”
He said: “The contemporaneous material clearly shows that the impact was trivial; that no damage was caused to the vehicle; no hurt was suffered by the front passengers and that any hurt suffered by the rear passengers was trivial, of short duration and therefore non-compensable".
He said Miss Withey had no motive to lie and accepted she drove at low speed and the impact was minor.
He also accepted Miss McIntyre had immediately shouted about her neck and said she could make a compensation claim, and dismissed the cases of both women.
Document TELUK00020140326ea3q003jv
