{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3271"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Baby Hannah gets her first taste of red tape
SUE CAMERON   
993 words
15 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
23
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Trying to get a passport for a baby highlights the absurdities of our immigration system
Little Baby Hannah is the latest addition to our family, and if her first brush with government is anything to go by, she is likely to grow up to be a Ukip voter. Her application for a passport was at times like something out of Kafka – or a bad sitcom, depending on your point of view. It raises pertinent questions about our relationship with bureaucracy.
First, some details about Hannah. Born in London, she is the daughter of my niece and her husband, a New Zealander who has indefinite leave to stay here. The shenanigans began when they needed to go to New Zealand for a family funeral and had to get an emergency passport for their new daughter.
The first official they spoke to said the baby could be added to her mother's passport. The next one said they had stopped adding children to passports years ago – the baby would need her own. They were then told to send documents proving the family funeral was happening – death certificate, letters from the doctor and undertaker. They were not, however, given a reference number – so how would officials link the documents to the right baby?
After failing to call back despite promises to do so, passport officials told them to come in the next day and, no, they would not need an appointment. At this point, farce took over. The security guard wouldn't let them beyond the front hall, pointing to notices saying no admittance without an appointment. A yellow phone at the London Passport Office enables the public outside to communicate with officials inside. My lot rang it and were told to "beg the security guard" to let them in. He did – after warning that they would be sent out again.
He was right – they were.
They did consider getting Hannah a New Zealand passport. The New Zealand High Commission said it was possible, but warned them that this would make her a Kiwi – and there might "issues" about letting her back into Britain. Even if the UK did let Hannah in – I'm told we would have done – her parents were worried that getting her British citizenship would be a fight. An extremely costly one.
You can see how Nigel Farage strikes a chord when he speaks about the absurdities of our immigration system, can't you? To be fair to the Home Office, it points out that it needs to make rigorous and often time–consuming checks when handing out a child's first passport to safeguard against abduction – something that every parent would understand if it were explained to them. It is also true that all bureaucracies have cock–ups. Yet at a time when Ukip is garnering support, somebody needs to ensure that everyone in the Passport Office is singing from the same hymn sheet at the same time.
One old hand at the Home Office told me that normally the Passport Office was one of the best agencies, though he admitted that it was difficult to make the system sensitive to individuals. It meant giving officials a degree of discretion, but there were fears that this would be misused.
"You turn the political screw at the top and there's a vice at the bottom," said another insider. "If you apply tough rules to cover your backside politically, then the Civil Service will apply them rigorously. But we shouldn't just blame the guys on the front line. We always make it easier for them to say no and apologise later rather than to say yes and then be shouted at if things go wrong."
Another perennial problem is the clash between ministers' manifesto promises and the reality of making things happen on the ground. The trouble is that politicians are rarely interested in long–term good government. Much easier to make grand promises about toughening up passports and border controls than sorting out complicated family cases. Perhaps the best option for citizens is to shout more when they have poor service. A well–publicised complaints system would show officials where standards are inadequate and give them a chance to explain when there are good reasons for delays.
Baby Hannah? In the end she did get her British passport in time to go to New Zealand – and get home safely afterwards.
There has been much wrangling among politicians over the issue of TV debates and who should appear in them. So far there has been more heat than light and a good deal of mudslinging. Now I hear that the Hansard Society has set up an informal group to look at how best to decide the rules about who should take part in TV debates. It is more complicated than you might think.
Tories, Labour and Lib Dems are all in decline – while the new fourth party, Ukip, is on the up but with no seats at Westminster. In a hung parliament, the Greens or the Scottish Nationalists could be crucial in forming a coalition. So who should be allowed to debate with whom?
Should the main event be a debate between the PM and Ed Miliband with Nick Clegg excluded but the broadcasters allowed to stage other debates with or without Clegg if they wish? Should the decision be left to the broadcasters, or should there be a wider body with independent voices?
The Hansard Society is likely to plump for the latter. This would follow the American model, where an independent commission decides the rules and delivers the broadcast debates.
Asked this week about the "vicious" fight between the Tories and the Lib Dems over education spending, the Cabinet Office minister Oliver Letwin said indignantly: "It's not vicious – I don't do vicious."
Comment on Sue Cameron's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140515ea5f0006x
