{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"178"}
____
  
News
Why we should pause before rushing to make a UK citizen stateless
David Pannick   
845 words
3 April 2014
The Times
T
1; National
56
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Next Monday, the House of Lords will consider whether the Home Secretary, Mrs Theresa May, should have power to remove British citizenship obtained by naturalisation even if it makes the person stateless. I will be asking the House of Lords to support an amendment to Clause 64 of the Immigration Bill to establish a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament to consider and report on this important issue before any decision is taken on whether to change the law.
At present the Home Secretary can deprive a British citizen of citizenship in two circumstances. First, if they have obtained it by fraud, a false representation or concealment of a material fact. And secondly, citizenship obtained by naturalisation can be removed for public good reasons, but only if that would not leave the person stateless.
Last October, the Supreme Court ruled in the Al-Jedda case that Mrs May could not lawfully remove the British citizenship of a man suspected of membership of a terrorist group, when that would result in him becoming stateless. The court said that it was irrelevant that the Home Secretary believed that the complainant would be able to obtain Iraqi citizenship at a future date.
The Home Secretary responded by adding a clause to the Immigration Bill very late in its passage through the House of Commons — 24 hours before the Report Stage and Third Reading on January 30, she tabled an amendment which she said was "in response to" the Al-Jedda case.
However, the clause goes much wider than allowing the Home Secretary to deprive someone of British citizenship when she reasonably believes that they could obtain another citizenship within, say, six months. The Government amendment would remove the bar on deprivation of citizenship which makes a person stateless, so long as the subJect had obtained citizenship by naturalisation and the deprivation is for public good reasons.
There are three main concerns about the Government's proposals. First, it is far from clear how the measure would protect the national interest and indeed it may be counter-productive. It is difficult to understand what taking away the citizenship of a person resident here would achieve: the Minister, Lord Taylor of Holbeach, told the House of Lords at Committee Stage that such a person would retain a right to work and study here and would have "protection against removal" from this country. Indeed, it may be more difficult to remove them from this country since other countries would be less willing to admit a person who has no passport.
If, as seems likely in practice, such a deprivation of citizenship would normally occur while the individual is abroad, it is likely to result in other countries sending dangerous people back here. Other states may well say that the individual was only allowed in because they were travelling on a British passport, and now that this status has been removed, and they have no other nationality, we can have them back. Professor Guy Goodwin-Gill, Professor of International Refugee Law at the University of Oxford, has expressed the opinion that the United Kingdom would, in those circumstances, have an international law obligation to the other state to re-admit the individual, however obJectionable their conduct.
The second main concern is that this country has played a leading international role in the drafting of the 1961 UN Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and in encouraging nations to refrain from inflicting on their citizens what Lord Wilson for the Supreme Court in the Al-Jedda case described as "the evil of statelessness". It is highly undesirable that this country should now suggest to the world — and particularly to dictators who use this weapon as a means of oppression of opponents — that it is acceptable to render citizens stateless.
The third main concern is that, as the Home Secretary recognised when she introduced this clause on January 30, depriving people of their citizenship "is a serious matter. It is one of the most serious sanctions a state can take against a person and it is therefore not an issue that I take lightly". But the Government added the clause so late in the Parliamentary passage of the Immigration Bill that there was no pre-legislative scrutiny, no consultation, and no opportunity for consideration by the Public Bill Committee of the House of Commons.
My amendment will, if approved, require a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament to consider all aspects of the proposal and report back. Then Parliament can take an informed view on whether the benefits (if any) of giving these new powers to the Home Secretary outweigh any detriments. Before such drastic new powers are conferred, Parliament should pause so it can properly consider the implications.
The author is a practising barrister at Blackstone Chambers in the Temple, a Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and a crossbench peer in the House of Lords
'There are three main concerns about the Government's proposals'
Document T000000020140403ea430008w
