{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3134"}
____
  
NEWS
Ukip aide calls police over explicit photos
By Miranda Prynne News Reporter   
353 words
24 April 2014
11:24
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Assistant to Nigel Farage who posed as 'voter' in Ukip's promotional posters calls police after explicit photos of her are given to national newspaper
A Ukip aide who faced criticism after appearing in the party’s publicity posters posing as a ‘voter’ called in police after intimate sexual images of her were given to a newspaper.
Lizzy Vaid appeared in the full-page advert as an ordinary voter from Devon telling readers: “I’ll be voting Ukip because they’re the only party listening to what people want.”
But earlier this week it emerged she actually works full-time for the party as an events manager and assistant to Nigel Farage.
Now Miss Vaid has found herself embroiled in a new scandal after photographs of her engaging in “lewd acts” were passed to The Sun .
When approached by the newspaper – which chose not to reproduce the images claiming they were too graphic - the 27-year-old called the police.
She is believed to have blamed an ex-boyfriend for leaking the photos, taken when she was 20.
The Met Police confirmed they were investigating whether any crime had taken place.
Miss Vaid’s Twitter account, which has been closed down, described her as “Ukip Events Manager and Assistant to Nigel Farage, as well as a lover of social occasions.”
Earlier this month she defended Ukip’s immigration policies and denied the party was racist, tweeting: “I am half Indian, I work for and support @UKIP policies. I am not a racist. Our immigration policy is about SPACE and NOT race!”
Mr Farage dismissed criticism over “racist” posters as he launched Ukip’s campaign for the European Parliament elections on May 22 in Sheffield last Tuesday.
The controversial £1.5million poster campaign urges voters: “Take back control of our country.”
The party’s 2014 Ukip manifesto declares: “We want our country back. Don’t you?”
A Ukip spokesman described the explicit photos of Miss Vaid as a “personal matter”.
“It is not a matter for the party,” he added.
Document TELUK00020140424ea4o001p5
