{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1361"}
____
  
News
Grandees warn PM to avoid UKIP trap
Marie Woolf ; Jack Grimston   
711 words
2 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
14
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
TWO of the Conservative party's most respected grandees have warned the prime minister not to veer to the right and pander to UKIP's agenda.
Lord Heseltine, the former deputy prime minister, warned David Cameron he risked losing the election to Labour if he let Nigel Farage's party determine the Conservatives' pitch to the electorate. Lord Howard, a former Tory leader, urged Cameron to target the collapsing Liberal Democrat vote rather than chase UKIP supporters. He said Cameron should face down climate change sceptics in the Tories as a way to woo disillusioned Lib Dems.
The intervention of the two "big beasts" from opposite wings of the party marks the beginning of a fightback by senior Tory figures worried that right-wing Eurosceptics are forcing the agenda.
They are urging Cameron to appeal instead to centrists including disaffected Lib Dems who might be more willing to vote Tory as Lib Dem support dwindles. Polling by Ipsos-Mori found 21% of Lib Dem supporters would consider switching to the Tories, but only 15% of those backing UKIP would do so.
Today's YouGov poll for The Sunday Times shows the Lib Dems at just 9%, three points behind UKIP. Labour is on 38%, four points ahead of the Conservatives.
In an interview with The Sunday Times, Heseltine said moving to the right would cost the Tories crucial votes from moderates and could bring Ed Miliband to No 10. "I would fear very strongly that moving to the right is likely to lose significant ground in the middle, which is where elections are [decided]," he said.
It would be a mistake for Cameron to rule out another coalition and Heseltine urged Tory voters not to vote for the "isolationist" party UKIP.
"If you want Milband as PM, all you've got to do is vote UKIP. It will put Miliband in and [Ed] Balls back in charge for a rerun of his earlier disaster," he said.
He warned against adopting anti-immigration rhetoric, saying that Britain should encourage more people to come to work here. Responding to figures showing immigration is up, Heseltine — who has been appointed by the government to chair the independent approval panel for the regional growth fund — said Britain had a serious skills shortage and the economy could continue to expand only with help from abroad.
"There is no way we can fill the jobs in the short term from the domestic market," he says. "If you want the economy to continue to grow — and everybody does — there is no known way in which you can fill the skills gap in the short term except by encouraging people from overseas. That is the fact of life."
His comments follow figures showing net migration to the UK rose from 60,000 to 212,000 in the year to September 2013, mainly because of increased migration from the EU.
Heseltine said the regional growth fund, which distributes billions of pounds to businesses, had created or kept in the country 81,000 jobs since it was created, many of them in small and medium-sized businesses.
Howard, speaking at a private dinner given by a green think tank, said Cameron should appeal to disaffected Lib Dems by publicly rebuffing Tory climate-change sceptics.
A source said Howard's message was "forget the obsession with UKIP, we need to target the collapse of the Lib Dem vote and one of the ways to do this is to face down the climate sceptics".
Howard, who as Michael Howard was home secretary, warned there had been "no real political countercharge" against Tory climate sceptics. These include Owen Paterson, the environment secretary, and Lord Lawson, the former chancellor.
The dinner in Westminster, hosted by the think tank Green Alliance, was attended by business-friendly Conservative MPs not normally associated with the party's environmentalist tendency, including John Penrose, a government whip, and the backbenchers David Amess, Graham Stuart and Nadhim Zahawi, who is a member of Cameron's 10 Downing Street policy board.
Howard declined to comment on what was discussed at the dinner, saying it was a confidential occasion.
@grimstonjack Coalition must rise to Miliband's challenge, Editorial, page 26
Document ST00000020140302ea32000lw
