{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1756"}
____
  
News
New Ukip broadcast targets EU migration
Matthew Holehouse   
581 words
24 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A HOUSE must be built every seven minutes in order to cope with the pressures of immigration, the UK Independence Party claimed last night.
It tied the national shortage of housing to migration from the European Union in a televised election broadcast. Hundreds of thousands of British jobs are being advertised across the European Union and Polish migrants are driving down natives' wages, the broadcast claims.
Nigel Farage hopes to come first in next month's European elections – a victory that is likely to provoke open revolt against David Cameron from within the Conservative Party.
Ukip has secured £1.5million in funding from Paul Sykes, a retail entrepreneur, making this its most lavish election campaign.
The party's improved financial health is evident in the slickly–produced video. "To meet current levels of immigration, a house has to be built every seven minutes," the broadcast warns.
The housing claim is based on migration figures that show Britain will grow by 221,000 households per year for a decade. Migration will account for about 38 per cent of population growth, creating 200 new households per day.
In a scene shot in a pub, Mr Farage said: "The other parties will go on telling us we can't survive outside the European Union. The truth is we can.
"We want our country back. I'm urging you to join our people's army and cause an earthquake in British politics."
In an appeal to older voters, the broadcast warns that more than eight million people are forecast to be in fuel poverty by 2020, in part due to green levies.
However, the party faces embarrassment because several of the people featured in the broadcast are party aides. They include Lizzy Vaid, Ukip's events manager and an assistant to Mr Farage, who lives with his press officer Alexandra Phillips.
Amjad Bashir, the party's small business spokesman and a candidate in the European elections, also appears in a scene shot in a curry restaurant.
Mr Farage on Tuesday said it was "ridiculous" to criticise the use of party staff in advertisements as they are "sincere" supporters. "Most parties use actors. We use Ukippers," he said.
Meanwhile, polling shows that a majority of Conservative and Ukip supporters are in favour of same–sex marriage. Research by Ipsos Mori found that 61 per cent of would–be Tory voters and 54 per cent who intended to vote Ukip supported same–sex unions.
The poll highlighted a dramatic shift in attitudes towards homosexuality in Britain within a generation, with support specifically for same–sex marriage more than quadrupling in less than 40 years.
Ipsos MORI said it was "very unusual" to see such a "sea change" in public opinion on a social issue. Overall, almost seven in 10 Britons – 69 per cent – believed that homosexual couples should be able to marry, while just over a quarter – 28 per cent – disagreed.
When the same question was asked in 1975, support for same–sex marriage stood at just 16 per cent, with 53 per cent against. Today, however, opinion on the subject varies among generations. While 88 per cent of 18 to 34 year–olds thought gay and lesbian couples should be able to marry, only a minority – 43 per cent – of those aged over 65 agreed.
Along political lines, support for same–sex marriage was strongest among Labour and Liberal Democrat voters, with about three quarters in favour.
Document DT00000020140424ea4o0005i
