{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"19"}
____
  
NEWS
Model Cara Delevingne's plea for schoolgirl
515 words
24 March 2014
20:44
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Fashion icon Cara Delevingne is backing a campaign to halt the deportation of a schoolgirl from a west London academy to Mauritius without her family
Fashion model and socialite Cara Delevingne has joined a campaign to prevent a schoolgirl being deported without her family.
The 21-year-old Bedales educated fashion icon tweeted her support for Yashika Bageerathi, 19, who faces being sent back to Mauritius alone later this week.
Yashika, a pupil at Oasis Academy Hadley, in Enfield, west London, moved to the capital in 2012 with her family but faces deportation after the Home Office refused her appeal to say in the UK.
Her case was considered separately to that of her mother, brother and sister because, at the age of 19, she is considered an adult.
Model and actress Delevingne tweeted: “The Rt. Hon. Theresa May MP, Home Secretary: #FightforYashika Stop this sixth form student being deported alone. She deserves a future!”
Yashika, who has been offered a place at Queen Mary University in London to study maths, was being held at Yarl’s Wood Immigration Centre in Bedfordshire.
The teenager claimed she had been detained without warning after attending a weekly appointment with Home Office inspectors who have rejected her application for asylum.
Her mother Sowbhagyawatee, 38, sister Shaivya, 16, and brother Cherish, 11, have not yet been informed of the outcome of their request and are still free to remain in the UK. The family came to the country after escaping an “extremely dangerous” relative.
From her cell, Yashika told the Evening Standard: “I’m really scared. They would find me easily. They were very violent towards me and my mum since I was a child.
“I didn’t have any friends out there because of that situation. I never thought I would have so many friends as I do now.
“I came to know what it’s like to interact with people. I was a girl who never had a voice but here I am free.”
If a further legal application fails, Yashika is expected to be deported within days, with only her schoolbag, the clothes she is wearing and the handful of change she took to the Home Office appointment.
She said: “I have some school books with me so I have been doing some maths. I don’t speak to the other people. I feel like a prisoner again.”
Yashika was initially detained four days before Christmas when her application was first rejected. She was kept at Yarl’s Wood for six weeks before her headteacher Lynne Dawes secured bail pending a review of her case.
Mrs Dawes said: “Yashika is a really dedicated student and is very talented at maths.”
Around 100 pupils from Oasis Academy Hadley, where Yashika is due to take A-levels in maths, French and chemistry in June, have staged a protest outside the Home Office, handing in a letter asking Home Secretary Theresa May to stop the deportation.
The Home Office declined to comment, saying: “We do not routinely comment on individual cases.”
Document TELUK00020140324ea3o005sf
