{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3410"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Nick Clegg is not so much patriotic as scaremongering
Ross Clark   
992 words
16 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
IT IS usually easy to sleep through the Today programme but every so often there is something which makes you sit bolt upright, if not choke on your corn flakes. One of those moments was yesterday when Nick Clegg told the country that advocating a United Kingdom that is independent from Europe is unpatriotic. "It is a seriously unpatriotic thing to do, to say that in this globalised world we should turn our backs on the EU," he said to an astonished John Humphrys.
Asked to explain himself the Deputy Prime Minister resorted to his usual line that leaving the EU would cause mass joblessness. Let's deal with that in a moment but first the astonishing charge that advocating departure from the EU is somehow "unpatriotic". What next? Is he going to propose internment for Ukip members, or convene McCarthy–style hearings for those caught engaging in un–European activities such as complaining about EU directives on butter portions?
Surely we can debate the serious issue of whether Britain remains in the EU without being put in the same basket as Lord Haw–Haw or Anthony Blunt. Even Nigel Farage doesn't go about accusing pro–Europeans as being unpatriotic. People can come to different conclusions while still believing they are acting in the best interests of the country.
BUT if anyone has opened themselves to charges of unpatriotic activities it would surely be Liberal Democrat MEPs who, in a package of budgetary measures, recently voted to abandon Britain's rebate from the EU. It is hard to see how volunteering to raise our contribution to EU funds without asking for anything in return is supposed to benefit Britain.
One of those MEPs, Andrew Duff, has called for Britain effectively to be abolished as a nation state in favour of a federalist European super–state. He tries to portray anyone sceptical of the great European experiment as neo–fascists "who march to the beat of the nationalist drum". In other words, according to Mr Duff, you are either with the Lib Dems or with the boot boys.
But on to Clegg's more serious charge that leaving the EU would mean mass unemployment. This is yet one more repeat of his oft–repeated claim that three million British jobs "depend" on our membership of the EU. The Lib Dem leader has been peddling this line for years in spite of it being regularly pointed out that it is utter nonsense. Clegg's claim derives from an 11–year–old Treasury document which estimated that three million jobs were directly or indirectly related to exports to the EU.
Leaving aside the age of the data, the Treasury did not in any way imply that these jobs would be lost if Britain left the EU. To do so would be absurd. Certainly some EU directives have been aimed at boosting cross–border trade in goods and services – at least in industrial goods. It is an entirely different story on agricultural goods, where the EU continues to take a protectionist stance. But it is hardly as if trade between Britain and other EU countries would cease if we left. After all in 2011 EU countries managed to trade €3.2trillion of goods and services with non–EU countries.
If being outside the EU means death to your export industries how come our shops are full of goods made in China, Malaysia and many other countries which are not in the EU?
It is far from clear that EU membership has had a net benefit on our exporters at all. As think tank Civitas pointed out in a report last week, trade between Britain and other EU member states has grown no faster than that between Britain and the rest of the world.
Trade has increased generally but other EU nations account for no higher a proportion of our trade than they did in 1973 when we joined. If other EU members did suffer a fit of pique on our departure from the EU and start a trade war they would have more to lose than us, as we buy more from them than they buy from us.
In March, for example, we exported £13.3billion of goods and services to EU member states and imported from them £19.1billion. Other EU member states have a huge vested interest in ensuring that free trade continues, even after a British exit.
CLEGG'S claim that three million people would lose their jobs in the event of us leaving the EU is a giant piece of scaremongering far worse than anything that has ever emanated from Ukip's campaign team. You can imagine how Nick Clegg would react if someone plucked a figure out of thin air and claimed that immigration was costing the jobs of three million Britons and yet he goes about peddling an equally lurid piece of fantasy.
Nick Clegg knows he is losing the argument on Europe. He staked his reputation on a TV debate with Nigel Farage, deluding himself that he could win over a sceptical public with calm reason. He failed, not least because he couldn't produce any calm reason. His party is heading for a disaster in the Euro elections as increasing numbers of the public can see that the case for EU membership has been built on exaggeration and deceit.
Not everyone in Britain wants to leave the EU. There are some genuine arguments for membership as well as a good many arguments for leaving.
Trouble is, you are not going to hear good arguments from Nick Clegg. He and his party have chosen a line of trying to scare the British people and, if they don't respond to that, insulting them. He may think he is patriotic. I think he is just patronising.
'The EU has more to lose than Britain does'
Document THEEXP0020140516ea5g0003d
