{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3413"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
The Tories said coalition wouldn't work – and they were dead right
FRASER NELSON   
1,315 words
16 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
20
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Government by No 10's select Quad has been an experiment that doesn't bear repeating
Just before the general election, the Conservatives released a party political broadcast warning that a coalition would bring disaster. "Under–the–table deals will be the order of the day," we were told. The fate awaiting savers was depicted by a hammer smashing a piggy bank. The process of proper government would be subverted by policies being "bickered over by secret committees". And instead of Cabinet government, there would be an "end to transparency".
It has taken time, but this prophecy now seems to be coming horribly true. Savers? Their only choice is deciding which bank to lose money with – every single one is offering negative real interest rates. The secret committees? We have the Quad: David Cameron, Nick Clegg, George Osborne and Danny Alexander, his Liberal Democrat deputy. This quartet, in effect, runs the Government: its conclusions are announced to members of the Cabinet, who duly take note and shuffle off back to their departments. The rest of us have very little idea how decisions are taken – or we didn't, until the extraordinary kerfuffle over Mr Clegg's plans for universal free school meals.
This policy was announced by the Deputy Prime Minister last year, at his party conference. At the time, it was hailed as a great concession wrung from the parsimonious Tories. Its real origin, we now know, was in one of those under–thetable deals. The Prime Minister wanted to spend £700 million to support marriage in the tax system, so he granted Clegg a free wish – to the same value – in return. The Deputy Prime Minister, who had until then shown no interest in free school meals, suddenly declared their extension to be a burning priority for his party.
The problem was that no one told the Department for Education until a few hours before Mr Clegg's announcement. Its officials were appalled, saying the idea was expensive and unworkable. Some 1,700 schools have no kitchens: what were they to do? How was this to be funded? The Prime Minister, too, was baffled, not least by the idea that his children should qualify for free government lunches. But he did not confront Mr Clegg: if it kept the Coalition ticking, he would not protest.
Normally, we'd know none of this. But the whistle has been blown by Dominic Cummings, a former special adviser to Michael Gove. This was, he said, a perfect example of bad government – of schools, and taxpayers' money, being used to win headlines. His disclosure seems to have driven Mr Clegg quite mad: only this week he demanded that Mr Gove and David Laws, his Lib Dem deputy, pen a joint article pretending that they agree over the policy.
Creating such a fuss has, of course, only served to help make Cummings's essential point: that coalition brings with it feuds, power struggles and shabby deals. The same can be seen in the extraordinary role given to a rotten institution at the heart of the Coalition. This is the Cabinet's home affairs committee, through which most policies have to pass. Since it is chaired by Nick Clegg, he is able to veto any proposal he thinks the Tories are keen on, so he can keep it hostage. He may release it later, but only if he is granted a favour (or three) in return. This horse–trading happens within the Quad, in which the Lib Dems hold 50 per cent of the power – not bad for a party that has just 9 per cent of the seats.
That Tory advert in 2010 also warned that coalition would rob British government of transparency. So it has proved: even Cabinet members now have no idea what happens in the Quad's meetings. The broadcast jokingly promised a "brave new world of undemocratic processes". What else can you call a committee used by Lib Dems to hold the rest of government to ransom?
There are plenty more examples of bad policy, created by the chaos of coalition. Consider the recent bizarre idea of granting minority status to the Cornish. This was intended to help Lib Dem prospects in the South West: the announcement was made by Danny Alexander, who just happened to be visiting the area. The American idea of pork–barrel politics – favours for selected chunks of the electorate – is slowly being introduced.
We shouldn't blame Mr Clegg: he is simply doing his best to turn the chaos to his party's advantage. He was driven to such behaviour because his first approach to government – honest co–operation and shared radicalism – was not working. Joining up with the Tories cut the Lib Dems' support in half. He fears their identity has been subsumed in the Coalition, so he is picking fights to stand out again. And he's doing so not to save his job, but to save his party – whose main preoccupation is, as always, survival.
There is no evidence that coalition has helped the Conservatives, either. The Prime Minister has been reduced to acting as horse–trader–in–chief. Tory ministers routinely complain that his staff have been turned into emissaries for Nick Clegg, seeming interested only in keeping the Lib Dems happy. As a result, not enough thought is going into the Conservative message – as is evident in the party's strategy ahead of next week's European and local elections.
Exhibit A is the fairly uninspiring pamphlets that will be filling wastepaper baskets all over Britain in the next few days. Chief among the lists of Tory boasts is cutting the deficit – but the actual progress has been abysmal. Next comes a claim that income tax cuts have saved the typical voter £705 a year – but the real figure is closer to £550, which evaporates entirely when the VAT increase is considered. Then there's a warning that Labour would bring "more borrowing and more taxes". True – but the Tories plan the same.
After four years, one would have hoped for a longer, more impressive and more honest list of accomplishments. And had the Prime Minister been focusing more on his own tribe, he'd find plenty more to say. What about the school reforms, which will give the parents of 150,000 pupils the choice in education that only the rich have been able to afford? When the Prime Minister boasts about the astonishing increase in jobs for British workers, why not link it more clearly to his welfare or immigration reforms? There is a broader, better and truer Conservative success story – but as yet, it has gone untold.
When the Coalition held its marriage ceremony in the Rose Garden of No 10, many cynics, myself included, predicted its early demise. We were wrong. David Cameron's success in creating and sustaining this alliance has been nothing short of extraordinary. Mr Clegg's initial concessions, on tuition fees and public spending, were substantial and sincere. The Coalition has been a historic political achievement – yet it's hard, now, to see who has benefited other than Ed Miliband. For all the power wielded by the Lib Dems, coalition seems to have been quite toxic to their popular support. They may lose all of their MEPs next week – quite some blow for a party that feels so deeply for Europe.
The Coalition will stagger on until the general election, but it's difficult to point to any successes other than its survival. Still, at least the Tories won't need to pay for another broadcast warning voters off coalitions. The past five years have been one long, expensive advert for why the experiment should not be repeated.
Comment on Fraser Nelson's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140516ea5g0007o
