{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"739"}
____
  
Dissenting voices are vital. Even if wrong
Matthew Syed   
1,020 words
5 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage is disagreeable but it's important that he airs his views in public. Democracy needs people who disagree
In 2002 Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a professor at Yale School of Management, set out to examine what makes an effective board of directors. This was in the aftermath of some pretty spectacular corporate collapses, most notably Enron and WorldCom.
Professor Sonnenfeld looked at all the usual theories of how to improve board performance: directors should turn up more for meetings; they should have more experience; they should hold shares in the company they are supervising. But here's the thing: the numbers didn't support any of this. High and low-performing companies were the same, on average, in all these measures.
But one thing turned out to be vitally important to successful boards: dissenters. People who were prepared to disagree with each other, people who challenged the consensus, people who didn't just go along for a quiet life. As Professor Sonnenfeld put it: "The highest-performing companies have extremely contentious boards that regard dissent as an obligation and that treat no subject as undiscussable."
Over recent weeks the British people have experienced a great deal of dissent. Nigel Farage, in his debates with Nick Clegg and elsewhere, has challenged some of the most cherished shibboleths of British politics. I happen to disagree with much of what he says. I disagree with him on Europe, on immigration and on gay marriage. I disagree with him on Ukraine, too. But I am thrilled he has had a chance to air his views; thrilled that he has dared to challenge some of the orthodoxies that have united the main parties for the better part of 40 years.
Dissenting voices are vital, even when they are wrong (or one thinks they are wrong). They shake us up and expose our assumptions. This is why free speech is so precious. As John Stuart Mill put it: "The peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is that it is robbing the human race [of useful information] ... If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error."
Ed Miliband, perhaps understandably, is not terribly keen for Mr Farage to get access to the TV debates at the next election. "I think the format we had last time ... is good format," he said.
I do not have a strong view on the TV debates per se (I can see why adebate involving four or five party leaders might be unwieldy). But I am certain that we need to hear, and to protect, the voices of dissenters. I say this not to help Nigel Farage or Ukip. I say it in order to help all of us.
The complacency of the political class on the European issue was revealed when Mr Clegg was asked how the EU would look in ten years. The Lib Dem leader floundered. He hadn't given the issue much thought. He seemed happy to sleepwalk into the next decade of European collaboration so deeply has it become an article of faith. This is what political ossification looks like: opinions become credos and those who dare to disagree become weirdos.
In this epoch of political conformism, we need shaking up more than ever. Democracy and free speech alone are not enough to expose us to contrary opinions. The irony of the information age is that people are retreating far more into their own backyards of cherished dogmas. We desperately need the opposite. Socialists should read Hayek. Christians should read Dawkins. Atheists should explore C. S. Lewis. This kind of exposure will not necessarily change our opinions but it will render them more nuanced and infinitely more humane. If we only ever associate with the things we agree with, we are like a scientist wearing blinkers. Only by exposing ourselves to dissent will we grow.
I freely admit that I have been shaken up by Mr Farage. I had not given anything like enough thought to issues of social integration. I had not given enough thought to the infrastructure necessary to make immigration work effectively. Most of all, I had not fully registered the dubiousness of a political union that nobody has really voted on for 40 years and that, even back in 1975, was supposed to be a common market. We need a referendum.
Dissent can, of course, be taken too far. Brian Uzzi, a sociologist from Northwestern University, conducted a major study of Broadway musicals. He investigated nearly every musical produced between 1877 and 1990, analysing the teams behind 2,258 different productions. He came up with a figure called Q. This was a measure of the "social intimacy" between these teams: how often they had worked together before, did they have similar ideas, were they total strangers, etc.
Q turned out to be astonishingly significant in whether the musicals were a success. When Q was low (below 1.7), the musicals bombed. This is the danger of too much dissent. The teams were strangers, they kept disagreeing, they had totally different assumptions. But here's the thing: when Q was too high (above 3.2), the musicals bombed too. The artists were so similar in their thinking and assumptions that innovation was stifled. As Jonah Lehrer, the science writer, puts it: "The best shows were produced with intermediate levels of intimacy."
The problem today, it seems to me, is that Q is far too high. Conformism is rampant. Politicians are drawn from a narrow cadre of researchers and advisers. The rush towards the middle ground has become a stampede. Debates take place on the head of a pin. That is why people like Mr Farage are important to our democracy, even when you think they are wrong. By reducing the level of Q, they raise our collective IQ.
Conformism is rampant. Debate takes place on the head of a pin
Document T000000020140405ea450003e
