{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1362"}
____
  
News
Don't frarp in your gruds: our new lingo
Kevin Dowling   
717 words
2 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
17
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
LINGUISTS have uncovered new forms of slang born of family banter.
Researchers found hundreds of newly invented words — including 57 for a television remote control — as slang blossoms among all generations and social groups. While all languages evolve over time, experts say English is changing more rapidly because of its global prevalence and liberal immigration policies that have exposed it to foreign influences.
Tony Thorne of King's College London, author of the Dictionary of Contemporary Slang, said: "Once associated with enclosed communities such as the prison, the army barracks, the factory floor and the older public schools, more recently slang has escaped its boundaries and is running wild."
In the latest edition of the dictionary Thorne has included a new category of informal speech used by families that was originally identified by researchers at Winchester University and called "kitchen-table lingo".
While slang is often used by young people as a way of excluding adults, this form of subversive linguistic informality is born of collaboration between the generations.
The words are often used to inject a note of silliness into the domestic routine with names such as "blabber", "zapper" "melly" and "dawicki", which are all used for the remote control.
Families have also invented words for everyday items or situations. These include "grooglums", the bits of food left in the sink after washing up, "slabby-gangaroot", the dried ketchup left around the mouth of the bottle, and "trunklements", the personal possessions of a grandparent.
Other examples include "splosh", "chupley" or "blish" for a cup of tea, "gruds" for underpants and "frarping" for the act of scratching one's backside.
Bill Lucas, professor of learning and a trustee of the English Project at Winchester University, which catalogued the family slang words, said: "A lot of these words are inspired by the sound or the look of a thing, or are driven by an emotional response to that being described."
Most slang still comes from the fast-moving linguistic innovation of young people, with many words emanating from the street jargon of the Caribbean. Examples include "choong" and "peng", meaning attractive, and "blud" for friend.
The word "merk" originates from American street gangs where it is used as a verb to describe murder but it has evolved to mean "to humiliate" among west London teenagers.
Other words and phrases used by teenagers, such as "totes devz" and "amazeballs", feature in the new dictionary as do "nim-nimnim", describing boring adult conversation, and "meh", a verbal shrug of indifference.
Internet-savvy mothers have also emerged as slang artists with words such as "boyf" for boyfriend, "hubz" for husband and "soz" for sorry now in common use.
Texters are using abbreviations such as "YOLO" (you only live once), "LMAO" (laughing my ass off) and "CBA" (can't be arsed).
Teenagers are also adopting old-fashioned words picked up from grandparents as "gran slang". Thorne said he found teenagers using words such as "reek", "trek", "luka" (from lucre), "galavanting" and "rapscallion" as new slang.
Some say slang undermines language, lowers educational standards and damages the career prospects of young people. Jean Gross, who has advised the government on children's speech, said teenagers were becoming unemployable because of their limited vocabulary.
In 2012 Sheffield Springs Academy in South Yorkshire banned students from using slang on school premises and promoted the use of standard English in a drive to improve their employment chances. Other schools have pursued similar policies.
Thorne, however, points to the inventiveness involved in creating slang and says studies have shown that those who use slang are often more literate.
The poet Benjamin Zephaniah described slang as a positive force. "I see slang like martial arts," he said. "So long as you have strong foundations, you are free to improvise."
Professor Mark Pagel, an evolutionary biologist at Reading University, who has written about the evolution of language, said: "There is nothing inherently inferior about slang but it doesn"t cross boundaries very well.
"So if you want to get on then you have to behave like the majority group or those in power who are setting and marking the exams or providing the employment."
THE WORDS ARE USED TO INJECT A NOTE OF SILLINESS INTO DOMESTIC ROUTINES
Document ST00000020140302ea32000mz
