{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1371"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel Farage: 'Immigrants have jollified Britain and made our food better'; The Ukip leader says that immigration has a positive influence but must be stopped to protect jobs for the children of British people
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
511 words
2 March 2014
10:45
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Immigration has “jollified" Britain and improved the quality of food in towns across the country Nigel Farage has said.
The Ukip leader added that if he were a Romanian worker he would have moved to the UK to take advantage of the better work opportunities and wages on offer.
His comments come as it was revealed that net migration has soared to over 200,000, up nearly 60,000 year on year, despite David Cameron’s pledge that he would bring down the figure to the “tens of thousands" by the next general election.
Mr Farage said that while British people liked some of the things that migrants had brought with them they had increasing fears that jobs would be going to immigrants over their children who were born in the UK.
The Ukip leader said: “The question here, it isn’t just about money, it isn’t about GDP; I think it’s about community, it’s a sense of who we are as a people and what we belong to.
“I toured the whole of England last year in the run-up to the English county elections and I met people everywhere who said: ‘Nigel, we’ve never had a problem with immigration – it jollifies the place and the food’s better and all that – but how many people can we actually take? What chance have our kids got of getting jobs?
“Why am I, whether I’m driving a lorry, whether I’m working in a factory, why am I finding that my take-home pay is less than it was five years ago?’
“It is because we have a distorted labour market. We have a mass oversupply of unskilled, semi-skilled and in some cases skilled labour. It’s driven down wages and it’s hurt those at the bottom of society most."
Mr Farage added it was “utterly meaningless" for David Cameron to set targets for net migration of tens of thousands a year as it was not possible to have “any control over who comes to Britain" while it remains a member of the European Union.
Britain was at “real risk" of “hundreds of thousands" more people coming from the Mediterranean to find work in Britain before their economies recover.
Discussing his party’s policies for the general election he confirmed that Ukip would not ring-fence NHS funding but instead look at how to “better results or the same results" by spending less on the the National Health Service.
He said: “If we could get better results, or the same result, by spending less then that is what we should try and do.
“We can make savings given the middle management has grown by over 40 per cent since 1997, it seems to me that there are places here we can make genuine savings."
Document TELUK00020140302ea320035x
