{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2952"}
____
  
Features
Michael Travis
1,103 words
10 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
74,75
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Costume designer who gave Liberace his glitter in rhinestone suits and feather cloaks
The Hollywood costume designer Michael Travis found his dream job dressing Liberace, a man for whom nothing was too outrageous, too uncomfortable or too expensive. Travis was the creative brain behind "Mr Showmanship" at the height of his fame, sketching jaw-dropping outfits — rhinestone encrusted jumpsuits, mink fur trains, ostrich feather cloaks and gold brocade tuxedos — that inspired a generation of outlandish stage stars from Elton John to Lady Gaga.
Despite suing the press for suggesting he was a homosexual, Liberace lived, said one critic, "in a glass closet" and it was his camp, glitzy fashion, as imagined by Travis, that made him one of the first gay icons on stage and TV.
Already a successful designer, creating clothes for Dionne Warwick, the Supremes and Nancy Sinatra, Travis was introduced to the flamboyant pianist in 1969 at his Palm Springs home — "Piazza de Liberace" — by the producer and choreographer Ray Arnett. The star was after a new costume designer and Travis's first task was to create a chauffeur's costume for a performance in a limousine. It was made from, he described, "three-inch by six inch patches of different shades of blue, each embroidered with different bugle beads, rhinestones, jewels, and sequins, as were the boots. the costume was further embellished with mink cuffs, collars and boot tops. He loved it."
A 16-year fashion relationship began — Travis designed the majority of Liberace's wardrobe until the pianist's death of an Aids-related illness in 1987. At one point the highest paid pianist in the world, Liberace demanded outfits that were ever more lavish and detailed — "There's nothing he will not do." The costumes included his famous "flame" costume, sewn with mirrors and 1,600 tiny lights, and his Fabergé cape, made of three shades of pink turkey-feather boas lined with lamé, which he wore over a crystalstudded pink silk suit to climb out of a giant Fabergé egg. His most expensive outfit consisted of a $300,000 fox-fur 26-foot train, weighing 137 pounds, over a jewelled tuxedo worth $50,000.
A Liberace show could include as many as ten costume changes, totalling $1million in value, not including jewellery. There was no budget and Travis spent what he liked: "The bookkeepers scream and yell now and then but [Lib-erace] never says anything."
All the outfits and all the beading patterns were designed from scratch by Travis himself. "I usually use plain fabric that I embroider the heck out of. Then they all become wedding cakes confections." After Liberace approved a design, Travis would oversee every aspect of its creation. It took about two-months planning to allow for cutting, fitting and detailing. "It means I have to wear roller skates just to get around to fabric people, cutters, furriers, beaders and embroiderers, to have the work come out on time," he said. "I do the original sketches from my home studio, and the rest is then processed through various workshops."
Travis recalled that once during a fitting he worried a heavily embroidered coat would weigh too much. He asked the pianist if he could lift his arms. Liberace looked at him, took a drag of his cigarette, and said: "don't worry about it".
Michael Travis, who leaves no partner or children, was born in Detroit in 1928 to Greek immigrant parents. Just out of high school and not yet 17 he enlisted in the army and in 1945 was sent to postwar Germany. Three years later he moved to Paris to study fashion and period costume, working in boutiques and sending sketches to Paris fashion houses. However, he felt he would do better in New York and in the late 1950s, was given a job at Eaves Costume Company, cataloguing its costume collection and building new items for Broadway productions.
His break came designing classical Greek costumes for the production of Rape of the Belt. Soon afterwards, he moved to Los Angeles to work on costumes for the Academy Awards under the celebrated costume designer Edith Head, who dressed the leading female stars of the era including Ginger Rogers, Audrey Hepburn, Grace Kelly and Elizabeth Taylor.
From the late 1960s Travis was involved mainly in television costume design, thinking up psychedelic outfits for the NBC comedy Rowan &Martin's Laugh-In, for which he would create as many as 400 costumes a week and received an Emmy nomination.
After discovering in his late 40s that he had multiple sclerosis, he slowed the pace of his work and started designing for Las Vegas music stars including Dionne Warwick, Wayne Newton, the Fifth Dimension, the Temptations and Connie Stevens. He created Diana Ross and the Supremes' famous swirly orange and gold butterfly dresses that appear on the cover of Cream of the Crop. The stage wardrobe of the Supremes was worth a fortune, dresses covered in thousands of sequins cost between $1,000 and $2,000 at the time, as much as $26,000 in today's values.
He was described by the industry as "one of the most gifted and talented costume designers in American television and theatre".
The 2013 biopic of Liberace's life Behind the Candelabra, starring Michael Douglas, made no reference to Michael Travis, though featured outfits copied from his work. Travis claimed there was "bad blood" between him and the producer Terry Weintraub after a fall out about costumes on a 1970s TV show.
Of the film, and its portrayal of his friend's sexuality, Travis said: "The acting was great. But [I] thought it was a piece of crap. Lee [Liberace] kept a good lid on that part of his life. He always kept up the pretence of the woman in his life and everyone went along with the gag and that was it. Those of us in the inner circle knew what was going on but I never had a gay word with him all the 16 years. No admission of anything. It was a different time."
He said after Liberace's death that the best outfits were yet to come, including a cape so huge that it would lift up to become the backdrop of the Radio City Music Hall, with candelabras in the fabric lighting up the stage. "It would have been the showstopper of all time."
Michael Travis, television and stage costume designer, was born on April 13, 1928. He died on May 1, 2014, aged 86
Travis created a 26ft fox-fur train that was worth $300,000
Document T000000020140510ea5a0001l
