{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3608"}
____
  
CULTURE
What next for BBC Two? Folliwing BBC Two controller Janice Hadlow's abrupt departure, Neil Midgley wonders about the channel's future.
By Neil Midgley   
938 words
23 February 2014
08:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Of all the BBC’s TV channels, BBC Two is in the rudest health. Its clever documentaries chime with critics and viewers alike; it has a resurgent drama slate, including The Fall and Peaky Blinders ; and, of course, it gave us The Great British Bake Off . All of which makes it rather mysterious that its controller, Janice Hadlow, is leaving the channel – without an obviously alluring job to go to.
Though the BBC says it was “very much" Hadlow’s decision to step down, the corporation has created a new (and ill-defined) job for her out of nowhere – a tactic that director-general Tony Hall has used a number of times, when he has wanted to ease senior managers out of front-line jobs. But unlike, say, former Newsnight editor Peter Rippon – who was moved away from that programme after the Jimmy Savile debacle – Hadlow does not leave a poisoned chalice for her successor.
BBC Two’s current success contrasts starkly with its poor form when Hadlow took over in 2008. She was promoted from running BBC Four, a channel for which Hadlow coined the mantra “clever pleasure". BBC Four and its digital sibling BBC Three had stolen so many of BBC Two’s clothes – taking both younger viewers and the more intellectual ones – that it was increasingly unclear why the BBC was spending the thick end of £500 million a year on the older channel.
What Hadlow has done, quietly but deftly, is to give BBC Two a new confidence in presenting brainy topics to a mass audience. Even Bake Off, BBC Two’s biggest hit by far in 2013, isn’t as light as it might appear. According to the BBC’s head of documentaries, Emma Willis, Bake Off’s success depends on taking the anatomy of a sponge cake “as seriously as the anatomy of a murder". The result is that, when viewers finish watching an episode, they have not only been thoroughly entertained – they also feel a smidgeon more intelligent.
Hadlow also had a stroke of luck when the BBC’s arcane budgeting process gave her a new pot of money to spend on drama. She and drama chief Ben Stephenson have, however, produced a run of successes that can’t be put down just to chance. Line of Duty 窶  currently on its second series – is a standard cop show, but impressed critics with its sophistication and ambiguity. The Fall, ostensibly another genre piece, also played with viewers’ traditional loyalties by presenting Gillian Anderson as a cold-hearted police detective – and Jamie Dornan as a knee-weakeningly handsome serial killer.
REVIEW: Line of Duty, series two, BBC Two
However, whoever Hadlow’s successor is (Adam Barker has just been announced as the Acting Controller of both BBC Two and BBC Four), they will inherit an in-tray that contains some chunky challenges as well.
By taking the Springwatch format that she inherited, and morphing it into a whole raft of live factual events, Hadlow effectively created a new genre of programmes for BBC Two. But after Autumnwatch, Winterwatch, Lambing Live, Stargazing Live, Volcano Live and (the widely panned) Airport Live, the new BBC Two chief might have to come up with their own brilliant idea – unless they want their first commission to be Dead Horse Flogging Live.
Hadlow’s personal passion is history – she’s just written a book about the family life of George III, out in May. That has made BBC Two’s history films particularly strong, but at the expense of more contemporary themes. Dan Snow, for example, has been despatched to make films about the history of Syria and the history of the Winter Olympics . By contrast Channel 4 has treated the same topics much more vividly, hoovering up awards for Olly Lambert’s reportage in Syria: Across the Lines, and showing the vile face of today’s anti-gay bigotry in Russia with Liz Mackean窶冱 Hunted .
REVIEW:  Syria, Across the Lines, Channel 4 
Indeed, the BBC’s current-affairs output has yet to emerge from the shadow cast on its investigative reporting by the Savile crisis. Channel 4窶冱 Benefits Streetmay have divided opinion, but it created a genuine debate about one of modern Britain’s most divisive issues. By contrast, BBC Two’s authored documentaries – Nick Robinson on immigration, Robert Peston on China – are beautifully made and argued, but hardly visceral.
And Hadlow’s successor inherits a smaller, but possibly more intractable, problem: BBC Four. That niche channel now comes under the remit of the BBC Two controller. The BBC has scandalously vandalised BBC Four over recent years, denuding it of its popular drama output and forcing it to focus on increasingly dreary arts documentaries. It’s almost inconceivable, now, that BBC Four could come up with The Thick of Itor The Secret Life of the Motorway – and that’s a problem that surely has to be fixed.
Bringing both BBC Two and BBC Four up to date, and making them directly relevant to the UK’s political process, will have one other, crucial benefit. After the general election next year, Tony Hall will have to dive straight into negotiations with the Government about the renewal of the BBC’s charter, expiring in 2016. If Hadlow’s successor can make BBC Two indispensable at Westminster, this resurgent channel will have scored its biggest win of all.
READ: The 10 best TV shows of 2013
Follow @Telegraph_TV
Document TELUK00020140223ea2n002hd
