{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1102"}
____
  
NEWS
David Cameron appeals to Conservative supporters to back his economic policies
By Christopher Hope Senior Political Correspondent   
438 words
7 May 2014
07:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
David Cameron appeals to Conservative grassroots supporters to back the Government's economic policies.
David Cameron has urged his own Conservative grassroots supporters to back the Government’s economic policies.
In an email to Tory party 134,000 supporters on Tuesday night, he said he was “asking you to back the plan that is turning our country around”.
In the 260 word message for Conservative supporters, Mr Cameron said: “The Conservatives are the ones with the long-term economic plan that is working.
“If we want to continue this Great British revival, and keep on turning our country around, we’ve got to keep working through this plan. That’s why today, I’m asking you to back the plan that is turning our country around.”
The emailed message was timed to be sent out one year from next May's general election.
Mr Cameron said: “For each of those 365 days, the Conservatives have one clear message: we are the team that is turning Britain around.”
Mr Cameron said the Government had a “serious, long-term economic plan” to cut the deficit, reduce income tax, cut immigration and cap welfare.
He said that the Conservatives would demonstrate that this “plan is working for families across our country”. He said: “From the ashes of the Great Recession we are building a Great British revival. But make no mistake: all this is at stake a year from now.
“Labour’s only plans are for more spending, more borrowing, more debt – more of the same that got us into the mess. They would ruin the progress that has been made.
“So our message is clear, consistent and unrelenting: the Conservatives are the ones with the long-term economic plan that is working.”
The Government has been "underselling" its policies which are aimed at women, David Cameron told his MPs last night.
The Prime Minister told Conservative MPs that "we have been underselling this ourselves" in terms of women policies.
Nicky Morgan, the Women's minister, told the MPs that the number of women on FTSE100 boards had increased from 12.5 per cent to 20.7 per cent.
She added that the Government figures showed the gender pay gap has fallen since 2010, and "almost eliminated for full time workers under 40".
Other achievements included legislating for the Married Couple's Allowance, as well as an increase in the number of female Tory MPs.
She said that 30 per cent of the party's candidates at the 2015 general election were women.
Document TELUK00020140506ea56005se
