{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3011"}
____
  
Hot stuff from Heston as he reinvents Britain's curry house dishes
Ellen E Jones   
654 words
9 May 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
47
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
Last Night's TV
Heston Blumenthal's food shows always make for spectacular television, but Heston's Great British Food (Channel 4) can claim an additional triumph: it has succeeded in restoring pride to Britain's national cuisine. How can dishes such as fish and chips, roast beef and sticky toffee pudding be dull and uninspiring, when each has served as inspiration for one of Heston's fabulous feasts? The return of the show for a second series also proves Britain isn't out of foodie favourites yet - even if this episode's curry theme did seem a bit of a stretch.
Curry is from India, yes? Well, no, not quite. Most of the curry house pioneers were actually from Bangladesh, not India, and, as Heston was informed by restaurateur Enam Ali, the deliciously inauthentic likes of chicken tikka masala and onion bhaji were both invented on these shores. So, much like the Birmingham-produced bhangra-pop hit "Mundian to Bach Ke", which we heard on the soundtrack, Heston's curry episode was a celebration of the culture of second, third and fourth-generation British-Asians.
The food history sections were full of fascinating morsels, since even before the Second World War instigated a wave of mass immigration, Britain had a culinary relationship with India. This has resulted in Victorian Anglo-Indian concoctions of varying tastiness, like kedgeree (yum), mulligatawny (passable) and devilled kidneys (the very work of Satan). In conversation with Heston, the author and historian Shrabani Basu, also scandalously hinted at an affair between Queen Victoria and her Indian Secretary Abdul Karim. For it was he who first introduced her maj to that known aphrodisiac - a massive curry. If Karim's poppadum's were as impressively over-sized as Heston's, we can hardly blame her.
It wasn't this tittle-tattle, which made Heston's glasses - literally - mist over, however. That spectacle took place when he bit into a moruga scorpion chilli, aka "the hottest chilli in the world". As if his discomfort wasn't evident enough from his crimson cheeks and steamed-up specs, Heston also managed a mind-bending description for the viewer: "Ooh, I've just found a couple of radiators at either side of my head!"
Is Jonah from Tonga, BBC3's new comedy series, another meditation on the cultural contribution of immigrant communities? It features Australian character comedian Chris Lilley as Jonah, a 14-year-old tearaway who's back at school in Sydney after a period living with his extended family on the Polynesian island of Tonga. Having heard Jonah's trademark dick jokes, however, you might feel "cultural contribution" is a bit much.
The good news is, this was much funnier than Ja'mie: Private School Girl, the disappointing first spin-off from Lilley's cult mockumentary Summer Heights High, which aired on BBC3 back in February. It's not that 39-year-old Lilley is more convincing as 14-year-old schoolboy Jonah than as 17-year-old schoolgirl Ja'mie - both are disturbingly accurate - it's that Jonah from Tonga appears to have found a format that better suits the material.
We're used to seeing Lilley switch between several different characters in one episode of Summer Heights High, so when he concentrates his efforts on just one of his creations, it can become monotonous. Jonah from Tonga solves this problem by introducing a few more supporting characters. There is Jonah's gruff non-English speaking uncle (Tevita Manu) and new teacher, Mr Joseph (Doug Bowles), a specialist in teaching children with behavioural problems who has some behavioural problems of his own.
If you're also watching the Channel 4 documentary Mr Drew's School for Boys at the moment, Mr Joseph's counter-example of disciplinary techniques for wayward teens makes for a cathartic double bill.
Document IND0000020140509ea5900029
