{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2546"}
____
  
News
Immigration shock: you, dear reader, are a member of the 'wealthy metropolitan elite'
By James Kirkup   
848 words
6 March 2014
11:25
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
There are two sorts of people in this world. The ones who think the world can be neatly divided into two groups of people, and those who don't. James Brokenshire thinks we can draw such clear lines of distinction, at least when it comes to immigration and economics.
The immigration minister has this to say this morning:
“For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services – but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country."
Got that? There are good people and there are bad people. The Conservatives are on the side of the good ones. Hooray for them, and those hardworking ordinary folk, angry about immigration and the metropolitan elite, who have, by amazing coincidence, been identified by Tory pollsters as most likely to shun the Conservatives in favour of Ukip.
Mr Brokenshire is a nice man, a decent and honourable one and the sort of hardworking politician who could give his trade a good name. But his speech this morning is wrong, wrong and silly.
Let’s start with his “wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services". How dare they, how very dare they? The effrontery of these urban sophisticates, wanting to pay less rather than more for things. It makes the blood boil, doesn’t it?
Presumably, Mr Brokenshire believes that the right and moral thing to do when buying goods and services is to pay more for them, in order to avoid lining the pockets of foreign workers? That’s the logic of his argument, and there’s nothing intellectually wrong with it. Still, many of his Conservative colleagues would struggle to live by it, since they employ “cheap tradesmen" from overseas: Mark Harper, the last immigration minister, employed a Colombian cleaner; David Cameron has employed nannies from countries including Nepal and Australia.
Mr Brokenshire’s is such a tricky principle to put into practice because it defies a basic rule of economics: rational people pay the least amount possible for the things they buy.
The same goes for companies hiring workers, of course. Businesses taking on staff are in the same position as householders looking for a plumber: they want to pay the smallest sum possible. Doing so leaves both with more cash left over, to use on other things. For companies, that means using the money saved to hire other workers, buying machinery, returning profits to shareholders. For households, that means using the cash to buy a new TV, a pub lunch, or save for a rainy day.
It used to be thought, not least in the Conservative Party, that there was nothing ignoble about any of this. It used to be broadly understood that this is how free markets work, and that the more of it goes on, the better off everyone will become: more workers get hired, more TVs get sold, pubs do more trade, and all the people involved in those endeavours end up with money in their pockets. The Tories used to take pride in making this argument.
But Mr Brokenshire’s speech is final confirmation that the Conservatives have given up on the market and been frightened by Ukip into dumb populism. The modern Conservative Party appears to believe there is something dishonourable about profiting from the operation of a free market (in this case, the labour market).
Again, it’s possible to argue that case (even it’s a stupid one), but it’s a line of argument that will surely lead the Tories to some uncomfortable places. Because Mr Brokenshire’s dividing line is a nonsensical one. It simply isn’t possible to distinguish between those who have benefited from immigration and those who have suffered in the way he suggests.
Have you ever bought a burger in McDonalds or groceries in Tesco? If so, I'm afraid you’re a member of that “wealthy metropolitan elite" profiting from migration at the expense of ordinary decent workers. Because those companies, like just about every other major firm in Britain are “employers who want an easy supply of cheap labour" (is there any other sort, incidentally?) They include foreign workers among their workforces in order to minimise costs and prices, thus maximising their sales and thus profits. And you, dear reader, collude in their sin by buying their cheapened products. I hope you’re ashamed of yourself; I know I am.
And don’t let’s get started on the NHS or any of the other public bodies who employ foreign labour. For they do so for very simple reasons: that’s the best way they can hire the skills they need for the money they have available. Anyone out there happy to pay more tax so the health service and the rest can operate a Brits-only employment policy that would push up their operating costs? Don’t all shout at once.
Document TELUK00020140306ea360035z
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	22/02/2014 to 05/04/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or London Evening Standard Online Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,848
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 16:34
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
