{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"533"}
____
  
NEWS
Maria Miller could cost Tories election if she stays, say MPs
By Georgia Graham, Peter Dominiczak and Christopher Hope   
786 words
8 April 2014
19:36
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A quarter of all Conservative MPs in the most at risk seats at the next election say Maria Miller must resign for the sake of the party's chances at the next election
Maria Miller's expenses scandal is costing the Conservative party vital votes in the marginal seats that will decide the next election, MPs have warned.
Voters in key marginal seats are angry that the Culture Secretary has kept her job and will turn against the Conservative party at the general election if she remains in place, MPs have said.
In a Telegraph survey of the 40 most marginal seats that the Conservatives must hold if they are to have a chance of winning the next election, not a single MP was willing to speak in the minister’s support other than Mary Macleod, her parliamentary private secretary.
Many others were strongly critical of Mrs Miller’s conduct and refusal to resign. One said the Conservative Party needs the controversy the minister has attracted "like a hole in the head".
A third of marginal MPs said the scandal is costing the party support. A quarter called for her to lose her job.
Of the 23 MPs who responded to the survey or have made their views public none would publicly back Mrs Miller apart from Ms McCleod.
Nine said they would make no comment on the affair with one saying they did not want to add "fuel to the fire".
Parliament's Independent Standards Commissioner last week found that Mrs Miller had broken Commons rules and should repay £45,000 she claimed on a London house she later sold for a £1.2 million profit.
A committee of MPs reduced the payment to £5,800. An online petition calling for Mrs Miller to repay £45,000 or resign has been backed by 150,000 people.
The public anger at Mrs Miller is worrying marginal MPs who believe that the issue has become so toxic that even if Mrs Miller resigns the "damage is already done."
Another said marginal MPs need it "like a hole in the head" and that Maria Miller was being "extraordinarily selfish" by not resigning.
Others said negative public opinion surrounding the case would be "unstoppable" until the Culture Secretary accepted the "inevitable" and resigned.
One marginal MP said: "Whether resigning now recovers that damage is debatable, I mean you are almost at the point where you almost might as well stick it out now - because you have already upset the world.
"The damage is already done, David Cameron may as well stick to his guns now that he has got this far and hang on in there with her."
Many marginal MPs pointed to the resignation of Mark Harper, the immigration minister who stepped down immediately when he realised his cleaner was working in the country illegally as an example of how to resign with dignity.
One marginal constituency MP said: "I contrast the view with what has happened with Mark Harper - makes mistake, puts his hands up resign immediately and therefore goes with honour.
"He will come back as a minister, he is very capable, a very good guy and respected across the house - opposed to someone who has their fingernails gripped to the door and the desk being dragged out almost bodily."
Another MP added: "Maria is a good person. I really like her. I hate to see her like this. She should just go - not for me, not for others, just for herself."
Jackie Doyle-Price, the MP for Thurrock who has a majority of just 96 implied that Maria Miller was placing a burden on her Tory colleagues by staying in post as Culture Secretary.
She told Newsnight: "If I was in that position facing a difficult set of local elections; I wouldn't be expecting my colleagues to defend me."
Pressed on whether her own position would be improved if Ms Miller resigned, she repeated: "That's a matter for her."
Mark Field MP, Conservative MP told the World at One that Mrs Miller's apology was "unacceptably perfunctory" and that the row was damaging the Conservative party with MPs experiencing a "real backlash" from constituents over recent days.
Esther McVey, the employment minister, who has been tipped as a possible replacement for the Culture Secretary also criticised the 32-second apology Mrs Miller gave MPs after she was asked to pay back £5,800 of her over claimed expenses.
Zac Goldsmith, the MP for Richmond Park, heaped pressure on the embattled Culture Secretary by saying that he is 窶徭urprised窶  she still has not resigned. 
Document TELUK00020140408ea48004v2
