{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2904"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
The phoney war on Europe is now over
542 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
20
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Was it simply a clash of political pygmies? Most people did not tune in to last week's LBC Radio debate between Nigel Farage, the leader of UKIP, and Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrat deputy prime minister. David Cameron, no doubt fearful of reliving his own underwhelming performance during the televised leaders' debates in 2010, claimed not to have done so. One poll suggested fewer than 1% of people mentioned it when asked which were the biggest news stories of the week.
In the run-up to the European elections, however, the debate had more than curiosity value and the question of whether we should be in or out of the European Union really was worth putting straight. For the first time since 1975 Britain may get to vote on membership of the EU, courtesy of Mr Cameron's referendum election pledge.
Mr Farage probably did not convince many people who were not already committed outers. But his arguments were clear: membership of the EU has opened up this country to a potential pool of hundreds of millions of legal immigrants, Brussels interferes damagingly in British life and being tied to a tired continent, away from the new economic powerhouses of the world, holds Britain back. Mr Clegg encapsulated what is the central problem for the pro-EU side. People know what life is like in the EU. Never mind the disastrous common agricultural policy. The experience of opening up Britain's borders to the new member states of eastern Europe a decade ago has taught them that official assurances on immigration cannot be believed.
They have also witnessed the eurozone's devastating crisis with austerity measures and unemployment levels that have put Britain's in the shade and they know that the politicians now urging them to put their trust in Europe, including the deputy prime minister, were once gung-ho for membership of the euro.
For optimists, signs of a tentative alliance between Britain and Germany could change the argument. George Osborne and Wolfgang Schäuble, his Berlin counterpart, are agreed that in a two-tier EU the interests of countries outside the euro, including Britain, have to be properly respected. Germany would love Britain to be the free-market leader of the EU's non-euro tier.
This is a start. But more will be needed to sell the EU to sceptical voters. The single market, Margaret Thatcher's great gift to Europe, is still not delivering where it would most benefit Britain; a genuine single market in services which, on one estimate, could lift GDP by 7%.
In 1975 people voted in favour of staying in Europe for positive reasons as well as fear of national decline. Membership offered the hope of matching the postwar success of continental Europe. Now the game has changed and UKIP's negative arguments about the disadvantages of staying in the EU match the negative arguments about the dangers of getting out — to which the response is: if Switzerland can do it, why shouldn't Britain? This EU debate is necessary. If members of the pro-EU camp want to win it, they need to give us positive reasons to believe them.
Document ST00000020140330ea3u000og
