{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3098"}
____
  
News
Rise of the childless couples who never discuss parenthood
John Bingham   
513 words
25 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
10
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
LARGE numbers of couples are ending up childless by default because they never fully discuss the possibility of having children, a study suggests.
Research presented to the British Sociological Association found that as many as four in 10 childless couples either had only had one conversation about the possibility of having children or none at all.
In some cases the conversation took only seconds because both parties felt there was little to discuss. Others said they only spoke about it because of pressure from family or friends.
Edina Kurdi, a lecturer in social policy at Middlesex University, surveyed and interviewed women who were either married or in long–term relationships and had chosen not to have children.
She said that what was most surprising was the "negligible" amount of discussion many of the couples had had on the subject of becoming parents.
Among the responses, one woman explained: "It never really got said, it was just realised by our actions – we had a two–seater car." Another said: "We didn't discuss really, just mutually agreed. There was no issue to discuss." A third added: "There is no discussion – I don't want kids and I would never bother to pursue a romantic relationship with someone who did, it would be a pointless endeavour." While Britain has been experiencing a baby boom in the past five years, partly because of immigration of young adults, the number of couples choosing not to have children is rising.
A study published by the Office for National Statistics last year showed that the number of childless women had doubled in a generation.
One in five 45–year–old women in England and Wales had not had children, compared with one in 10 a generation before. The ONS said the shift could reflect changing lifestyles and career pressure to put off starting a family until it is "too late".
"One possible reason that couples did not need to talk about the issue much is that they could accurately sense their partner did not want children from their beliefs and lifestyle," said Miss Kurdi.
She added: "Very little attention has been paid to the negotiations within romantic relations about not having a family, even though developed countries are facing a general decline in fertility combined with an accelerated rate of childlessness."
Baby blues Work fears threaten EU birth rates
The spread of short–term "zero–hours" work contracts could trigger a population crisis in western Europe because people without secure jobs dare not have children, warns a leading economist.
Prof Andranik Tangian, of the Hans Böckler Foundation, Düsseldorf, foresees a "critical" shortage of children by 2030.
A study of 15 European Union countries including Britain concluded that birth rates could fall from 1.6 children per woman to 1.4 by 2020 if "atypical" work practices continue.
He told the annual conference of the British Sociological Association in Leeds: "The socio–economical message is that the increasing share of atypical employment is damaging for the European demography."
Document DT00000020140425ea4p0003r
