{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1852"}
____
  
NEWS
Low-skilled workers most affected by immigration in recession, says report; Immigration makes it harder for low-skilled British workers to find and keep jobs during economic downturns, a Government report suggests
By James Kirkup political editor   
403 words
6 March 2014
12:57
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Immigration makes it harder for low-skilled British workers to find and keep jobs during economic downturns, an official Government report has suggested.
The study also said that during times of economic growth, the arrival of foreign workers in the UK has no obvious impact on native workers.
The report, by officials from the Home Office and Department for Business, was the subject of a political row this week when the BBC reported that it was being withheld because Conservative ministers found its conclusions politically inconvenient.
The 76-page document was published online without any announcement, while Theresa May, the Home Secretary, was telling MPs about a new public inquiry into police corruption and the Stephen Lawrence murder.
The report, largely based on a review of economic papers, concludes that there is “little evidence that migration has caused statistically significant displacement of UK natives from the labour market in periods when the economy has been strong."
However, it found “evidence for some labour market displacement in recent years when the economy was in recession."
Where such “displacement effects" were found, it was “low skilled natives" who were most likely to be affected, the officials found.
Those conclusions may boost the case of politicians who argue that mass migration has harmful economic consequences.
However, the report also makes several points that may support the arguments of those who say immigration is not harmful and may have economic benefits.
For instance, the effect on native workers’ employment prospects is temporary and “dissipates over time", the report found.
It also suggested that the arrival of foreign workers could have “dynamic benefits" for the UK economy, including greater innovation, knowledge transfer, productivity gains.
Perhaps the most politically significant section of the report deals with migration from the European Union.
Conservative and Ukip politicians have suggested that the arrival of increasing numbers of EU nationals in the UK is having harmful economic effects on the native workforce.
The report found “little evidence in the literature of a statistically significant impact from EU migration on native employment outcomes."
However, the officials noted that because large-scale European immigration is a relatively recent phenomenon, the economic evidence for its consequences is limited.
Document TELUK00020140306ea36003mr
