{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"746"}
﻿NEWS
David Cameron: No more coalitions after next General Election; Prime Minister wants to make a commitment in Conservative Party election manifesto he will not form second coalition government even if he falls short of Commons majority
By James Kirkup Political Editor   
831 words
24 February 2014
22:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
David Cameron is preparing to fight the next general election on a clear promise to the British people not to form a second coalition government even if he falls short of a Commons majority, The Telegraph has learnt.
The Prime Minister wants to make a commitment in the Conservative Party election manifesto not to sign a second power-sharing deal with a smaller party in the event of a hung parliament next May, it is understood.
Instead, a Conservative party that won the most seats but lacked a Commons majority would attempt to rule as a minority government, a course that would almost certainly lead to its early collapse and a quick second election.
Mr Cameron’s allies believe the high-stakes promise would confront voters with a stark choice: an all-Conservative government or rule by Labour, possibly in coalition with the Liberal Democrats.
“He’s very clear, he doesn’t want another Coalition," a source close to Mr Cameron has told The Daily Telegraph.
“A promise in the manifesto not to do any deals after the election would make that very clear to voters and ensure they know exactly what the choice is at the election."
Private polling for the Conservatives is said to have shown that voters are increasingly disenchanted with the idea of coalition and want a clearer sense of direction from a government.
A public poll by Ipsos MORI last month also showed that 65 per cent of voters believe that a second hung parliament would be bad for Britain.
Mr Cameron’s public rejection of a second coalition could also rally support among Conservative MPs and activists, some of whom are openly unhappy about sharing power with the Lib Dems and the compromises involved. However, it would also close off the option of remaining in power if the election delivers another hung parliament where the Tories and Lib Dems would together have a majority.
The Conservatives fell short of a majority in 2010, a failure that forced Mr Cameron to negotiate his coalition agreement with the Lib Dems and which has haunted his leadership of his party. With barely 14 months until the next general election and despite the recent economic upturn, Labour retains a solid lead over the Conservatives in most opinion polls. Labour is registering around 38 per cent support on average, while the Conservatives are around 33 per cent. Most Conservative strategists believe the party needs more than 40 per cent of the vote to deliver a full Commons majority, an outcome many believe is extremely unlikely.
That has led to speculation at Westminster about the Conservatives seeking to renew their coalition with the Lib Dems.
Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem leader, has publicly said that he wants to remain in power after the election by striking a coalition deal with either of the larger parties.
However, Mr Cameron and his inner circle are said to be more and more unhappy with the current power-sharing arrangement.
As the election approaches, the two coalition parties are increasingly at odds on issues ranging from schools reform to immigration curbs. The Lib Dems have also angered many Conservatives by refusing to support their attempts to change the law to guarantee a referendum on European Union membership by 2017.
Whitehall officials say the Government is becoming “dysfunctional" as political differences between the parties grow, preventing ministers agreeing any new policies to implement before the election. That raises the prospect of a becalmed Government marking time until the election next May, something that is said to have left Mr Cameron frustrated and impatient.
The Conservative manifesto is still being negotiated within the party, with final decisions not due until early next year.
However, a “no deals" promise in the manifesto would mark a sharp change in approach by the Prime Minister, who had previously been moving to prepare his party for a second coalition.
Last year, Mr Cameron told Conservative colleagues that he would change party rules to ensure that in the event of a second coalition being negotiated, the final deal would have to be approved by Conservative MPs before being signed.
During the early years of the coalition, some of Mr Cameron’s friends privately suggested that he was happier working with the Lib Dems than with his own party’s traditional wing.
But sources say that more than four years of co-operating and compromising with the Lib Dems has left Mr Cameron increasingly frustrated at his inability to push ahead with key Conservative policies.
The Prime Minister last year revealed he keeps a “little black book" of Tory policies that the Lib Dems have blocked. In September, he said: “I don’t want another coalition. I want a Conservative majority."
Document TELUK00020140225ea2o000jo
