{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"389"}
____
  
Features; Opinion Column
You should have taken risk, Nige
Rod Liddle   
472 words
1 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
11
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
HAS Ukip boss Nigel Farage lost his nerve? Is he running scared? It looks horribly like this might be the case.
There's an important byelection due to take place in Newark. The local Conservative MP, Patrick Mercer, has resigned after being involved in a lobbying scandal.
It's prime Ukip territory: A fairly well-orf swathe of middle England which likes its Conservative MPs to be fairly Right-wing.
Frankly, there wasn't much daylight between Mercer, who was a good MP, and Ukip on a whole bunch of issues.
Mercer was a rebel who had no time at all for David Cameron's band of Old Etonian, metropolitan liberals. He was an ex-Army man who found them absurd, frankly.
So why has Nigel Farage announced — yet again — that he will not stand in Newark? His party is soaring ahead in the polls. He's got the mainstream politicians terrified out of their wits.
So frightened, in fact, that a bunch of them have got together in a cross-party association to scream "raaaaaaccissst" whenever Ukip are in the news.
This sad conglomeration is being led by a ghastly old hag from the last Labour government, Barbara Roche.
She was on Newsnight on Tuesday attacking Ukip — but all she had to say was "raaaacccissst", over and over again, like a morbidly obese, lobotomised sheep.
Roche was a minister in the government which let an astonishing three million foreign workers into the country — a policy the present Labour leader Ed Miliband now admits was terribly misguided.
For the awful Roche, anyone who complains about immigration is a racist.
The people who lose their jobs as a consequence are racist.
The people scared of being mugged in the street are racist.
You're all racist, you lot, all of you — anyone who has a few misgivings about immigration.
No wonder the woman can't find a seat any more.
But still — given all this, why has Farage decided not to fight his corner? Imagine what it would do to Westminster politics if the bloke actually won? It would truly upset the apple cart.
But instead, Farage has called the Newark byelection a "distraction" and decided he's going to have nowt to do with it.
The truth is he's scared that if he loses it will banjax his prospects of Ukip winning the Euro elections next month.
Suddenly, Ukip won't be the party poised on the edge of a breakthrough — they will be the party that couldn't quite make a breakthrough.
They will live in the public mind as also-rans.
I think this is timid of Farage — who most of the time is made of sterner stuff.
Change your mind, Nigel — and, for once, take a risk.
Document THESUN0020140501ea5100082
