{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1753"}
____
  
Editorial
I love sport - so long as I don't have to beat anyone
Tom Whipple   
478 words
24 April 2014
The Times
T
1; National
28
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
THUNDERER
Somewhere, one presumes, there exists a school that has actually banned competitive sports. I imagine it is located in that left-wing Camelot where every drain has a personhole cover and all official documents refer to "Christmas" as "Winterval".
Yet no matter how often I've heard this school cited in rants about the loony left, I've never found it. Shame, as I'd love to send my son there.
This week an MCC survey found that two thirds of children would be relieved or "not bothered" if school sports lost their competitive element. This concerned the club. Competitive sport is "under threat", it said.Children need the "clear benefits" that it can bring to their lives. The alternative, frankly, is just not cricket.
The only thing that concerns me is that no one is listening to children's democratic will. Because the clear benefits of competitive sport have never been that clear to me.
To avoid any doubt, I have suitably sturdy views on the rest of the curriculum. Rank children rigorously on intellectual ability. Reintroduce the dunce's cap. Cull the bottom 10 per cent each year and swap them for Romanian immigrants.
Of course we can't all be winners.We need good mathematicians to know they are good and be pushed to excel. We need bad mathematicians to know not to study to degree level. The correct answer in calculus is not a bourgeois authoritarian construct.
Sport is different. We don't need people to excel at it; we need people to do it, however bad they are. If only for the NHS savings, we need people to find a love of sport that sustains them for the rest of their lives.
Despite some excellent teaching, including from teachers who I now know were ambivalent about the benefits of competition, I didn't enjoy school sport. I suffered from both a lack of co-ordination and having a surname that rhymes with "cripple", and found that my relative ranking in ability to transport an oval ball to one end of a muddy field correlated almost exactly with my social status when not on that field.
But this is not just about me. It is about evidence. A recent study strongly advised the provision of non-competitive PE options after finding that, for girls in particular, this improved happiness and (not surprisingly) long-term participation.
It has taken time, but today I love sport. I jog and go mountaineering. What I love most about doing sport for fun is no one ranks my status or invites me to parties on the basis of my 5km time. And, most importantly, no one calls me Cripple Whipple.
If only for the health benefits, we need people to take exercise
Document T000000020140424ea4o0007w
