{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2576"}
____
  
Features
THE WEEK IN WESTMINSTER
335 words
17 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
26
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MONDAY, MARCH 17
Commons: Defence Questions. Cooperative and Community Benefit Societies Bill [HL], all stages. Motion to approve a Ways and Means Resolution relating to the Pensions Bill. Pensions Bill, Consideration of Lords amendments. Motion to approve a Statutory Instrument relating to mesothelioma. Short debate on transport infrastructure in the south of England.
Lords: Questions. Immigration Bill, Committee of the whole House (Day 5). Debate on assisting the information technology sector in filling job vacancies in that sector.
TUESDAY, MARCH 18
Commons: Justice Questions. Ten Minute Rule Motion: Brown Hare (Protection). Debate on Ukraine. Motion to approve Statutory Instruments relating to Combined Authority Orders. Motion to debate three EU Proposals on Criminal Procedural Rights. Short debate on defence in Scotland after 2014.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: Value of teaching assistants in schools; Fair tax mark; Insolvency of football clubs and the football creditors rule; Use of Whitchurch playing fields; Bost Agricultural Business Park and Bost Airfield.
Lords: Questions. Deep Sea Mining Bill, Third reading. Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill, Third reading. Debate on the situation in Ukraine.
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 19
Commons: Scotland Questions. At noon, questions to the Prime Minister. The Budget statement. Short debate on healthcare provision in south Gloucestershire.
Westminster Hall: Debates on: Conduct of the Metropolitan Police; Illegal wildlife trade and the London Declaration; Childcare in London; Zero–hours contracts; Newspaper supply chain and independent newsagents.
Lords: Immigration Bill, Committee of the whole House (Day 6). Debate on the report of the Olympic and Paralympic Legacy Committee.
THURSDAY, MARCH 20
Commons: Transport Questions. leader of the House and House of Commons Commission Questions. continuation of the Budget Debate. Short debate on planning for large infrastructure projects and Hinkley Point.
Westminster Hall: Debate on: Contribution of women to the Ordained Ministry of the Church of England.
Lords: Questions. Debate on the level of employment in the United Kingdom. Debate on the report from the Joint Committee on Parliamentary Privilege.
FRIDAY, MARCH 21
Commons: Not sitting.
Lords: Not sitting.
Document DT00000020140317ea3h0000j
