{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2900"}
____
  
Features
TOP STORIES FROM THE UK
462 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Courts Clifford gives evidence
The publicist Max Clifford denied he was a "grubby little wotsit" but admitted he had sex with a woman in his office while having an affair with her. Clifford, 70, called allegations that he had a sexual interest in children "utterly revolting". He denies 11 counts of indecent assault against seven women and girls. The trial continues.
Health Feline poorly
Two people have contracted tuberculosis and two more have latent TB after coming into contact with infected domestic cats — the first recorded cat-to-human TB transmissions in Britain. Nine cats in Hampshire and Berkshire are known to be infected.
Mycobacterium bovis can be transmitted when humans breathe in or ingest bacteria shed by the animal or by contact with unprotected skin. Professor Dilys Morgan, of Public Health England, said: "M. bovis is still uncommon in cats."
Europe
EU: 'blood on its hands'
In a radio debate over Britain's future in Europe, Nigel Farage accused the deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg, of dodging a question on uncapped immigration. The UKIP leader said the EU had "blood on its hands" for encouraging the revolution in Ukraine. A YouGov poll said Farage won the debate by 57% to 36%.
Energy
Ofgem accuses Big Six
Energy companies may be ripping off loyal customers, the regulator Ofgem said. It called for a full investigation. Profits of the Big Six suppliers soared from £233m in 2009 to £1.1bn in 2012. Ofgem accused them of "consistently setting higher prices for consumers who have not switched" — thus penalising loyalty. Centrica's chief executive, Sam Laidlaw, said he hoped a lengthy review would "not damage confidence in the market when over £100bn of investment in new infrastructure is needed".
Contraception
In case of emergency The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) has advised that teenage girls should be given greater access to the morning-after pill. Free condoms should also be "readily accessible" at "schools, colleges and youth clubs". Professor Mike Kelly, director of the Centre for Public Health at Nice, said it was important that information should be made easily accessible to teenagers. He said: "Evidence clearly shows that the availability of contraception reduces the rate of unwanted pregnancies."
Education
Teachers strike
About one in eight English schools were forced to close as the National Union of Teachers (NUT) staged a one-day strike over pay, pensions and conditions. Teachers belonging to the NASUWT union, which had already said it would not take part, said they had been "threatened and intimidated" by an "aggressive NUT campaign" encouraging them to strike as well. The Department of Education said the strike "disrupted parents' lives, held back children's education and damaged the reputation of the [teaching] profession".
Document ST00000020140330ea3u000m2
