{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2949"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
UKIP LEADER HEADS OFF CHARGES OF RACISM
Macer Hall   
430 words
10 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
31
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
INSIDE POLITICS by Macer Hall email macer.hall@express.co.uk
NIGEL FARAGE has launched a determined fight back against claims that the UK Independence Party rank and file is crammed with racists.
He stood shoulder to shoulder with dozens of black and ethnic minority Ukip candidates at a passionate rally on Wednesday night to make the point.
Several of them spoke emotionally about their own experiences of racial prejudice growing up in the UK and their anger at the way the party is being smeared as xenophobic by opponents.
And there were considerably more black and Asian faces among the Ukip supporters in the rally than among the hectoring and abusive crowd of Left–wing protesters outside.
"From this moment on, please do not ever call us a racist party. We are not a racist party," Mr Farage said at the rally in a plea to the establishment and its allies in the media.
With polls suggesting the party is on course for a historic victory in the European elections in under a fortnight's time Ukip's enemies are unlikely to drop the smear or ease up on their quest to dig up unpleasant remarks made in the past by a few of the party's candidates.
The attempt to tackle the racism charge head on this week highlighted an interesting shift in Ukip's argument on the crucial issue of immigration.
At the rally Ukip economic spokesman Steven Woolfe insisted the anti–Brussels party had the most "ethical" border control policy of any party.
By introducing a points–based system that would assess all immigration applications on the basis of skills and seek to admit the brightest and the best Ukip's proposals would end discrimination in favour of European Union citizens and against those from other parts of the world including the Commonwealth, he said.
Mr Farage returned to theme on BBC One's Question Time on Thursday, saying: "We shouldn't be discriminating against people from India and New Zealand which we do at the moment because we have an open door to Romania and Bulgaria."
Genuinely controlled immigration could bring a "net benefit" for Britain, he added.
The change in language could disappoint some voters who want to see a stop to all immigration to Britain and could even cost Ukip a small number of votes.
But that would be seen as a necessary sacrifice to make clear that Ukip is the "decent, respectable" party that Mr Farage insists it is.
Document THEEXP0020140510ea5a0002u
