{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1865"}
____
  
News
Immigration: the real fight is now between the Conservatives and the busineses they used to back
By James Kirkup   
522 words
6 March 2014
18:24
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
This is from the Telegraph Politics Evening Briefing Email. Sign up here.
James Brokenshire, the Conservative immigration minister, gave a speech that appeared to criticise companies and well-off households for employing foreign labour:
"
For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services – but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country.
"
That single paragraph has caused Mr Brokenshire and his colleagues no end of trouble. For one thing, it exposes other Conservatives to questions about their own employment of foreign labour. Downing Street, it's fair to say, wasn't best pleased to be fielding questions about David Cameron's Nepalese and Australian nannies today; by Mr Brokenshire's logic, the PM is presumably part of the "wealthy metropolitan elite", which isn't exactly the sort of label he relishes. Other Tory ministers are also unimpressed. "Idiotic" was the private verdict passed by one.
The intention of the speech appears to have been to reassure Tory voters flirting with Ukip, and also to take a swing at the Lib Dems: Mr Brokenshire was dutifully rude about Vince Cable, who has been ever-more vocal in his argument for the free movement of labour. The business secretary, Mr Brokenshire said, is exactly the sort of privileged swine who has cashed in on migration in recent years. it remains unclear as to whether that's a reference to Mr Cable's highly dubious decision to employ a Belgian special adviser (an no, that's not a euphemism).
The Con-Lib row over immigration is entertaining, and suits both sides well. But there's a far more interesting and important fight that went public today: business vs the Conservative Party.
According to the Institute of Directors, Mr Brokenshire's speech was "feeble and pathetic". In fact, the IoD is worth quoting in full:
"It is feeble and pathetic to hear yet more divisive language from politicians on immigration. The UK is an open, trading country that benefits from the skills and ideas of migrants. We will not become more prosperous by closing our borders to talented individuals and entrepreneurs from across the world. This speech seems to be more about political positioning and less about what is good for the country."
For free-market business lobby to denounce a Tory politician in such terms is quite something, but it confirms how far the party has moved here. Once, Conservatives were proud to make the case for free markets, in labour as well as goods and services; that was, after all, what Norman Tebbit's "on your bike" speech was about. Today, the party revels in populism, even if that means giving the impression it believes there is something ignoble about profiting from the operation of a free market.
So forget Conservatives vs Lib Dems, or even Conservatives vs Ukip. On immigration, the real fight is now between Tories and British business.
Document TELUK00020140306ea360058z
