{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1123"}
____
  
Guardian Features Pages
G2: 'They blew my head': Why would a band choose to launch their new album with a tour of psychiatric hospitals? And will vitamin drinks and dad naps be enough to keep them going? Laura Barnett hits the road with Kitten Pyramid
Laura Barnett   
1,551 words
6 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
16
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
A tin of chicken soup, a Kinder egg, a bag of salt and vinegar crisps, and a sponge. These are the items I'm given, in a carrier bag, when I arrive in Shrewsbury to set off on tour with Kitten Pyramid - Britain's latest, and probably most surreal, purveyors of prog rock. "Your welcome pack," says bass player Mark Hamon, who has a tufty yellow beard and a tattoo of an octopus on his right shin. "What's the sponge for?" I ask. Hamon's smile broadens. "You'll find out."
In the world of Kitten Pyramid, such a random collection of objects makes a kind of sense. Formed in Burton upon Trent in 2010 by songwriter Scott Milligan, the band is a loose five-piece, swelling to 14 for some gigs (when guitars, bass and drums are joined by trumpets and strings). Out this month, their first album is called Uh-Oh! and is pitched somewhere between Talking Heads at their most fractious and strange, and Syd Barrett-era Pink Floyd.
Lyrically, Milligan's songs are both hilarious and bizarre. "I want to see you naked in a caravan," he reveals on Chester. Elsewhere, he sings the praises of "gorilla fajitas", "ladybird jumpers", and a "pyramid army with their bags of peshwari". Clearly, Milligan is bored by conventional pop. But much of Uh-Oh!'s freshness and richness springs from the fact that it's a concept album inspired by Milligan's late Uncle Jarek, a Polish immigrant who had schizophrenia.
To launch it, and to draw attention to the issues around mental health, Kitten Pyramid have put together their own idiosyncratic tour - of psychiatric hospitals, performing for patients and staff, with each daytime hospital session followed by an evening gig in a pub. Their aim is to raise money for, and awareness of, Arts for Health (AFH), an arm of the band's local NHS trust, South Staffordshire and Shropshire, which organises arts events for patients.
All of which explains why, still puzzled by my welcome pack, I am watching Kitten Pyramid perform in Redwoods hospital on the outskirts of Shrewsbury. The gig takes place in the bright, domed foyer, around a splendid grand piano, with a string of fairylights marking out a makeshift stage. The band kick off quietly, strumming through Red Shoes, a song that traces feelings of alienation in a supermarket. "You can't look down," Milligan sings, "because she'll think you're weird." The woman sitting beside me has a complaint. "I can't hear you!" she shouts. "Louder?" asks Milligan. "Yes!" the audience call back as one.
John, sitting next to me, tells me he recently lost his wife, Glenys, to early-onset Alzheimer's. They used to go to singing workshops run by AFH. "Even when she was hardly able to speak," says John, "she could still sing whole lines from her favourite songs. Music is incredibly powerful for people with dementia. It seems to stir up so many memories."
Certainly, something similar seems to be happening today. As the band play Whale, a track that requires the audience to shout the song's title at regular intervals, even the most distracted patients seem to sharpen their focus. An elderly woman with a cotton cloud of white hair taps out a steady rhythm on the footrest of her wheelchair. "It was wonderful," she tells me afterwards. "I used to be a ballet dancer. Listening to the music brought it all back."
Jessica Kent, the AFH manager behind the concert, thinks the band went down well. "Kitten Pyramid have a unique sound," she says. "It's like a musical patchwork, with something all ages seem able to relate to. It's so important to have events like this in psychiatric hospitals. The age of the asylum is over. New psychiatric hospitals are very different places."
As we all sit down to post-gig fish-finger sandwiches in a nearby pub, Milligan tells me the album's concept began with a bus. "Where I used to live," he says, "was opposite a bus-stop. I was sitting in my bedroom one day, looking out the window, when a bus arrived. I started thinking how weird it would be if I climbed into a bus with no driver, no passengers, and the bus took me to Burton, and there was nobody anywhere. Then I started to think that maybe this was the sort of thing my Uncle Jarek used to experience."
Milligan fleshed out his daydream until he had a detailed treatment for a film (his day job involves making lawyer training videos). In the meantime, he set about bringing together musicians to work on songs he'd composed over the last decade. He soon realised most of them touched, to some extent, on Jarek's condition. "One song, Fire, is about the time my uncle set fire to a brand-new mattress," he says. "Not all the songs are that specific, but a lot of them relate to what my uncle went through."
Kitten Pyramid were born. Milligan secured a bank loan to record an album and, in January 2013, the core five-piece - Milligan, Hamon, drummer Rob Redfern, guitarists Chris Baldwin and Dan Baker - went into the studio with producer Nick Brine, best known for his work with Oasis, the Stone Roses and Super Furry Animals. Uh-Oh! was the result.
The trouble with concept albums is that they can be a bit, well, conceptual: they can risk sacrificing musical coherence to high-art pretension. But Milligan's songs would still make an impact without any knowledge of the underpinning concept. "What sets this apart from other concept albums," says Baker, "is that we're not ponces."
Milligan is still planning to make his film. Each band member has been assigned a character: Milligan a psychiatric nurse, the luxuriantly bearded Baker a bear. There's talk of a musical. All this from a band that are unsigned. When I ask if they're looking for a major label, Milligan looks anxious. "This way," he says, "we have more freedom."
They are making no money from their tour: the hospital concerts are unpaid, and they're donating a pound to AFH from every CD sale. What's more, they've all had to take time off from their day jobs, which range from teaching to construction. There's no tour bus either: sustained by Coca-Cola and elaborate in-jokes about dolphins, they're travelling in a Ford Focus and a Volkswagen Polo, although sometimes they get to pile into the "jaffa cake", Hamon's orange and brown VW campervan. Their stimulants of choice are "dad naps" (they range from 31 to 45, and they all have young children) and vitamin drinks spiked with Solpadeine.
It's all quite un-rock'n'roll - and rather refreshing and cheering, especially when it's clear how well the band's gigs go down, both in and out of psychiatric hospitals. After Redwoods, they hit an open-mic night in the Wrekin Inn in Telford, where the walls are lined with posters for the 1960s psychedelic band the Groundhogs (its founding member Tony McPhee's partner, Jo, runs the open mic). Kitten Pyramid blow the place away, with shouts of "Whale!" threatening to lift the roof. By the end of the set, two locals ("Juke Joint" John and "Dead Hand" Terry) have joined them on harmonica and kazoo.
The next day takes us to St George's in Stafford, where Milligan's uncle was once admitted. Kitten Pyramid are playing two concerts. The first is on a ward filled mainly with elderly patients. Between songs, an old man in a hospital gown shouts huskily: "Brilliant!" His name is Tony and he loves the blues. "Loved this, too," he says. "They blew my head."
Later, in a therapy room, the band perform shoeless and cross-legged beneath a board advertising classes: Monday is relaxation, Wednesday coping skills. I'm not sure which category Kitten Pyramid fall into, but their flight-of-fancy lyrics and helter-skelter guitarwork go down a storm. After the concert, one patient comes over. "Hopefully I'll get out quicker now," he says with a grin. "You've put me back on my feet."
It is this kind of reaction that makes all the hassles - the long drives, the dad naps, the Solpadeine cocktails - worthwhile. "That's what it's all for," Hamon says as we load the equipment back into the cars. With my somewhat surreal stint as roadie now at an end, I look again inside the bag they gave me. I never got the chance to eat the chicken soup - and I still have no idea what the sponge was for.
Uh-Oh! is out on 26 May. Kitten Pyramid play Newhall Social Club on 30 May and the Alsager Music Festival in Milton Park on 12 July. Details: kittenpyramid.squarespace.com
Captions:
Louder please! . . . Kitten Pyramid play St George's hospital, Stafford
Document GRDN000020140506ea560000k
