{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"921"}
____
  
Guardian Weekend Pages
Weekend: Coming clean: Graham MacIndoe was a successful photographer, working for this magazine among others. Then he began a destructive journey into heroin addiction - and turned the camera on himself. He and his partner Susan Stellin recall the road to recovery
Graham MacIndoe Susan Stellin   
1,943 words
3 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
38
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Most documentary projects about addiction expose someone else's self-destructive behaviour, but Graham MacIndoe took a very different approach: he photographed himself during the years he was addicted to drugs. He'd place a cheap digital camera on a table or bookshelf, set the self-timer to take a photo every so often, then turn his attention to the rituals of his habit: filling a crack pipe, cooking heroin, shooting up. Over time, he became more deliberate about lighting and composition, but the point was not to glamorise what had become a solitary existence, the monotonous repetition of an addict's daily life.
I am not a casual observer of these images; after Graham and I broke up because of his drug use, I found 342 self-portraits - images he had not meant for me to see. "In some way, this is exactly what I'd been curious to see," I wrote at the time. "All those close-ups of the needle going into a vein, his expression during and after, the rooms and stairwells I never saw. . . Maybe the point is, 'So you wanted to see? Here it all is.' And then we're supposed to feel sick over our voyeurism, because maybe we didn't need to see that after all."
Now I think we do need to see it, and try to understand addiction from the inside, as Graham describes what he wanted to show. Not the view of an outsider, but a first-person account of the isolating, all-consuming nature of addiction. No one else is in the pictures; drugs have replaced everyone and everything that used to matter.
Beating the odds, Graham has been clean since 2010, and we've been back together for most of that time - a road to recovery that included four months at Rikers Island and five months in immigration detention, after he was ordered to be deported from the US. (Born in Scotland, he moved to New York legally and has a green card, but even a minor conviction can lead to permanent exile these days.)
A rare prison rehab programme and a compassionate judge set him free, but Graham did the hard work to rebuild his life. To anyone who knows him, these photographs are a painful reminder of a dark, difficult era, but they also exhibit signs of hope: that Graham wanted to live to show them some day. In this interview, we talk about the complexities of addiction and what we learned about escaping its grip.
A conversation between Graham MacIndoe and Susan Stellin
Susan Stellin Tell me about the first time you used heroin.
Graham MacIndoe The very first time, I smoked it. I was in my apartment in New York with a couple of friends. We'd been doing cocaine and I was coming down really badly, and somebody said, "You should smoke a little bit of this." So we put it in a cigarette and smoked it, and I got really dizzy. It wasn't really pleasant, to be honest, but it did take the edge off the cocaine.
SS Did you do it again soon after that?
GM Yeah, I did it a few other times to combat the comedown from the cocaine. I liked the high, but the comedown was devastating. It would make you just want to cry and stay in for days on end. Being in that addictive frame of mind, I wanted to see what it was like on its own. I went straight to injecting soon after that, because it seemed like a more efficient method of delivery, like crack is a much more efficient delivery of cocaine. I knew a couple of active intravenous heroin users, and I asked them and they quite willingly enabled me.
SS Did you consider yourself an addict at the time?
GM Oh, yeah. When I first really started doing drugs, I felt it was enhancing my life - it just made everything sort of great. But I knew I was an addict when I started having to do it in the morning when I woke up. That's when you know.
SS Do you remember when that was?
GM I remember that feeling of waking up one morning after getting about an hour and a half of sleep and having to be somewhere. And my eyes were red and I was so tired and I didn't want to move. It was worse than any hangover - I was so depressed. And I had some cocaine left from the night before. And I did that line and I was like, boompf - I'm ready to go, I can take on the world now. Later on, I realised that, wow, I'm using first thing in the morning.
SS And what about when you started lying and covering up?
GM I didn't really have to lie in the beginning, because the people around me were doing it all the time. These were people in similar situations to me - you know, working, creative, for want of a better expression, "high-living", had money. Unfortunately, I was one of the ones who went down the addiction path. Some people went down the party path and got fed up with it. I went down the addiction path and had to see it to its end. So there was a bit of that hiding and sneaking around - there always is with drugs.
SS When we first started dating, did you think I wasn't going to catch on?
GM In the beginning, I didn't think you would. I was a much edgier person than you, and there was a slight attraction to that. I liked that sort of recklessness in me, and that sort of composed way that you are. You've got routines, and do things in a set order. I thought that's what I needed. And I was hoping some of that would rub off; that if I get in this good relationship with somebody who's solid, I can overturn my addiction, because it'll be stronger than this. In reality it wasn't.
SS When you talk about wanting to quit, was it just a moment and then it would go away? Because I think that's what people don't understand: why doesn't this person want to quit; or if they do want to quit, why can't they?
GM I really wished I could've quit. And there's nothing in my heart that I feel so bad about - not being able to quit when I first met you. Because I would've saved myself and my family a lot of stress and pain and anger and money and humiliation.
I quit a bunch of times, but I always slipped back into it because it's not the quitting - it's the long-term thing. You don't know how to function, because you've been so dysfunctional for so long that you find yourself going back to your comfort zone, and your comfort zone is being around people who are in the same boat as you. You go to somebody's house where other people are using, and it's like you're with your family again. They tell you it's going to be all right, then you take a hit, then you think, fuck it, I feel good. Because it's hard to get your shit together when you don't feel good. And when the reality of where you've been and how much you've done and the lies you've told all dawns on you, it's hard to face.
SS Did the pressure of starting to run out of money compound things?
GM Yeah, it did. I wasn't working - I didn't know how to work at that point - so I was running out of money, I couldn't pay my bills, I was spending my savings, I was borrowing money from people. And I was going down that cliched path of someone who falls into deep addiction. You start losing everything. You start losing your friends, your savings, the place you live. You lose sight of reality, your morals - everything goes down the drain. You sort of give in to it.
SS What are the key factors to helping someone, or were key to helping you?
GM Rehabilitation is really important. Jail doesn't work. Jailing somebody for being an addict is not going to help them, because it doesn't teach them anything. You need to teach people different thought processes and different ways of running their life. You might have started taking drugs just to party, but at the end of the day, what they do to your mind is they bring out every insecurity, every piece of pain, every piece of anger you've had in your life and bring them to the top of the pile. Those are the things you dwell on when you're an addict. So you have to address them. You have to address, how can I stop being angry, how can I stop being jealous, how can I get my self-esteem up, how can I feel more comfortable in my skin?
SS What can people who know and love an addict do to help?
GM People need to be nurtured out of addiction. Turning a blind eye because you think you can do nothing is really destructive. Because you're getting somebody at the lowest ebb of their life who just needs something, and they don't know how to do it. But you have to stand up to them, too, because addicts are really manipulative and lie all the time. You have to get professional help. There should be much more help to stop this never-ending pile of people going in and out of jail for drug possession. And they need to be put in mandatory programmes - because if you give an addict a choice, they're going to choose drugs.
SS Do you worry that you'll relapse?
GM No, I don't. I mean, there's a chance everybody could relapse, but I don't worry about it. It was such a deep, dark, destructive journey for me, and recovery has been so enlightening that I can't even think what would push me back down that line.
When you're on drugs, you never think you're going to be able to get back to where you were or anywhere close to living a normal life. And you can - not real easy, but you can. Things are never going to be the same, but it can be fulfilling and it can be enlightening and life-changing. It has been for me. I mean, my priorities are different now. Not that I was a bad or selfish person, but I think more of other people and I see humanity in a different way. I'm much more passionate about life *
A longer version of this article appears on theguardian.com/weekend. Graham MacIndoe is due to talk at Face To Face: The Portrait in Photography Today on 14 May at the Scottish National Portrait Gallery (nationalgalleries.org/whatson). His work will feature in Photographers' Sketchbooks, published this autumn by Thames & Hudson.
Captions:
MacIndoe after recovery from drugs
Document GRDN000020140503ea5300065
