{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1638"}
____
Guardian Home Pages
Cameron's plans for EU get boost from Merkel: Berlin wants rights of non-euro members protected: PM also welcomes German proposals on migration
Nicholas Watt, Chief political correspondent   
490 words
28 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
9
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
David Cameron has received a highly significant boost to his campaign to renegotiate the terms of Britain's European Union membership after Berlin said that any EU treaty change must protect the interests of non-eurozone members.
In a sign of Angela Merkel's determination to keep Britain in the EU, the German finance minister, Wolfgang Schauble, has written an article in the Financial Times together with George Osborne to say that any treaty change must "guarantee fairness" for countries outside the eurozone.
The joint article with the chancellor confirms the signals from Berlin, disclosed in the Guardian on the eve of Merkel's recent visit to Britain, that Germany is keen to provide assurances to Britain.
German officials said Merkel acknowledged the need to guarantee that the 10 EU countries outside the eurozone could not be outvoted in negotiations on the single market by the 18 euro countries. The rules of the single market are decided by "qualified majority voting" which means that the so called "euro-outs" could be outvoted by the eurozone members.
In their joint FT article Osborne and Schauble write: "As the euro area continues to integrate, it is important that countries outside the euro area are not at a systematic disadvantage in the EU. So future EU reform and treaty change must include reform of the governance framework to put euro area integration on a sound legal basis and guarantee fairness for those EU countries inside the single market but outside the single currency."
The message is designed to assure Britain after Schauble spoke yesterday of the need for treaty change to underpin new governance arrangements for the eurozone. He suggested this could involve a eurozone parliament.
Mats Persson, director of the Open Europe thinktank, told the FT that it marked "a substantial win for Osborne and Cameron". Persson added: "This is the first time treaty changes for further eurozone integration and safeguarding the rights of non-euro countries have been linked by senior German and UK figures."
During her visit to London Merkel said a deal was doable. She said: "I firmly believe that what we are discussing here is feasible, is doable . . . it is not a piece of cake."
Cameron yesterday also welcomed proposals by Germany to deny residency rights to jobless EU migrants and to prevent the re-entry of those who abuse EU rules on the free movement of people.
The prime minister said he would look closely at Berlin's proposals, which go further than current British plans.
Cameron spoke out after the Times reported that an interim report prepared by the German government's EU immigration committee proposed removing residency rights from EU citizens if they failed to find work after a certain period of time.
Document GRDN000020140328ea3s00031
