{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3272"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
The Tories must take advantage of recovery
460 words
15 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
23
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
With a week to go until the European and council elections, the words of Mark Carney yesterday will have been music to the ears of David Cameron and his ministers. The economy is heading back to normal, said the Governor of the Bank of England – but suggestions that interest rates will rise in the near future are wide of the mark. This confounded some predictions in the City that the Bank was preparing to raise the cost of borrowing. Even the latest jobless figures, showing that unemployment in the first quarter of the year fell below seven per cent, have not prompted a response – despite this being the point at which Mr Carney had previously indicated that he would consider an interest rate rise, potentially resulting in mortgage costs increasing just before an election.
After the worst recession since the Thirties, there could hardly be a more benign set of pre–election statistics. Employment growth is at a 43–year high. Predictions of a flood of immigrants from Romania and Bulgaria after work restrictions were lifted in January have failed to materialise: while immigration in general remains high, the number of would–be workers arriving from these two countries in the first quarter of the year was actually lower than over the previous three months. Since dire warnings of what would happen when the borders were opened have formed a central plank of Ukip's campaign for the European elections, this should be a setback for Nigel Farage's party.
And yet, despite the good news, opinion surveys still suggest that Ukip may top the poll next week, albeit on a low turnout, and that the Tories could come third – while their Coalition partners, the Lib Dems, will be fortunate to beat the Greens. True, the country is not being asked to elect a government, and voters tend to use these elections as an opportunity to register a protest. But ministers doubtless feel entitled to see some political benefits accrue from the economic revival they have engineered.
Yet as John Major discovered in 1997, it is dangerous to expect a recovery to speak for itself and automatically garner votes for the governing party. The Tories, in particular, need to link the growth in jobs not just to George Osborne's economic stewardship but to a wider narrative that emphasises their successful reforms of welfare, taxation and education. At least they are aided by the continuing retreat of the Labour Party to its pre–Blair comfort zone of state intervention, high taxes and excessive spending. Even if such a platform has short–term populist appeal, it does not amount to a credible strategy for government.
Document DT00000020140515ea5f0006p
