{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2184"}
____
  
Features
Tight connection
Gill Charlton; Joanna Symons; Nick Trend; Fred Mawer   
435 words
8 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
31
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Our writers solve your travel problems
Our experts – on everything from key destinations to consumer rights – will be responding every week on this page to questions from readers. Here the answers come from Gill Charlton, Joanna Symons, Nick Trend, Fred Mawer
This week: baggage claims and deadlines, dog–friendly London, timing your flights just right and luxury all–inclusive beaches
Q I'm flying with British Airways from Orlando, Florida, to London Gatwick, connecting to easyJet to Edinburgh. I understand that both airlines fly out of the North Terminal at Gatwick and I have 90 minutes between flights. Is that enough time to make the connection? Can I check my golf clubs all the way through to Edinburgh, or do I have to claim them from BA at LGW and recheck them with easyJet?
J Heise
Nick Trend, consumer expert
A I think you are cutting it extremely fine, even though both airlines do indeed use the same terminal. Because you are flying on two airlines, with two separate bookings, neither airline has a responsibility to make sure you connect, and you won't be able to check in yourself or your luggage on a "through journey". So when you arrive at Gatwick, you will have to pass through immigration, collect your luggage, go out into the main terminal, check it in with easyJet and pass through security into the departures area. EasyJet closes check–in 40 minutes before the scheduled departure time – and it is strict on this timing; in fact it recommends checking in two hours in advance. You are then supposed to be at the departure gate at least 30 minutes before departure.
You might be lucky, land early or on time, and hit a quiet moment at immigration, but it will be tight. If you miss your flight, you will have to pay for a later one. Since BA also flies from Gatwick to Edinburgh, you would have been better off booking a through–ticket on the same airline.
You can find advice and detailed information from all our experts online at telegraph.co.uk/ travelexperts and guides to major destinations at telegraph.co.uk/destinations. Queries may be sent by email to asktheexperts@telegraph.co.uk. Please provide your name and nearest town and, if your query is about a dispute with a travel company, your full address, daytime telephone number and any booking reference. Readers with complicated complaints may be asked for full documentation. We regret that we cannot answer postal inquiries or deal with telephone calls.
Document DT00000020140308ea38000e4
