{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"97"}
____
  
News
Clegg v Farage: tonight's debate proves that Euroscepticism has come of age
By Tim Stanley   
483 words
26 March 2014
17:43
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
So the Nige v Nick Night is upon us and, politically, it’s a bit of a sideshow. Not that I don’t like Farage (I’m only human) and my respect for Clegg has risen over the years (in the same way that you spot a one-legged, one-eyed dog in the pouring rain and think, “Poor thing.”). But the debate will be missing the two people who really matter: Dave and Ed. It's one of those leaders who will actually enter Number 10 in 2015, and their absence makes the whole debate feel like a plain Jane contest. A prize for best effort etc.
Moreover, Farage and Clegg aren’t really there to argue with each other. They’re there to score points over the men who aren’t there to answer them. It’s complicated…
Farage is never going to get Lib Dem, pro-European votes: the one thing left uniting the yellows is their passion for being governed by unelected foreigners. So Farage will attack Dave and Ed for not being there and talk largely to his growing constituency of disaffected Tories and Labourites. He’ll mention immigration a lot, which is technically relevant to the EU debate but is also a bit of dog-whistling. The Roma will surely put in an appearance.
Likewise, Clegg is never going to win Ukip or Eurosceptic votes: the kind of people who would like to relocate Britain physically to a tax haven in the Caribbean. So expect him to attack Dave and Ed for not being there and try instead to court pro-Europeans who might otherwise go Labour or Tory. He’ll also talk a lot about the “tough choices” that the Lib Dems have made that prove they are fit to govern. That’s code for 100 per cent, cowardly u-turns that betray their core voters.
If the two men do engage directly, it will probably be to congratulate each other for turning up: “We might not agree, but at least we have the courage to debate.” And, in a way, they are right. We might wish that Ed and Dave were debating the EU, but at least someone is. It’s proof that the Europhiles realize they can no longer rely on public uninterest in what Brussels does to keep the status quo and proof that Euroscepticism has finally come of age.
So we shouldn’t expect a debate that changes the course of history, but we ought to welcome the fact that continued membership of the EU is up for discussion at all. I'm old enough to remember when the argument for leaving was the preserve of clinically insane Tory backbenchers, half a dozen pig farmers in Devon and Edward Fox. Times, they are a-changin'.
Document TELUK00020140326ea3q00441
