{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3484"}
____
  
News
Ethnic middle–class vote may help Tories
Steven Swinford   
327 words
22 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE rising number of middle–class ethnic minority voters could help tip the election in favour of David Cameron, new research has concluded.
Research by Demos, a think–tank, suggests that Labour risks losing some of its traditional support from black and Asian voters as many move to the suburbs.
The report by Trevor Phillips, a former Labour politician and former head of the equalities watchdog, and Richard Webber, a professor of geography at University College London, concluded that "upwardly mobile" ethnic minority voters were more likely to turn Conservative.
"There is a great deal of evidence to suggest that any emerging volatility amongst the UK's five million ethnic electors may turn out to be at least as significant as the three million who tell pollsters they might support Ukip in the forthcoming election," the report states.
It suggests that second or third generation immigrants could lose their "reflex" support for Labour, and those moving to traditionally white middle–class areas would be less likely to vote Labour.
"The expectation would be that succeeding generations of minority voters may drift away from their parents' reflex support for Labour – or at the very least might not inherit the first–generation immigrants' hostility to the Conservatives," the study said. "The other factor that could boost the Tory share of seats is a secular out–movement of ethnic minority families from the inner city neighbourhoods in which they first settled.
"The process is accelerating in London, in particular, due to the combination of spiralling inner–city housing costs and changes to the benefit system."
An analysis of polling data suggests that ethnic minority voters are signifi–cantly more likely to vote Labour when living in majority non–white neighbourhoods than in areas that are predominantly white. In majority non–white areas, 60 per cent of ethnic minorities voted Labour, compared with 48.1 per cent in majority white neighbourhoods.
Document DT00000020140422ea4m0005u
