{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2537"}
____
  
News
Clegg v Farage in two live clashes on the EU
Alison Little   
429 words
6 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Eire
2
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
NICK Clegg and Nigel Farage are to go head-to-head in two live debates on the tinderbox issue of immigration.
The hour-long clashes will be held in the run-up to the May 22 elections to the European Parliament.
The first bout will be before a studio audience on national LBC radio on March 26, mediated by host Nick Ferrari.
Next they will confront each other on BBC2 on April 2, with election veteran David Dimbleby.
The debates will centre on whether to stay in Europe.
Outraged They were first suggested last month by Lib Dem Deputy Prime Minister Mr Clegg - who has vowed to fight the elections as leader of the "party of in".
Ukip leader Mr Farage, who wants Britain to leave, accepted the challenge. Mr Clegg said yesterday he "relished the prospect of talking about how we are fighting to keep Britain in Europe to protect jobs".
Mr Farage said: "For the first time in 39 years the British people will hear a proper, open debate on membership of the EU."
Warming up for the hostilities, Mr Clegg outraged Mr Farage by accusing Ukip of "letting down" Britain. He said: "You would have thought that if your world view was based on the idea that it has been bad for Britain to be part of the EU, Ukip would have used its berth in the European Parliament to find every possible opportunity to promote reforms that create British jobs, enhance British security and enhance the British way of life.
"Yet Ukip leaders don't turn up to vote most of the time. Nigel Farage hasn't tabled a single amendment since July 2009. They have let down British interests within the heart of the EU."
Mr Farage hit back: "Nick Clegg has some cheek.
"Although he lives in London, between 2010 and 2014 he has voted in Westminster only 22.6 per cent of the time. I live eight hours away from Strasbourg, lead a national party and have voted 55 per cent of the time in the European Parliament."
He added that some Ukip MEPs had participated in up to 91 per cent of votes while the Europe of Freedom and Democracy group of MEPs that Mr Farage leads had tabled "hundreds of amendments".
Neither Prime Minister David Cameron nor Labour leader Ed Miliband are pressing to be in the debates. Downing Street says the PM would set out his views in the European election campaign.
Leo Mckinstry: Page 12
Document THEEXP0020140306ea360000o
