{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"2054"}
____
  
Observer Home News Pages
Special Investigation: Serco, the Observer, and a hunt for the truth about Yarl's Wood: Efforts to investigate repeated claims of sexual abuse by staff at the asylum centre met with resistance and led to a private company calling in reputation lawyers. After a legal battle, this paper has received a copy of an internal inquiry - but many questions remain unanswered.
Mark Townsend   
2,855 words
18 May 2014
The Observer
OB
8
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
The report is seven pages long, bears a Serco logo and is signed by Ian Wills, the company's deputy head of security and operations. It is the account of an inquiry into sexual abuse allegations involving a female detainee living at the mercy of the British state.
Her care was outsourced - on behalf of all of us - to the private sector. Reading the report, it is perhaps no surprise that one of Britain's biggest contractors fought long and hard to keep its contents secret.
This weekend a new dispute has erupted over government proposals to hive off child protection services to companies such as Serco and G4S; perhaps the ministers and officials behind those plans should look at the case of Sana when they come to make their final decision on the future of another vulnerable section of the population.
Sana called the Observer early in 2011. Her voice trembling but resolute, she went methodically through the chain of alleged events in which she claimed she had been sexually assaulted by a healthcare worker at Yarl's Wood in Bedford, Britain's biggest immigration detention centre for women.
Her journey to Yarl's Wood had been circuitous, troubled and violent. Born in June 1983 in the Pakistani city of Lahore, her earliest childhood memories are scarred by beatings administered by her father. When she was 17, she says he threatened to kill her unless she married an older family friend. Her unwanted husband then announced they were to start a new a new life in north London. The marriage soured and turned violent.
Divorced, Sana became involved in another relationship, which also turned abusive. Having been kept in the dark by her first husband over her immigration status, Sana left the second man and applied for asylum. On 4 October 2010 she was taken to Yarl's Wood after attending a routine immigration appointment. Estranged from her family and a long-term survivor of abuse, she could hardly have been more vulnerable.
During the last of the alleged assaults on Sana, about 1.50am on 8 January 2011, she feared she was going to be raped inside Yarl's Wood, according to witness documents later handed to the courts. Serco's internal report recounts her claims of how a healthcare worker, whom she had approached with problems of headaches and dizziness, allegedly told her "she did not need medication but needed his penis".
It then describes her allegations of how the healthcare worker held Sana's hand and "placed it on his penis and that he touched her vaginal area outside her clothes". It was the third time over five weeks that the same man had allegedly sexually assaulted her in the confines of the centre's medical room. Terrified, she said she left and told a guard: "I am not safe here." The female guard seemed convinced by Sana's claims. Witness statements quote the Serco detention officer as saying it was "just so difficult not to believe that this [the allegations] is true".
Her colleagues failed to share the view. In fact, the sympathetic Serco officer would be criticised for failing to see the possibility that Sana's testimony might have been fabricated. She required guidance, senior officers concluded in the report, to become more "objective" and to dissuade her making similar snap judgments in the future.
Astonishingly, another allegation against a Yarl's Wood employee is treated as a reason to suspect that Sana, now 30, is lying about her own experience. The report points out that Sana shared a solicitor with another detainee who had recently made allegations. Therefore, there could be "an element of coercion to thwart removal directions". The alleged attacker is described as a "family man with strong religious beliefs".
Bedfordshire police came, but instead of sending specialist sex abuse officers, they sent an ordinary constable. Instead of the lengthy recorded interview usually reserved for such sensitive allegations, Sana claims her interrogation lasted only 30 minutes.
A police email to UK Border Agency investigators lamented a lack of independent witnesses, ignoring the fact that few sexual assaults occur in front of others. Sana even alleges that the officer accused her of "lying in order to stay in the country", a claim he denies.
The prisons and probation ombudsman was unimpressed with the police's view that Sana's allegations could not be proven, stating: "I find it difficult to understand how the police found it possible to reach such a definitive conclusion after such a brief investigation."
The case closed, and almost immediately the Home Office told her she was to be deported back to Pakistan.
"After the meeting with the police officer I returned to the wing, and a little later I was given the notice saying I would be removed to Pakistan on a flight," states her witness account. The flight was in five days' time, the minimum notice the government has to give.
For legal reasons, the Observer had been unable to run the story of Sana's allegations. But when last September the paper printed testimony from another 23-year-old who said she had unwanted sexual contact with two guards, Serco adopted what would become a characteristically aggressive stance. The company hired reputation management lawyers to issue a five-page letter instructing the articles "be amended to reflect the true position". Having become aware that Serco had conducted an internal inquiry into Sana's case, as a result of cases brought by Sana against the Home Office, Serco and the police over her treatment, we asked for access to the report. The company was not willing to disclose it, though the legal letter was categorical that any claim Serco had "perpetrated a 'cover-up' in respect of complaints is . . . unfounded". Serco settled Sana's claim over the assaults for a modest sum.
Then more anguished calls came from women who claimed they felt terrified and intimidated. Allegations of inappropriate behaviour reached as far back as 2007. A perception appeared to have evolved among detainees that if they flirted or slept with guards their case might be treated more favourably.
There are clear guidelines governing the behaviour of staff towards women held in the centre, but something seemed to be going badly wrong in Yarl's Wood.
Leah, 33, from Cameroon, who was in the centre twice, between 2008 and 2009, said: "The guards would flirt with the detainees. I spoke to some ladies who were in proper relationships with the guards. They used to give these women the impression that if you sleep with me I'll put in a good word for you." She said the dynamic was complicated by the fact that some detainees came from countries where having sex with guards in order to escape prison was not unusual.
Tilia, 41, from Zimbabwe, who spent 12 months in the centre from September 2011, said: "You're very vulnerable, you are thinking that if I get closer to this person he might help me out. So many girls were flirting, two or three had got to the point of having sex in exchange for favours."
Sharon, 27, from Uganda, who was at Yarl's Wood for three months from June 2012, told of hearing women talk about tolerating inappropriate behaviour for modest returns. "Small essentials like nice soap, nice hair products . . . they thought that if they gave in to demands they would get these things in return."
Some former detainees say the centre was so out of control that occasionally fights broke out after women suspected they were having sex with the same guard. Others describe impromptu discos where they witnessed guards dancing provocatively with detainees. "The girls would put on their hot pants and dance closely with these guards like in a nightclub, grinding and winding," said Sharon. The cinema is also mentioned as an alleged place for inappropriate encounters. Sandra, 25, from Uganda, whose last stint in Yarl's Wood was between May and July last year, describes looking through the door and seeing guards cuddling up to women.
More articles by the Observer prompted further activity from lawyers acting for Serco. One letter complained the company could not "see the basis upon which you can justify or publish" allegations from some of the women.
Serco continued to claim it conducted thorough investigations into complaints, but refused to let the Observer see the internal report into Sana's case. During an extraordinary legal battle, Serco fought to keep it out of the public sphere. The Observer argued it was in the public interest to publish an inquiry into claims made by a vulnerable woman that she had been sexually assaulted on its premises. Lawyers acting for Serco vehemently argued there was a balancing public interest in not disclosing the confidential report.
In early December 2013 lawyers for Guardian News and Media (GNM), which owns the Observer, sought a court ruling that the Serco report was a public document and the newspaper was entitled to a copy, arguing its release was in the public interest. The initial high court hearing was scheduled for 7 February, but the day before Serco's lawyers dropped a bombshell.
The company's legal team indicated that it had "learned of a police investigation concerning a sexual assault at Yarl's Wood". Serco said that making its report public could prejudice that investigation. When it was established there was no overlap between that investigation and Sana's case, Mr Justice Bean delivered his judgment, saying GMG should be granted access to Serco's subsequent internal report and endorsing its "proper journalistic purpose in seeking to inspect a document which they believe may throw light on whether or not the allegation was properly investigated".
Many unanswered questions remain. How many witnesses and victims might have been deported before their allegations came to light? That one will almost certainly never be answered. How many allegations have there been? Available data confuses rather than clarifies the situation. A Home Office freedom of information (FoI) response, dated 23 May 2013, says that the government is aware of only four complaints "of a sexual nature from detainees" relating to contractor staff since 2008. However, a response four months later from Serco says it has received nearly four times that figure, stating that "over the six years we have been managing Yarl's Wood there have been a total of 15 complaints or concerns raised about inappropriate behaviour".
The figures become even more muddled when another Home Office FoI response, dated 30 April 2014, reveals it knows of only one case of sexual contact that has been substantiated since Serco began managing Yarl's Wood. Yet in the same response the Home Office states "seven members of [Yarl's Wood] staff have been dismissed" over the issue. For its part, Serco, in data provided upon request to the home affairs select committee last September, admits eight staff have been sacked or have resigned over the issue of "inappropriate behaviour".
Amid the confusion and conflicting numbers, many former detainees allege they felt too vulnerable and intimidated to formally register misgivings. Sharon, for instance, says: "I never heard anyone complaining explicitly about the nature of things, people just wanted to survive."
Others allege they came under pressure to retract accounts of inappropriate behaviour after lodging a complaint. Sana herself describes a change in attitude by guards following her complaint. "Officers started behaving differently towards me . . . many seemed to become aggressive and rude towards me."
Instead of becoming more transparent, campaigners claim that Yarl's Wood is becoming increasingly secretive. The Home Office still denies the Observer access to the detention centre. Why? Meanwhile, one campaigning group last week complained that it felt it was getting harder to contact detainees via phone. Attempts to contact the sympathetic (and female) Serco guard who appeared to have believed Sana's assault allegations have proved fruitless. She still works in the centre. Calls to her have been intercepted by colleagues demanding to know the intention of the conversation.
Sana's lawyer, Harriet Wistrich, has also repeatedly tried to contact the sympathetic guard without success, claiming a "closing of ranks" may have prevented her coming forward. It is not just those inside who are effectively censored. The United Nations expert into violence against women was last month refused permission to inspect Yarl's Wood by the "highest" echelons of the Home Office. Speaking from South Africa last week, Rashida Manjoo remains deeply perturbed that she was unable to conduct her high-profile investigation.
Lessons must be learned. The Home Office finds itself facing uncomfortable questions. A number of former Yarl's Wood detainees say they know of victims of inappropriate behaviour who have been deported before being able to testify, in effect silencing their stories. One woman who made allegations of sexual assault claims attempts were made to deport her to nine different countries after she complained. Detainees who claim to have witnessed sexual contact say they have also been threatened with deportation. One woman who witnessed an alleged case of sexual misconduct was detained for deportation hours before a scheduled interview with police. Only when the Observer highlighted the deportation bid was she allowed to share evidence with officers. Tilia, from Zimbabwe, said: "There are women who have been sexually abused but their voice couldn't be heard because they have been deported."
That buck stops at the door of the Home Office, which must authorise all deportations. Has it become an unwitting accomplice in silencing and removing "troublemakers"? The police appear not to have handled Sana's case well. The investigation by Bedfordshire police, which investigates Yarl's Wood allegations, was accused of being cursory at best in its inquiries. Sana's claim against the force for failing adequately to investigate her case was soon settled.
But the biggest questions are for Serco, a private company operating on behalf of the British state, funded by the British taxpayer. At Yarl's Wood, it deals with female detainees facing deportation, by any measure some of the most vulnerable people in our society. Does it not have a public duty to be transparent when problems arise? Serco chose to settle Sana's claim for a modest amount of damages "at least in part because it did not wish for the report to be published," according to one of Serco's lawyers.
The company should also reflect long and hard on whether it allowed a culture of automatic suspicion to develop whenever employees were faced by allegations such as Sana's. Almost from the outset, it appears Serco formed the opinion that Sana may have fabricated the allegation that she had been abused in order to escape removal. When people are as vulnerable as this, should not the overwhelming priority be to take their voice, their side of the story, seriously? Judging by the internal report that the Observer finally obtained, it appears this did not happen.
Described as the "biggest company you've never heard of", Serco was buoyant just over a year ago, with profits booming after securing a number of sizeable contracts. As reports of possible bid for child protection contracts make clear, it hopes to be a prime deliverer of many more important, sensitive services.
Inside Yarl's Wood, it is only fair to acknowledge that many campaigners acknowledge that conditions have improved profoundly over recent years. But there is still work to do, according to detainees. One recently described how guards caught her naked after they burst in on her without knocking, behaviour that breaches Serco guidelines and for which the detainee says that Serco apologised. Fundamentally, say activists, the complexities of male guards looking after female detainees needs to be challenged. Again, to be fair, it is understood that Serco is concentrating on recruiting more female guards.
For Sana such initiatives are too late: "It left me depressed and anxious, even now. When I think about what happened and how they decided they did not believe me, I get very sad." She is still waiting to hear whether she will be granted asylum.
Captions:
TILIA
Tilia spent 12 months in the centre, from 2011. 'You're very vulnerable, you are thinking: if I get close to this person he might help me out.'
Mark Townsend's reports began in September 2013. His coverage led later to an investigation into Yarl's Wood by HM Inspector of Prisons.
LEAH
Leah, who was in Yarl's Wood in 2008 and 2009, said many women who had sex with the guards came from countries where this was not unusual.
A bedroom for two detainees in Yarl's Wood immigration centre. Photograph by Graham Turner for the Observer
Document OB00000020140519ea5i0002c
