{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3240"}
____
  
News
Why should Eurosceptics vote Conservative next month?
By Daniel Hannan   
938 words
9 April 2014
08:59
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
I believe that Britain will be better off outside the European Union. I want fewer laws, lower taxes, direct democracy, controlled immigration and local devolution. And I'm proud to be standing as a Conservative in the European election on 22 May.
Why, people ask me online and at public meetings, don't I join Ukip, believing what I believe? It's a fair question. I admire the integrity and patriotism of my many Ukip friends. You won't find better men in public life than Stuart Wheeler or Malcolm Pearson. I'm very fond of Nigel Farage, whom I have found unfailingly sincere and gentlemanly.
Why, then, am I standing against Nigel next month? The short answer is that I want a referendum on leaving the EU. If my party were not committed to such a referendum, my online critics would have an unarguable point. Had that commitment not been made, I would not have been able conscientiously to stand as a Conservative. But it was made; and my Ukip friends are in denial about it.
Ukip was formed to get Britain out of the EU, and settled on a referendum as its preferred mechanism. Its supporters maintained, to their credit, that theirs was not like the other parties: that their ultimate goal was to dissolve their movement after restoring British independence.
But they would not have been human if they had not become attached to their creation. I think of it as Bridge Over the River Kwai Syndrome. You'll remember that, in the film, the British commanding officer, played by Alec Guinness, sets his men to work building a bridge as a way of keeping up their morale. But as the construction takes shape, he starts seeing it as an end in itself, and forgets that it does not serve British interests.
I wonder how many people would have joined Ukip had one of the bigger parties offered an In/Out referendum five years ago. As recently as September 2012, Nigel was telling Ukip delegates that a pact with another party would follow if that party's commitment to a referendum on EU membership were "written in blood". Four months later, David Cameron adopted precisely such a policy. Better than writing it in blood, he moved the relevant legislation, which his MPs backed on a three-line Whip. That Bill was asphyxiated by Europhile Lib-Lab peers, but may yet be brought back and subjected to the Parliament Act.
By then, however, Ukip had its tail up. Instead of celebrating their victory, its activists began 1) to close their eyes to the evidence, even as Conservative MPs were trooping through the lobbies; and 2) to decide, all of a sudden, that they were about much more than Europe – that they now stood for grammar schools and opposition to political correctness and so on.
Parties are of course free to stand on whatever platforms they please. But if your main objective is to get the chance to leave the EU – and mine is – the blunt truth is thatonly the Conservatives can deliver it.
Winning that referendum won't be easy. Sunder Katwala recently remarked on the paradox that, the better Ukip does in the polls, the lower support for leaving the EU sinks. Surveys are now showing EU supporters in the lead – and the pattern of all referendums is for the anti-change side to improve its position during the campaign.
The correlation between the rise of Ukip and the rise of pro-EU feeling does not mean that the one is driving the other, of course. What is surely unarguable, though, is that opponents of the EU won't win by relying on what Douglas Carswell calls "angry nativism". We need to conjure a warm and optimistic future, a vision of Britain as an open economy, a global trading nation, interested and involved in the affairs of every continent.
 I am what Matt Ridley calls a rational optimist . Unlike some of my regular commenters, I don't believe that our country is going to the dogs. Look at the fall in crime. Look at the record number of people in work. Look at yesterday's IMF forecast, which says Britain is now the fastest-growing of the world's major economies. My Ukip friends – with some exceptions – prefer to talk about the things that are going wrong. And, of course, there aresome things going wrong. But naysayers rarely carry the day. Even when voters share their concerns, they are often put off by the gloomy tone. Being against Brussels won't win us the referendum unless can offer a better alternative.
I continue to hope for an accommodation between the two Right-of-Centre parties. In the mean time, though, there are only two potential prime ministers: Ed Miliband and David Cameron. One crashed the economy, the other is repairing the damage. One refuses to accept that the debt and the deficit were too high under Labour, the other is painstakingly restoring public finances. One refuses to countenance welfare reform, the other is rescuing hundreds of thousands of people from the squalor of dependency. One won't let us vote on EU membership, the other will.
I hope this is the last time that Nigel and I have to face each other at hustings meetings. With a bit of luck, we'll both be out of work within the next five years, as Britain shuffles off the coils of the world's only declining trade bloc and rediscovers its hinterland across the oceans.
 
Document TELUK00020140409ea490012x
