{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"404"}
____
  
News; Front Page
20 million air passengers avoid thorough UK passport checks
Peter Dominiczak; Steven Swinford; Malcolm Moore   
665 words
11 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
1
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Calls to tighten passport security at UK airports
THE passport details of more than 20 million people entering and leaving the UK are not being properly checked, official figures show, amid concerns that a lack of security at UK airports could aid terrorists.
According to the Home Office's most recent figures, data is still not being collected and examined for around 10 per cent of the 200 million people flying in and out of the UK every year.
The figures have added to concerns about Britain's aviation security in the wake of the mysterious disappearance of Malaysia Airlines flight MH370.
Norman Baker, the Lib Dem Home Office minister, yesterday said that the apparent loss of the flight - - which was carrying 239 passengers - - bolsters the case for Britain to have tougher exit checks for people leaving the country.
The Home Office last night admitted that it needs to "improve" border checks using Advance Passenger Information (API) in the coming years.
Investigators have discovered that two men boarded the flight from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing using stolen passports and intelligence officials have warned that governments around the world are not doing enough to check travellers' details. No trace of the Boeing 777 plane has been found despite a three-day search operation involving dozens of aircraft and ships.
Azharuddin Abdul Rahman, the head of Malaysia's Civil Aviation Authority, yesterday described the disappearance of the flight as an "unprecedented mystery".
Interpol, the international intelligence agency, has said that governments are failing to properly monitor stolen passports. In Britain, the Home Office's e-borders scheme was meant to improve immigration controls by collecting passport details from people on every scheduled inbound and outbound journey to and from the UK.
The Government originally set a target to collect data on 95 per cent of all passenger movements. However, millions of travellers are still not being fully checked.
A Home Office spokesman said: "For foreign passports that have been reported as lost or stolen the UK has access to the Interpol Lost and Stolen database and is able to run checks against it. The UK receives API - - the biographic information in an individual's travel document - - for in excess of 90 per cent of passengers flying to, or from, the UK. We have significantly increased the proportion of passengers providing this information over the last five years. We are working to improve our coverage even further."
It comes amid a growing row over Liberal Democrat proposals to introduce "exit checks" at UK borders .
Nick Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister, was left furious last year after the Home Office stalled on plans to track everyone leaving the country. by 2015. Mr Baker last night said: "the Liberal Democrat s are firmly committed to exit checks at the earliest opportunity. Clearly the events of last week are facts to bear in mind."
Police yesterday. said they had discovered the identity of one of the two men who boarded the missing flight with stolen passports.
Mr Rahman said that he could not reveal the nationalities of the men travelling on stolen passports, but that they were "not Asian-looking" and that one looked like Mario Balotelli, the former Manchester City footballer who is of African origin.
In Thailand, police removed documents from two travel agencies in the resort town Pattaya used by the two men to book their flights. Benjaporn Krutnait, the owner of one of the agencies, Grand Horizon Travel, said the tickets had been booked through an Iranian middleman - a Mr Ali - who paid in cash.
in Beijing, the friends and relatives of the missing passengers voiced their anger after another day of waiting in a hotel. A Malaysian Airlines representative was pelted with water bottles and called a liar, while Chinese officials were also greeted with abuse.
Additional reporting by Adam Wu Michael Clarke and Editorial Comment Page 21
Document DT00000020140311ea3b0006j
