{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1982"}
____
  
NEWS
Quarter of eastern European workers 'pay just £1 a week in tax', says report
By David Barrett Home Affairs Correspondent   
640 words
30 April 2014
05:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MigrationWatch UK, which campaigns for tougher immigration laws, says many lower-paid eastern European immigrants receive more in benefits than they pay in tax
A quarter of eastern Europeans pay just £1 a week net in tax despite being in work, migration campaigners have claimed in a new report.
Research from think-tank Migration Watch said immigrants who work for the minimum wage make “virtually no net contribution”.
Tax rules also mean that if the immigrants are in a couple they can receive more in tax credits and other benefits than they pay in tax.
Sir Andrew Green, MigrationWatch’s chairman, said the research was intended to combat the argument that immigrants “work hard and pay their taxes”.
He said: “This analysis shows quite simply that the taxpayer is subsidising their wages. No wonder, then, that employers are in favour of them and that so many people find the UK such an attractive destination.
“We constantly hear that immigrants work hard and pay their taxes. There is no doubt that many of these people do work hard but it is a fact that those on the minimum wage pay virtually no direct taxes and, if in a couple, they can receive significant sums in tax credits and other benefits.
“Recent claims that EU migrants make a ‘very sizeable’ contribution to the Exchequer have simply not taken into account that the low incomes of so many mean that they receive much more in means-tested benefits than they pay in tax.”
MigrationWatch said official figures show about 150,000 employees from eastern Europe pay around £1 a week in net tax, while some on shorter hours pay nothing but still receive benefits.
It said: “Nearly one quarter of east European employees are earning the minimum wage or less. Indeed the data show that that nearly one in six of these eastern European workers earns less than half the equivalent of the minimum wage for a full week (i.e. gross weekly earnings below £111).
“The effect of benefits and tax credits is that a single worker on the minimum wage pays just over £1 more in tax than he or she receives back in benefits and tax credits.”
Employed migrants with a partner receive a net benefit from the taxpayer pot of £88 a week, said the research.
Those with two children receive a net benefit of £295 a week.
In the case of a couple where both partners work in minimum wage jobs, they would pay in a total £28 net, however, if they have two children they could receive a net benefit of £380 a week.
The group added that the calculations do not include indirect taxes such as VAT nor do they include health, education and social services.
Against a backdrop of growing concerns of an influx of Romanians and Bulgarians to the UK, and a surge in popularity for the UK Independence Party David Cameron, the Prime Minister last year unveiled a series of tough measures designed to clamp down on abuse of free movement between EU member states.
Earlier this month, statisticians admitted a 窶徭ubstantial窶  number of Eastern European migrants arriving in Britain in the last decade were not counted .
Net migration in the UK between 2001 and 2011 was 346,000 higher than previously thought as a result of “inadequate sampling” of arrivals into the country, the Office for National Statistics said.
Against a backdrop of growing concerns of an influx of Romanians and Bulgarians to the UK, and a surge in popularity for the UK Independence Party, David Cameron, the Prime Minister, last year unveiled a series of tough measures designed to clamp down on abuse of free movement between EU member states.
Document TELUK00020140430ea4u00001
