{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1789"}
____
  
News
Ukip 'voter' in manifesto leaflet works for party
Macer Hall   
352 words
23 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Lancs
2
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
NIGEL Farage yesterday dismissed as a "non issue" criticism that a "voter" in the UK Independence Party's European election manifesto was actually one of his aides.
A full-page photograph of a young woman was printed in the document with the caption: "Lizzy Vaid, Devon."
She was quoted as saying: "I'll be voting Ukip because they're the only party listening to what people want." But the manifesto failed to identify her as the anti-Brussels party's events manager and assistant to the leader.
The row threatened to overshadow the launch of Ukip's campaign for next month's European elections.
message Mr Farage brushed aside suggestions the manifesto picture of half-Indian Ms Vaid was also used to counter allegations of racism.
Speaking in Sheffield, South Yorks, he said he "did not see the need" to state she was an employee, adding: "She got a job with Ukip because she believes in what we stand for."
Ukip also came under fire for posters highlighting immigration from the EU, part of a £1.5million advertising blitz funded by Eurosceptic businessman Paul Sykes.
One showed a massive finger with the message: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?" Labour MP Mike Gapes described the posters as "racist" and urged "decent" voters not to support Ukip.
But Mr Farage said: "To have an open door to 485 million from Europe means there is an influx of foreign labour into Britain, the likes of which we have never seen.
"These posters are a reflection of reality. We are a nonracist party. But I think it is the job of the British Government to put the interests of our own people first."
Mr Farage was also forced to defend employing his German wife Kirsten as his secretary despite opposing foreigners taking British jobs.
He said: "I don't think anybody else would want to be in my house at midnight, going through emails and getting me briefed for the next day." COMMENT: PAGE 12
Document THEEXP0020140423ea4n00011
