{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3197"}
____
  
NEWS
Immigration from eastern Europe was massively underestimated, says official report
By David Barrett Home Affairs Correspondent   
636 words
10 April 2014
15:15
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Office for National Statistics admits it missed an estimated 350,000 in net migration over a decade because of flaws in a key survey
The number of eastern European migrants who came to Britain in the last decade was hundreds of thousands higher than previously thought, the Office for National Statistics has admitted.
In a disclosure that will fuel intense national concern about immigration, the agency said it had failed to count an estimated 350,000 migrants who arrived in this country between 2001 and 2011.
The ONS said the mistake occurred because it used “inadequate sampling” in a crucial survey at airports which is used to estimate net migration - the difference between the number of people arriving in Britain and those emigrating.
It said most of the migrants who were omitted from the International Passenger Survey (IPS) were from Poland and other former Communist states which joined the European Union in 2004, known as the “EU8” countries.
The revised totals showed net migration over the decade increased from just under 2.2 million to more than 2.5 million.
The ONS’s highest additional number of migrants was for 2006, when net migration is now thought to have been 67,000 higher than previously thought, reaching 265,000.
Original estimates were too low because the ONS concentrated its survey on main airports such as Heathrow but ignored migrants who were arriving on a growing number of budget airline routes into smaller, regional airports, a report said.
“There is evidence that shows the IPS missed a substantial amount of immigration of EU8 citizens that occurred between 2004 and 2008, prior to IPS improvements from 2009,” said the document.
“This is evident from comparisons of IPS data with a number of other data sources related to immigration.
“The EU8 migrants were missed due to IPS interviewing being concentrated at the time at principal airports, such as London Heathrow, London Gatwick and Manchester.
“During this time, many migrants from the EU8 countries were travelling on the increasing number of routes connecting their countries with the UK regional airports. Many of these routes were not covered, or not fully covered, by the IPS for migration purposes prior to 2009.”
The number of children migrating to Britain was also underestimated, it added.
More regional airports were included in the IPS from 2008 but the improvements were “too late to capture the main wave of increased migration” folloring EU expansion in 2004.
Labour, which was in power at the time, has admitted it was wrong not to impose restrictions on eastern Europeans’ ability to come to Britain from 2004.
At the time, official estimates predicted just 15,000 people would come from Poland and the other accession countries but the true figures ran into hundreds of thousands.
The ONS said there was “no evidence” that the passenger survey needed further revisions.
Carlos Vargas Silva, senior researcher at the Migration Observatory at Oxford University, which has previously raised concerns about the reliability of the IPS, said: "We have known for some time that net migration must have been much higher during the 2001 to 2011 period than the official estimates had suggested.
"This report provides important evidence of the need for better migration data and of the limitations of using a survey to develop net migration data."
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of MigrationWatch UK, which campaigns for stricter migration rules, said: "This is final confirmation that net foreign migration under labour totals nearly four million, two thirds from outside the European Union.
"It also shows that the peak of net migration was nearly 275,000 a year, making it even more difficult for the present Government to get the numbers down to tens of thousands."
Document TELUK00020140410ea4a002uv
