{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"6"}
____
  
News
WELFARE REFORM: EU PLANS LAWSUIT
Martyn Brown   
667 words
24 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
1,7
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
Brussels fights lower benefits for migrants
EU to challenge UK over cutting migrant benefits
MINISTERS last night fired a warning shot at Eurocrats as it emerged that Brussels is to take legal action against the UK, claiming its plan to limit migrant benefits is discriminatory and illegal.
The European Commission is expected to lodge a lawsuit in the European Court of Justice in the coming weeks because it believes the "right to reside" test to qualify for benefits is discriminatory since British citizens do not have to pass it.
However, Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith vowed to "rigorously" defend Britain's right to limit benefits payments tomigrants and insisted that immigrants should not be allowed to come to the UK and claim benefits without contributing.
He also said that the UK Government's residency test, which requires migrants to have a grasp of the English language, is "fair".
Mr Duncan Smith said: "It's right that we ensure our benefits system is secure.
"People should not be able to come to the UK and to claim benefits without contributing.
"The Habitual Residence Test is an important and fair part of the system – and that's why we recently strengthened it by adding more questions and inquiring about the applicant's ability to speak English.
"We don't accept the European Commission's views on the test and we will defend it rigorously against any challenge."
The test, first introduced by Labour to try to calm fears of so–called "benefits tourists" coming to the UK, requires migrants from other EU states to prove that they are seeking work before they can claim benefits such as Jobseeker's Allowance.
If Britain loses the case it will either have to change the law or face multi–million pound fines for non–compliance with the EU's rules.
The action is being brought by the office of Laszlo Andor, a Hungarian socialist and the European commissioner in charge of employment and social affairs.
A spokesman for his office said the legal action would probably be lodged "shortly".
"We expect that the referral to the court will happen within the next three months," the spokesman said.
"UK nationals have a 'right to reside' in the UK solely on the basis of their UK citizenship, whereas other EU nationals have to meet additional conditions in order to pass this 'right to reside' test.
"This means that the UK discriminates unfairly against nationals from other member states.
"This contravenes EU rules on the coordination of social security systems which outlaws direct and indirect discrimination in the field of access to social security benefits."
With European elections held in Britain on May 22, the timing triggered fury yesterday.
Stephen Booth, from Open Europe, a think tank which calls for widespread EU reform, said: "Free movement of workers has been beneficial to both the UK and Europe, but the European Commission should not be seeking to weaken the protection of national welfare systems."
Ukip's deputy leader Paul Nuttall, said: "The only way we can properly safeguard British taxpayers' money is by leaving the EU."
The Department of Work and Pensions has introduced a series of measures to strengthen the right to reside test. In January, it ordered EU migrants to wait three months before they can claim Jobseeker's Allowance and added "more individually tailored questions" to a verbal test that the migrants must pass.
From April 1, new migrant jobseekers will no longer be able to claim housing benefit.
OPINION: PAGE 12
SCOTTISH EXPRESS VOTE
Q Would Britain be better off pulling out of the EU?
YES: 0901 792 5300
NO: 0901 792 5301
Yes text DXMONYEs to 86611
No text DXMONNO to 86611
Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight.
Document THEEXP0020140324ea3o0008q
