{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1539"}
____
  
Features
My hols
Norman Jay   
775 words
16 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
He's made friends from New York to Namibia, been moved in Brazil and mobbed in Mumbai — but nothing beats the energy of London
We couldn't afford holidays when I was young. Coming from a working-class immigrant family, they were the last thing on the agenda. But when I was 19, I got my first job, in the Quaker Oats factory, and saved up for one of Freddie Laker's €118 returns to New York.
It was a fantastic time to be there, the late 1970s, the height of the disco boom, the birth of hip-hop culture, the rap scene. They couldn't believe black people came from England, so I was a curiosity, they loved the way I spoke. We stayed with my aunt in Flatbush, Brooklyn, and it was a real ghetto. I'd never been to a wholly black area, and I found it disconcerting. I'd always been surrounded by my white mates, my Asian mates, a proper multicultural mix.
From there, we went to my parents' home island, Grenada. That was a huge culture shock. I've learnt to love the West Indies, but coming off the grimy streets of Notting Hill into paradise, it didn't talk to me at all.
I could never just lie on a beach. I like cities. My idea of a holiday is to take off to a city and just walk around. Prague's a great wandering city, so is Sydney, but the king of them all is New York. I never tire of it. Me and my wife both have a keen interest in architecture, and we'll wander all over — Alphabet City, the Bronx, the Village, Harlem, Midtown. I'll walk up from 14th street to 125th, go through the park, look at those big town houses on the Upper East Side.
I've been lucky enough to go to a lot of cities, and I've loved most. I explored Rome from the back of a Vespa. I've taken the Maglev train into Shanghai — I've loved trains since childhood, and that's the fastest in the world, an amazing experience. I played a gig at a 12th-century monastery in Prague and was mobbed in Mumbai. But in all of them I was struck by the friendships, the random way I met people who would introduce themselves. By and large, people are genuine and friendly, anywhere you go in the world.
Well, almost anywhere. There are some places — in the southern states of America and eastern Europe — that weren't for me. Even today, there are cities in the world where the cabs won't stop for a black man.
Some trips have been moving. I went to Namibia to play a gig and stayed for a week. I was absorbed by the German colonial history, and I visited these huge townships outside Windhoek, and met a lot of families there, whole families living in shacks smaller than my garage. Yet there appeared to be a level of contentment — they knew their lot and didn't aspire to much more.
My trip to Bahia, in Brazil, had the biggest impact on me, spiritually and emotionally. I toured with Professor Paul Gilroy, who gave me an insight into the history: how the Portuguese brought slaves there from Africa in the 16th century, how runaways formed their own settlements — self-governing black communities, years before slaves arrived in numbers in North America and the Caribbean.
I still have countries I want to get to. There's a jazz scene developing in Azerbaijan — the DJ Gilles Peterson has been, and says it's amazing. And Colombia, Bolivia, Uruguay are all on my list.
My favourite place of all is London. I love our architecture, our trains, our galleries and museums. I love all the things we moan about, our crap hotels, our crap service. Nobody can tell me they are bored in this city. I won't have it. No matter how obscure your taste in music, somebody, somewhere is playing it in London, and nowhere else has that diversity. I think that is something to be celebrated.
Norman Jay is known as the godfather of British club culture. He made his name as a DJ playing warehouse parties in the 1980s, then went on to pioneer pirate radio with Kiss FM and launch the influential Talkin' Loud music label. His Good Times Sound System appearances are a highlight of the Notting Hill Carnival; he's also hosting Good Times in the Park at Wormwood Scrubs, London W12, on September 13 and 14.
Document ST00000020140316ea3g000d3
