{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1085"}
____
  
News
Gangsters and TV game shows on James Tait Black longlist
Scotland staff   
440 words
7 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Scotland
16
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The longlist for the drama prize associated with Britain's oldest literary awards is announced today, and includes works with themes ranging from TV game shows and gangsters to online dating and immigration.
The 14 nominations for the James Tait Black Prize for Drama showcase a range of diverse productions from new and established writers.
The drama prize was launched last year by the University of Edinburgh in partnership with the National Theatre of Scotland, in association with the Traverse Theatre in Edinburgh.
The £10,000 prize for the best new play in English, Scots or Gaelic complements the awards given to new works of fiction and biography.
Judges will award the accolade to an "original voice in theatre" and one that they feel has made a significant and unique contribution. The longlist was chosen from more than 180 plays from around the world. Scottish playwrights win the most nominations, including plays by David Harrower, David Leddy Rob Drummond and AJ Taudevin.
Also among those listed are Cannibals, below, by Rory Mullarkey; Grounded by George Brant, produced by the Gate Theatre, London; Quiz Show by Rob Drummond, produced by Traverse Theatre Company; Desolate Heaven by Ailis Ni Riain, produced by Theatre 503; Perfect Match by Gary Owen, produced by Paines Plough and Òran Mór, Glasgow, and Fleabag by Phoebe Waller-Bridge, produced by DryWrite Theatre Company. An award ceremony will take place at the Traverse on August 11, hosted by Joyce McMillan, the arts writer and theatre critic. Neil Murray, executive producer at The National Theatre of Scotland, said: "It is a very exciting longlist of plays, all of which have had a major impact on audiences. I look forward to selecting a winner."
Judging panelist Nicola McCartney, a playwright and lecturer at the University of Edinburgh, said: "The James Tait Black Awards are renowned for showcasing the very best of literature and we are delighted to celebrate the work of playwrights for a second year. The longlist is incredibly diverse and each play is of a remarkably high standard - it will be no mean feat to choose a shortlist."
The prize is judged by postgraduates and academics from the university. The shortlist will be announced in July. Last year the prize was awarded to Tim Price for his acclaimed play The Radicalisation of Bradley Manning" about the American soldier convicted of espionage for leaking military secrets.
The James Tait Black Memorial Prizes were founded in 1919. They are Britain's oldest literary awards. Past winners include D H Lawrence, Graham Greene, Aldous Huxley and Ian McEwan.
Document T000000020140507ea57000d1
