{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2251"}
____
  
NEWS
Prince Charles 'compares Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler'
By Keith Perry   
646 words
21 May 2014
12:54
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Prince of Wales reportedly tells woman who had lost relatives in the Holocaust that the Russian President is 'doing just about the same as Hitler' in Ukraine
Prince Charles has reportedly likened Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler.
In an unguarded comment about the Russian President’s actions in the Ukraine, the Prince of Wales told a woman who had lost relatives in the Nazi Holocaust: “And now Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler,” the Daily Mail reported .
The Prince’s comment could potentially be seen as criticism of the West for failing to confront Mr Putin over his seizure of Crimea. The annexation was a first by a major power in Europe since 1945.
Commentators have likened Russia's handing of the Ukraine crisis to Hitler’s takeovers of Poland and Czechoslovakia and have criticised Mr Putin's use of special forces in disguise to stir up tension in disputed areas.
The Prince of Wales, who is due to meet Mr Putin at the D-Day commemorations in France on June 6, made his well-intentioned but unguarded comment during a visit to the Canadian Museum of Immigration in Halifax, Nova Scotia, the Mail said.
The prince is on a tour of Canada with the Duchess of Cornwall – they have 41 engagements in just three and a half days.
On Tuesday night Clarence House sources said the Prince of Wales had a private conversation with a woman who had lost relatives in the Holocaust.
"It was a private, empathetic, conversation with a lady who had lost family members in the Holocaust," the source said.
On Monday, the pair paid tribute to Second World War veterans and their families at the museum in Halifax’s docks.
Prince Charles was introduced to Marienne Ferguson, a museum volunteer who fled to Canada with her Jewish family when she was just 13.
Mrs Ferguson, 78, was born in what is now the Polish city of Gdansk. A free city under the terms of the Versailles Treaty after the end of the Great War, it was seized by the Nazis on the first day of fighting in 1939.
Mrs Ferguson and her parents, two sisters and grandmother had managed to obtain permits to sail to Canada. But other members of her family failed to escape and were captured by the German forces.
They were sent to Nazi camps where they met their deaths along with an estimated six hundred Jews from the city,
Mrs Ferguson told her story to Prince Charles as she showed him the museum’s exhibits.
At the end of the visit, and surrounded by media, Prince Charles made his comment about the situation in Ukraine, the Mail said.
It was heard by several witnesses. Mother-of-three Mrs Ferguson said: "I had finished showing him the exhibit and talked with him about my own family background and how I came to Canada.
"The prince then said 'And now Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler'.
"I must say that I agree with him and am sure a lot of people do. I was very surprised that he made the comment as I know they [members of the Royal Family] aren’t meant to say these things but it was very heartfelt and honest.
"I told the prince that while my family and I were lucky to get a permit to travel, many of my other relatives had permits but were unable to get out before war broke out on September 1. They were sent to the concentration camps and died."
It is unusual for a senior royal to express an opinion on sensitive political issues as they are supposed to remain politically neutral.
A spokesman for Clarence House said last night they would not comment on a private conversation.
Document TELUK00020140520ea5k0076d
