{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"788"}
____
  
NEWS
850 Chinese millionaires and Russian oligarchs have 'bought' British visa; Chairman of the Home Office’s Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) says the government had effectively been “giving away" visas to some of the world’s wealthiest people
By David Barrett Home Affairs Correspondent   
588 words
25 February 2014
14:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
More than 850 Russian oligarchs and Chinese millionaires have won the right to live in Britain in the last five years under a scheme which has little benefit for British citizens, official government advisers have disclosed.
Professor Sir David Metcalf, chairman of the Home Office’s Migration Advisory Committee (MAC), said the government had effectively been “giving away" visas to some of the world’s wealthiest people.
A report by the committee revealed 433 Russian millionaires have come to this country since 2008 under an “investor" visa scheme which allows successful applicants to live in Britain in return for a minimum £1 million investment in government gilts - effectively a loan - but does not grant them a UK passport.
Another 419 super-wealthy Chinese used the scheme. The third largest group was US citizens, who made just 96 applications over the five years.
Prof Metcalf said: “The present system, it seems, is designed to minimise the gains to UK residents and maximise the gains to the migrants.
“Indeed, we pay them for making the application. They get interest on their loan - the gilts."
The MAC report, which was carried out at the request of the government, set out proposed reforms which would see the minimum amount for an investor visa doubled to £2 million.
A new “premium" route should also be set up, offering about 100 visas a year to the highest bidder, it said.
A reserve price of £2.5 million should be set for sealed bids, with any sum above the reserve price going into a “good causes" fund.
In exchange, the number of days per year an applicants would need to be resident in the UK would be halved to 90 days and they would gain permanent settlement rights more quickly.
“When people say ‘Isn’t it awful to sell visas’, I reply that it is better than giving them away, which is what we’re doing now," said Prof Metcalf.
The chairman attacked law firms which had criticised the MAC’s proposals before the report had been published.
“The immigration lawyers are kicking the MAC and they don’t even know what’s in the report," said Prof Metcalf.
“It’s also the case that they are self-interested - they get big, fat fees for looking after the interests of their clients.
“My question back to them is why don’t you have some concern not just for your big, fat fees but for the welfare of British citizens?
“I would also ask why they are so hostile to a good causes fund.
“Don’t they want cancer research to try to find a cure for prostate cancer? Don’t they want an inner city school to find funding for a basketball court? Don’t they want the Salvation Army to do the good work we saw them doing in the floods?"
The report said that including dependants such as spouses and children nearly 1,600 “investor" visas were granted to all nationalities in the 12 months to the end of September.
The MAC report rejected proposals which would have allowed investors to make endowments to universities or other organisations in exchange for a visa.
Theresa May, the Home Secretary will now consider whether to take forward the report’s recommendations.
Document TELUK00020140225ea2p003xy
