{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3267"}
____
  
Features
Offender's safety overrides open Justice
1,332 words
15 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
55
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Law Report
Supreme Court Published May 15, 2014 A v British Broadcasting Corporation Before Baroness Hale of Richmond, Lord Wilson, Lord Reed, Lord Hughes and Lord Hodge Judgment May 8, 2014 The court had an inherent jurisdiction under the common law as well as a statutory power to depart from the principle of open justice by prohibiting the publication of names and other details of parties in court proceedings if that was necessary in the interests of justice or for the protection of an individual. In those circumstances the interference with the media's right to receive and impart information and to freedom of expression was justified and lawful as the media did not have the right to publish information at the known potential costs of an individual being killed or maimed.
The Supreme Court so held, dismissing an appeal by the BBC from a decision of the First Division of the Inner House of the Court of Session (Lord President Gill, Lord Menzies and Lord Kilgarth) (2013 SC 533) refusing the BBC's reclaiming motion from a decision of Lord Glennie in the Outer House of the Court of Session (2013 SLT 324) which refused the BBC's application for a recall of an order made in the Outer House by Lord Boyd of Duncansby on November 7, 2012, prohibiting the publication of the name of the petitioner, A, or any particulars or details calculated to lead to his identification and that no picture of A should be published or broadcast.
A, a foreign national, had arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor in 1991. He subsequently married a UK citizen and was granted indefinite leave to remain. In 1996 he was convicted of sexual offences against his step child and sentenced to four years' imprisonment. In 1998 the Home Secretary served a notice of intention to deport A. A applied to be allowed to remain in the UK on the grounds, inter alia, that his removal would violate his right to life and right not to be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment under articles 2 and 3, respectively, of the European Convention on Human Rights. He asserted that if he was returned to his country of origin, he would, as a known sex offender, be at risk of death or ill treatment at the hands of persons enraged by his offences. That assertion was largely based on the premise that his return would receive publicity.
The Home Secretary refused the application and his appeals were dismissed by all tiers of the specialist immigration tribunal. He applied to the Court of Session for judicial review and for interim suspension of the removal decision pending the hearing. Lord Boyd refused the application but allowed the petition to be amended so as to anonymise A's name and made an order under section 11 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 prohibiting publication of A's identity. Prior to his planned deportation A absconded, was arrested and again applied for an interim suspension of the Home Secretary's decision to deport. The application was refused but it was accepted that his deportation would be unlawful unless the section 11 order remained in place because publicity would expose A to vigilante behaviour in his country of origin contrary to his article 3 rights.
Mr Ronald Clancy, QC and Mr Duncan Hamilton for the BBC; Mr Mungo Bovey, QC and Mr Daniel Byrne for A. The Home Secretary intervened by written submissions.
LORD REED, with whom the other members of the court agreed, said that it was a general principle of UK constitutional law, and an aspect of the rule of law in a democracy, that justice was administered by the courts in public. Since the rationale of the principle was that justice should be open to public scrutiny, and the media were the conduit through which the public received information about court proceedings, the principle of open justice was inextricably linked to the freedom of the media to report court proceedings.
The courts had an inherent jurisdiction to determine how the principle of open justice should be applied. Whether a departure from the principle was justified in any particular case depended on the facts of that case. The court had to carry out a balancing exercise which would be fact specific.
Central to the court's evaluation would be the open justice principle, the potential value of the information in question in advancing that purpose, and conversely, any risk of harm which its disclosure might cause to the maintenance of an effective judicial process or to the legitimate interests of other.
Under the European Convention the principle of open justice was expressly protected by article 6(1) which was subject to qualifications. The European Court of Human Rights had allowed national authorities a margin of appreciation and accepted that measures short of complete exclusion of the press and public, such as allowing a witness to remain anonymous, might be compatible with article 6(1), and that such measures might even be necessary in order to secure a fair trial.
The rights guaranteed by articles 2 and 3 were unqualified and the proceedings had to be organised in such a way that the interests protected by those articles were not unjustifiably imperilled. The right under article 10 to receive and impart information was also relevant to the principle of open justice. Article 10 rights were however qualified and reflected the fact that freedom of expression might conflict with other important values, including rights protected by articles 2, 3 and 6, and the right to private life protected by article 8. The fact that the present case concerned the deportation of a foreign sex offender, the remarkable length of time the proceedings had taken and the cost of the proceedings to the taxpayer, supported the BBC's contention that there was at all material times a public interest in its ability to report it without restriction. It would contribute to a debate of general interest concerning the deportation of foreign offenders, the impact of human rights law and the procedure followed in such cases. Although the BBC could report all other aspects of the case, their inability to reveal A's identity would detract from the human or journalistic interest of the story.
Nevertheless the arguments in favour of the decision to make the order were overwhelming. The decision to authorise the deportation had been based on an assessment that there was no real risk of a violation of article 3 if A's identity was not publicised.
If his identity was published a fresh application to be allowed to remain in this country could be made on the basis of the new factual situation created and the Home Secretary would have to make a fresh decision. The entire proceedings since at least 2007 would have been rendered largely pointless.
The reasons for making the order were equally compelling if considered from the perspective of protecting A's article 3 rights in the event of deportation and the serious risk of violence if his identity became known in his country of origin. The court's failure to make a section 11 order would have had the grave consequence that the deportation might create all the risks that the directions as to anonymity had been intended to prevent. In those circumstances it was plainly necessary in the interests of justice, and in order to protect the safety of a party to proceedings, to depart from the general principle of open justice to the extent involved in the making of the present orders. It followed that the section 11 order was not incompatible with the Convention rights of the BBC. The order had to be made if the court was to do its job, notwithstanding the resulting restriction upon the BBC's capacity to do its job.
Solicitors: Burness Paull &Williamsons, Glasgow; Drummond Miller, Edinburgh.
Document T000000020140515ea5f0008o
