{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"608"}
____
  
Observer New Comment Pages
Comment: The ninny who put the nannies in the news
Yvonne Roberts   
522 words
9 March 2014
The Observer
OB
33
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
James Brokenshire, junior home office minister, delivered a speech last week, in which he claimed that the middle classes were to blame for immigration. It was roundly mocked, and described as "feeble and pathetic" by the Institute of Directors. Or, to put it another way, Mr Brokenshire had landed his boss David Cameron right in it.
Nannygate - and, for that matter, Cleanergate, Chauffeurgate and Gardenergate - has begun, as myriad ministers, employing immigrants to tend to their domestic chores and childcare needs, are hunted down by the media.
Having only just camouflaged their duck houses and stables to avoid rumours about expenses, MPs will probably be spending the next several days rapidly raising the wages of their poorly paid domestic retainers; brutally sacking illegals and calling the Colombian au pair, a distant cousin, twice removed. They have Mr Brokenshire to thank.
He has - albeit inadvertently - delivered a triple political whammy. He drew attention to the exclusive habits of the "wealthy metropolitan elite" who head his team and who ignore their own advice not to hire "cheap labour"; he triggered particular examination of the man at the top, and his wife, Samantha, who may or may not have been instrumental in helping her Nepalese nanny Gita Lima to secure British citizenship (fee: pounds 874).
Brokenshire also highlighted the ineffectiveness of the coalition's controls on immigration. It's not a bad run of hits for a ministerial first speech, although it may be a long time before there is a second. The Camerons' hiring of Lima was followed by short-term employment of an Australian, Sammi Strange. Such is the nature of globalisation that London parks - since this is largely metropolitan elite behaviour - are full of women from the Philippines, Poland, Estonia and Central and South America earning a living abroad.
In a fair world, they ought not to come cheap, certainly not cheaper than the British nursery nurses on pounds 12,000 a year. But not as costly as a British-made Norland nanny - often employed in (wealthy) homes abroad - on around pounds 50,000 after three years' training.
Mr Brokenshire's moral outrage that foreigners come here to care for our children might have been tempered, and the increasingly divisive immigration debate eased, if he'd remembered that, for some time thousands of young British women have left these shores. Kitty Strutton, a bricklayer's daughter from Hackney, took care of Grand Duke Alexander of Russia in the 1840s. When she died, Alexander II, Tsar of Russia, and his four brothers carried her coffin.
Again, Anna Leonowens in her 30s took on the 82 children (and 39 wives) of Mongkut, the King of Siam, and, one presumes, nobody asked to see her immigration status.
The worlds of the elite and immigrants have always been intertwined, and rarely at a decent price, especially when it comes to care. That's what ought to shock more than the scale of the unfortunate Mr Brokenshire's political clangers and the number of Bulgarian cleaners now out of ministerial closets.
Document OB00000020140309ea390000q
