{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3155"}
____
  
Features
THE MAN WHO THINKS BIG
Fraser Nelson   
1,579 words
11 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
25
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The new Culture Secretary understands finance, passionately believes in free enterprise – and never trades on the fact that he is a working–class Asian boy made good, writes Fraser Nelson
When Sajid Javid started dating his wife, he immediately confessed how he'd like his life to pan out. He was still a teenager, and laid it on a bit thick – students are, after all, entitled to some wild dreams. He said he wanted to join a major international bank, and then if all went well he'd become a Conservative MP by the age of 40. He hoped to serve in the Cabinet. And then, when he was retired and sitting in his porch, he would look back – with the four children he intended to raise – on a life well lived.
There is not (yet) a house with a porch, but all the other pieces of Javid's plan have fallen into place. The 44–year–old father of four this week replaced Maria Miller as Culture Secretary, but not because of any love of interpretative dance. His story is one that George Osborne, who decides reshuffles, wants to hear told: a boy raised in poverty, who thought his way into the Conservative Party; the son of a Pakistani immigrant, who flourished in the City before entering politics to help others make a similar journey.
While the rags–to–riches story is impressive, it rather misses the point of Sajid Javid. What matters most is that he is a man of great intellect, force and efficacy who is capable of reshaping British government for the 21st century.
After Javid's promotion, there were inevitable suggestions that a politically correct government delighted in having an Asian face at the Cabinet table. While politics can work in such ways, Wall Street banks do not. When Chase Manhattan made Javid a vice–president at the age of 25, they did so because they regarded the young Brit as a game–changer who brought quick, radical solutions to problems that they did not know existed. The impatience and audacity relayed to his wife is his hallmark.
Javid has, reluctantly, grown used to telling his story – or, at least, parts of it. How his father came to Britain with £1 to his name, in search of what Michael Howard called "the British dream". He found it, insofar as his children grew up with opportunities that they would never have dared dream about in the Punjab.
From the offset, Sajid was marked out by his intellect. At school, he was so good at economics he was put in for the advanced paper. He passed with one of the best marks in the land. He hadn't, then, thought about university – not knowing anyone who had done so. His teacher urged him to apply for philosophy, politics and economics at Oxford, but he didn't. A near miss: he'd be a lot less distinctive in Westminster had he been spat out of the PPE sausage factory.
He plumped for Exeter, where he fell in with a group of young Tories who are now making waves. Robert Halfon and David Burrowes are now in Parliament; Tim Montgomerie is a political commentator. With them he set up the Exeter Enterprise Forum, committed to free markets and low regulation. He was thrown out of the 1990 Conservative Party conference hall for distributing a pamphlet he had written, entitled The ERM: A Fatal Mistake. Its final words were: "this will all end in tears". His father asked him why he was causing such trouble; didn't he like Thatcher? "Dad, I love her," he replied. "That's why I'm doing it." He was – and is – a Thatcherite first, and Conservative second.
Unlike his fellow political wonks, he then went into the City and joined Chase Manhattan, a Wall Street bank that was expanding in London after the Big Bang. It soon decided to experiment by sending this ambitious Brit to join its Ivy League trainees in America, to see how he would get on.
In training, he was asked to make pretend bets. He bet on the ERM ending in tears, and – like George Soros – was spectacularly vindicated.
It was just pretend money, but Javid emerged from that exercise having done better than any of the Americans he was up against. Chase Manhattan was impressed, and let him loose on real money. He moved on to emerging markets and invented an investment product that would tap into the growth of Mexico while hedging against its downsides. When this survived the socalled Tequila Crisis of 1994, Javid's star rose higher still. He was the first to spot that India's companies were more reliable than its government, and so deserved a better credit rating. This drew in lots of business for Chase. When he called the Russian crisis of 1998 before it happened, helping his bank dispose of its Russian debt just in time, his advice was worth millions. Soon afterwards, he was headhunted by Deutsche Bank and ended up running its trading division in Singapore and paid some £3 million a year.
After the expenses scandal broke five years ago, and several Tory seats became free, Javid was urged by his friends to come back from Singapore. He was swung by being told there was a financial crisis, and he was pretty good at finance. He liked the idea of being able to help his country as he had helped his old employers.
To understand Javid, it's crucial to understand how much he believes he owes Britain. He doesn't need to imagine what his life would have been like had his father not decided to come to Britain – he has cousins in rural Pakistan, living as farmers with none of his opportunities. His loyalty is not just to the country, but to the free enterprise system that allowed him to prosper. As soon as he entered Parliament, he joined the Free Enterprise Group of MPs urging radical policies on the Government. George Osborne would listen to them, and took Javid under his wing – first as parliamentary aide, then as a Treasury minister.
His ideas are all pretty radical. He holds no fear of Britain being outside the European Union, nor of the idea of £10 billion being lopped off the health budget. He wants the top rate of tax back down to 40 per cent (or lower) and resists attacks on bankers. Some of Osborne's forecasts suggest that, after the election, government spending will need to go back to levels not seen since 1948. This will require a fundamental rethink about what government is, and what it does. It's a horrible financial question – precisely the type that Javid likes to answer.
But as the new Culture Secretary, he will struggle to talk about his great love of the performing arts. He grew up in a household where renting a video was a rare treat, and is unlikely to try to disguise this point. It is, certainly, an odd casting. Javid's expertise is in finance, and the Treasury is not overflowing with good ideas about how best to grow the economy.
He now finds himself cast in the role of the working–class (Asian) boy done good, a card he has never played in his life. Coached by Osborne's formidable Treasury team, he has grown more used to talking about himself, but his hesitation still shows. This is why so few businessmen become good politicians. Outside Westminster, you can succeed by getting things done. Inside Parliament, it's all about building alliances, making arguments and bluffing, where necessary. Javid can still be too direct, too shy, too brittle for his own good. Already, broadcasters are struck by the difference between the friendly, chatty man who sits in reception and the serious, combative fellow who emerges as soon as the cameras start to roll. He would say he is in politics to do something, not be someone. But playing the role is very much part of the political game.
He will not welcome the fact, but Javid is an example of something the Tories want more of: second–generation immigrants who see their values as Conservative values. Javid now finds himself being asked about an Asian identity that he had thought came a very distant second to his British identity. He describes himself as Muslim, but not practising (his wife is a churchgoer). When asked about his ethnicity, he simply says: "I don't think about it." Nor has he had much cause to.
His constituency, Bromsgrove in the West Midlands, is 96 per cent white, and still elected him with a larger majority than his predecessor.
When the 18–year–old Javid was describing his career plan to his wife, something was noticeable by its absence – his career plan never involved being prime minister. This is because he was being quite serious: he wanted the chance to change Britain, not to run Britain. Culture Secretary may not be quite the job he had in mind but his promotion has laid down a marker. Whatever the future of the Conservative Party, Sajid Javid will play a large part in it.
"To understand Javid, it's crucial to understand how much he believes he owes Britain
"He holds no fear of Britain being outside the EU, nor of £10 billion being cut from the NHS
Document DT00000020140411ea4b0001h
