{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2003"}
____
  
NEWS
Ukip ad appears next to 'No Poles Required' billboard
By Auslan Cramb Scottish Correspondent   
407 words
29 April 2014
16:35
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Billboard for Nigel Farage's party 'accidentally' placed beside advert for inflatable tents that have no need for poles
A Ukip campaign poster has appeared on a billboard beside an ad for inflatable tents that bears the slogan, "NO POLES REQUIRED!".
The advertisement is for a range of camping equipment stocked by the retailer Go Outdoors.
The neighbouring Ukip poster for the European election states that the UK “pays £55 million a day to the EU and its Eurocrats”, and contrasts a crowded bus with a businessman in a luxury car, and the slogan, “Your daily grind... funds his celebrity lifestyle”.
The siting of the posters in the Granton area of Edinburgh is believed to be coincidental, but has been described as insensitive and unfortunate.
Steve Cardownie, an SNP councillor for the area, said that given Ukip’s stance on immigration the juxtaposition was insensitive, adding: “People might think it's funny, but it's the kind of message Ukip are trying to get over.
“You would have thought somebody would have the presence of mind to realise what message it's putting over.
"When it comes to questions of immigrant workers we have to be very careful. It does send out the wrong message. It's too close to home with Ukip, it's unfortunate. It's too dangerous to be funny.
"I would urge the tent company to do what they can to repair matters as soon as possible.”
Vicki Redpath, a Labour councillor, said “all sorts of people could take offence”, adding: “It's probably a stupid mistake where someone hasn't thought about the consequences."
A spokesman for Nigel Farage’s party said there was no intent, adding: “I do not believe people are getting upset.
"I think people will look at it with a wry smile. The posters are two completely different things juxtaposed in a wry way by accident.”
Last week, Mr Farage defended his party’s election campaign and denied that some of its posters were “racist”. One billboard states: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?" alongside a giant hand pointing at the viewer.
The camping ad was spotted by Willie Dunn, a charity worker from East Calder, West Lothian, who shared a photograph on Twitter with the words "Saw this in Edinburgh, seriously bad placement!"
Document TELUK00020140429ea4t002pc
