{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2102"}
____
  
NEWS
Ukip are the pro-Europeans' most dangerous weapon
By Bill Cash Conservative MP for Stone   
730 words
18 May 2014
07:50
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage is toxifying the debate on Europe and undermining his own cause, says Bill Cash MP
The biggest asset that EU-integrationists like Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband have is Ukip.
Ukip’s hope is that they can succeed in splitting the Euro-realist vote and, by taking enough votes in Conservative marginals to prevent a majority Conservative government from being elected to renegotiate our membership of the EU, to legislate to change EU laws and our EU relationship and to give the British people a say in an in/out referendum.
Many people do not know this but to have a referendum at all, a Bill for this has first to be passed by a majority in the House of Commons to pay for it.
On their leaflets, Ukip claim: "Only Ukip will take back control." How? They don’t have one MP, let alone a majority in the Commons.
That fact was underlined in the lobbies of Parliament earlier this year, when Labour and Liberal Democrat peers conspired with some of their colleagues in the House of Commons to kill James Wharton’s exclusively Conservative EU Referendum Bill, which I helped to draft.
But for them, there would now be a Conservative referendum Act. Ukip were nowhere.
Worse still, even before a single vote is cast in the 2015 general election, Nigel Farage is causing untold damage to the cause of opposition to European political integration. He is the problem. By his divisive rhetoric he is toxifying the debate. Furthermore, by undermining Conservative marginals, he is trying to destroy the only party which will deliver a majority for the cause he claims to champion. He is his own worst enemy.
His interview on LBC radio on Friday was a case in point. It was an unedifying and, at times, a shocking listen.
Under robust questioning from the host, James O’Brien, Mr Farage implied that immigrants in Britain commuting home from work ought to think twice before they speak their own first language on the train.
He claimed that you "know" what the difference is between living next-door to a German family and a Romanian family. What next?
He has claimed in the past that there is bound to be a culture of criminality among Romanians and that Britons should be wary of Romanian families moving into our streets.
All this in the same week that a young Asian Ukip activist resigned her membership of the party, claiming that Ukip has "descended into a form of racist populism".
It’s not just over the airwaves that Nigel Farage, now the Del Boy of British politics, is casting a pall over this European election campaign.
Lurid Ukip posters loom out of billboards across the country. A giant pointing finger aims to put people in fear of their livelihoods. An actor poses as a builder made homeless by EU immigration.
Amusingly, it transpired the actor was himself an immigrant from Ireland. On a less savoury note, a UKIP activist posing as a builder in one of Ukip’s recent election broadcasts was expelled from the party over a series of foul and racist Twitter posts.
This is not the kind of British debate that I and many others have taken part in over all these years, relentlessly shifting the argument against European integration.
Time and again, when we have taken on the EU-integrationists we have defeated them by analysis and argument. We have made our case by deploying facts and exposing falsehood, not by alarmist rhetoric.
This great, popular campaign has always been about protecting our British democracy and the hard-won freedoms which are our birth right, now and in the future.
Nigel Farage claims to champion the same cause, but by taking the debate down the road he has embarked on, he is simply playing into the hands of our pro-European opponents once again.
Ukip like to present the question as being one between good and bad, light and shade, but what they do is to generate a dark, reactionary Euro-phobia.
Our case has always been made on the moderate, common ground in line with British democratic values. Nigel Farage’s divisive and increasingly nasty campaign risks poisoning the well of this crucial and truly patriotic debate.
Document TELUK00020140518ea5i000p3
