{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"417"}
____
  
News
Many immigrants 'are better qualified than white Britons'
Rosemary Bennett   
620 words
11 March 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Immigrants to Britain are better qualified than the existing population — and many of those who settled here generations ago are considerably outperforming their white neighbours in education, according to a new study.
It found that more than a third of people who were born outside the United Kingdom but are now living here have degrees, compared with just one in four of those born and bred in Britain.
In addition, the figures show members of some ethnic minorities are more likely to have a degree and less likely to have no qualifications than their white counterparts.
Chinese, Black African and Indian communities all have a higher proportion of graduates than all other ethnic groups, including white Britons.
The findings, in research conducted by Manchester University, are based on the 2011 census.
Researchers also found that many ethnic minorities have seen bigger overall improvements in education standards over the last 20 years.
The study also challenges the concept that immigration to the UK has imported poverty.
Even the ethnic groups considered the most disadvantaged are rapidly catching up on white Britons, the study says. In Bangladeshi and Pakistani communities, 28 and 29 per cent respectively have no qualifications at all.
That compares with 24 per cent of white Britons.
However, in the course of ten years up to 2011, the proportion has fallen by 19 per cent among Bangladeshi and by 16 per cent among Pakistani people, compared with a more modest fall of five per cent among white Britons.
Black Africans have the lowest proportion of unqualified people at just 11 per cent.
The data comes as politicians are involved in a bitter dispute over the economic contribution made by immigration, and the cost to the existing population.
The Government has been accused of burying a report that suggests there is little cost to the economy because the Conservatives are eager to appear tough on the issue of immigration.
Kitty Lymperopoulou, co-author of the report produced by the university's Centre on Dynamics of Ethnicity, said the findings suggested that considerable progress was being made in access to education.
"Over the last 20 years, educational attainment has been increasing among ethnic groups as a result of an improvement in access to education overseas and the increasing proportion of ethnic minority people educated in Britain," she said. "Though this is good news for ethnic minorities, we need to remember that despite achievement gaps between some ethnic groups and white British people narrowing or even disappearing, ethnic minority groups continue to experience inequalities in education and the labour market."
Ms Lymperopoulou said that the weaker performance from the Bangladeshi and Pakistani communities was due to cultural as well as economic reasons.
"This partly reflects the lower rates of participation in education among Pakistani and Bangladeshi women, but also other factors including poverty and discrimination," she said.
The study highlighted that some ethnic groups continue to lag behind with no signs of progress.
Almost two thirds of white gypsy/ Irish travellers have no qualifications, making them more than twice as educationally disadvantaged as white people.
However the relative poor performance of white Britons will cause further concern in government.
Research from the London School of Economics recently found that white children came out consistently worst in a performance measure that tracks the progress made by children between primary school and taking their GCSEs.
At 16, the proportion of white British pupils awarded five or more GCSEs with a C grade or above, including English and maths, was lower than that for pupils from a long list of other nationalities including Chinese, Sri Lankan, Nigerian, Vietnamese, Indian, Ghanaian, Bangladeshi and Sierra Leonean.
Document T000000020140311ea3b0006o
