{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3308"}
____
  
News
Romanians and Bulgarians aren't coming for your job. So will Nigel Farage admit he was wrong?
By Dan Hodges   
661 words
14 May 2014
13:33
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
So they’re not coming for your job after all. The ONS has today released the first set of figures for the number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in the UK since the lifting of transitional controls in January. It has fallen by 4,000.
In response, Danny Alexander, Chief Secretary to the Treasury, said the figure “gives the lie to Ukip's scaremongering on immigration". He added: "The very modest number of Romanians and Bulgarians coming to work in Britain this year is in stark contrast to the inflammatory rhetoric of earlier this year.”
Danny Alexander is right. In November, under the headline 窶彝emember, it'll be Albanians next窶, Nigel Farage wrote: “In only a few weeks’ time the borders will be flung wide open to millions of people from Romania and Bulgaria who, like the rest of the EU, will be able to live, work, settle and claim benefits in the UK.”
Then we had the posters. “26 million people are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?” shrieked one. “EU policy at work. British workers are hit hard by cheap labour”, said another, complete with a picture of an unemployed construction worker begging in the street.
And as Alexander says, those posters told a lie. One gigantic lie. The Romanians and Bulgarians are not swarming through borders that have been “flung wide open”. Yes, net migration from across the EU is rising. And as it does so unemployment is falling. There are now fewer people unemployed in this country than in 2009. The economy is expanding. The cost of living crisis is easing. Inflation is falling. The Governor of the Bank of England has just confirmed historically low levels of interest rates will be sustained.
As I’ve noted before, the opponents of immigration are fond of calling for an “honest and open debate”. Well today will prove the acid test. The opponents of immigration told us the lifting of transitional controls would see a huge number of Romanian and Bulgarian migrants entering the UK to take up employment. Special coaches were being chartered, we were told. And those claims and reports were wrong. Now, will those who yearn for an honest and open debate now have the courage and good grace to admit they were wrong?
We were told by the opponents of immigration that the new influx of migrants would start as soon as the “floodgates” were opened. Then, when they didn’t appear in the first few days, we were told they were biding their time. Waiting a few weeks till the media's attention had turned elsewhere. And again, those claiming that were wrong. Will they now admit they were wrong?
We were told by the opponents of immigration that thousands of British jobs were under threat – 5,000 a week was the Ukip estimate. And that was wrong. Will Nigel Farage, the straightest talking politician outside the Westminster bubble, admit he was wrong?
I suspect not. As we’ve seen over the past few weeks, those who claim to want an “honest and open debate” about immigration don’t actually want a debate at all. They want to lie : 26 million Europeans are after your job. They want to scare: we’re facing a Romanian crime wave. The want to smear: it’ll be the Albanians next.
The fact Ukip has been running what amounts to a racist Euro election campaign has been evident for some time. Yesterday it was the turn of Ukip窶冱 own youth spokeswoman Sanya-Jeet Thandi to point out the party “has descended into a terrifying form of racist populism".
But it’s now clear that, as well as running a campaign built upon racist populism, Ukip are running a campaign built upon a lie. And today was the day the lie was finally nailed.
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e004vd
