{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"2863"}
____
  
A game of unhappy families for Bejo
REVIEWS BY LAURENCE PHELAN   
916 words
29 March 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
34,35
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
NEW RELEASES FILM OF THE WEEK
THE PAST (12A) *****
Dir. Asghar Farhadi; Starring Bérénice Bejo, Ali Mosaffa, 130mins
Asghar Farhadi's follow up to the international hit A Separation is another dramatically rich, layered and engrossing film about the ties that bind. Ahmed (Ali Mosaffa) arrives in suburban Paris from Tehran to finalise his divorce from Marie (Bérénice Bejo), who wishes to marry Samir (Tahar Rahim), whose first wife is in a coma. But, picking up the pieces of information that Farhadi has scattered artfully throughout the sinuous narrative, we can see that there is still something between Ahmed and Marie, that Marie and Samir's relationship is straining, and that the three children involved have their own not insignificant worries.
It is about a kind of love that is less often shown in the movies. The long-established kind, when it isn't passion and desire holding people together but entangled histories and circumstances. Its French setting means that there isn't the extra layer of complication that Iranian social mores provided in A Separation, but it is complicated enough. With its sympathies forever shifting among its characters, the film asks whether the truth is ever even objectively knowable, let alone whether honesty is always the best policy. And the drama plays out against a detailed and textured backdrop of domestic family life: the school run; a father cutting his son's fingernails in the bath.
The intensity of Farhadi's focus means that The Past would seem to be about minutiae. But it is crucially important minutiae, to the point where the dramatic climax hinges on the most fractional twitch of a muscle.
MUPPETS MOST WANTED (U) ***
Dir. James Bobin; Starring Ricky Gervais, Tina Fey, 113mins
From the lavish opening musical number, "We're Doing a Sequel", onwards, the Muppets Most Wanted is a riotous, self-aware, and pop-savvy laugh machine full of colour, daffy gags and cameos, featuring such sights as Miss Piggy duetting with Celine Dion, and Christoph Waltz dancing the waltz. But Ricky Gervais is an underwhelming bad guy. And it doesn't have the adorable charm of the 2011 film that brought all the gang back together.
AFTERNOON DELIGHT(18) ****
Dir. Jill Soloway; Starring Kathryn Hahn, Juno Temple, 96mins
A bored rich LA housewife in a loving but sexless marriage befriends a young prostitute, thinking that she might be able to help her, not realising that she is probably in need of some help herself. Deftly swerving around potential clichés, and preferring not to judge, this bittersweet relationships movie instead locates the comedy and the truth in its scenes of mid-life and marital discomfort.
ALMOST MARRIED (15) *
Dir. Ben Cookson; Starring Philip McGinley, Emily Atack, 97mins
A comedy about infidelity, STDs, and a man who can't sleep with his fiancée because he's committed the former and picked up the latter, requires a carefully judged tone and very likeable performances. This low-budget British film doesn't have them.
CAPTAIN AMERICA: THE WINTER SOLDIER (12A) ***
Dir. Anthony Russo + Joe Russo; Starring Chris Evans, Scarlett Johansson, 136mins
When the S.H.I.E.L.D. agency is compromised and the security of the whole world threatened, it is left to Captain America and the Black Widow to investigate. The other Avengers are probably on holiday. This ninth film set in what they call the Marvel Cinematic Universe gives you all of the fighting, shooting and things blowing up that you could possibly wish to see, and stylishly. But nothing more. There aren't any of the clever plot developments of, for example, Iron Man 3. And the period detailing and the stand-up-for-the-little-guy attitude of the first film are also sadly gone.
THE BORDERLANDS (15) **
Dir. Elliot Goldner; Starring Robin Hill, Gordon Kennedy, 89mins
Three men are sent on behalf of the Catholic Church to investigate claims of a miracle in rural Devon. The events that eventually befall them are strange even for rural Devon, but, like most low-budget found-footage horror films, this is more boring than it is scary.
20 FEET FROM STARDOM (12A) ****
Dir. Morgan Neville, 91mins
This Oscar-winning documentary, as the best documentaries often do, shines a spotlight onto previously unsung subjects. In this case, the backing singers who made acts including Elvis, Stevie Wonder and the Rolling Stones sound good: strong women, often from a gospel background, who discuss their place in the industry and reveal fascinating facets of their craft.
DANGEROUS ACTS (NC) ***
Dir. Madeleine Sackler, 76mins
A non-fiction film following a small Belarusian theatre company whose members endure censorship, persecution, imprisonment, exile and the threat of worse, for their support of the opposition leader in the rigged elections of 2010, and for their powerful pieces about life in "Europe's last dictatorship".
THE FOLD (15) **
Dir. John Jencks; Starring Catherine McCormack, Marina Stoimenova, 87mins
A dreary and not entirely convincing drama about the relationship between a vicar grieving the death of her daughter, and a suicidal teenage immigrant flower-picker in the vicar's new parish.
MY STUFF (15) *
Dir. Petri Luukkainen, 81mins
A homemade documentary in which a Finnish twenty-something puts all of his possessions into storage, retrieving them at the rate of one item per day for a year. This experiment into non-materialist living is apparently a success, though it doesn't cure him of his self-involvement.
Document IND0000020140329ea3t0004y
