{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3793"}
____
  
Features
Points
513 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Ulster
22
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
FLAWED CRUSADE Pope Francis's social-policy adviser Margaret Archer wants trafficked women to be allowed to get residency and citizenship in the West because, she says, "They did not come here voluntarily; they are not illegal immigrants" ("Woman takes lead in Pope's crusade", News, last week). However, almost all have been smuggled, albeit with the promise or hope of decent work. Of course they must be rescued from the abuse they find themselves in, but then deported. Pope Francis has described himself as "the pastor of a church without frontiers". He should not be listened to on the subject of immigration. Áine Ní Chonaill Immigration Control Platform, Dublin 2 GUITAR GRATES On his piece on Bernard Butler last week ("A new string to his axe", Culture) Dan Cairns describes the Fender Stratocaster as "arguably one of the least loved of all guitars". Eh? The list of famous Stratocaster lovers is lengthy, but to name just a few: Buddy Holly, Hank Marvin, Jimi Hendrix.
 The Stratocaster may not have the faux-coolness bestowed on some other guitars by indie acts (Jaguar? Please!), but those of us who have fallen under its spell would beg to differ with Cairns's opinion. Seán O'Flynn Kilcolgan, Co Galway CAUTION ON CANCER TESTS I support your campaign to beat cancer, but when discussing early diagnosis we must differentiate between screening tests and those used to investigate patients presenting with symptoms ("Young die as NHS rules deny them cancer tests", News, April 13). In Britain screening for cervical cancer is restricted to those over 25. Medical literature demonstrates that routinely performing smear tests on women younger than this age does little to reduce rates of invasive cancer or mortality, but does increase the number of false positive results obtained — along with all the attendant harms that spurious results bring about (further invasive investigations and unpleasant treatments). Conversely a young woman presenting to her doctor with symptoms that are suggestive of cervical cancer should, of course, be offered appropriate and timely investigation, regardless of her age. Dr Liam Scott Cheltenham, Gloucestershire GOING TO EXTREMES What evidence does William Shawcross, chairman of the Charity Commission, have for his assertion that "Islamist extremism" is a growing problem for UK charities ("'Deadliest threat' to charities is extremism", News, last week)? A recent survey of Muslim aid agencies by us found that 88% had regulations in place to prevent the financing of terrorism and had adopted measures to protect against terrorist abuse. Our members are vigilant in working to ensure that material aid and funding do not get into the wrong hands. Shawcross says Islamist extremism is not the most widespread abuse that charities face, so why not focus on what he believes the most rife problem to be? Dr Hany El-Banna OBE Chairman, Muslim Charities Forum, London W5 Letters should arrive by midday on Thursday and include the full address and a daytime and an evening telephone number. Please quote date, section and page number. We may edit letters, which must be exclusive to The Sunday Times
Document ST00000020140427ea4r0010n
