{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"625"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
The Tories have both motive and opportunity to Taser the police [CORRECTED]
ADAM BOULTON   
1,116 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
21
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Publisher Notice: The above article incorrectly states that Sir Paul Stephenson resigned as Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Service "for accepting favours from a former News of the World executive". We are happy to make this clear.
The British police may not be the best in the world. Twentyone years after the murder of their son Stephen by racist thugs, Doreen and Neville Lawrence have still not had justice. The home secretary Theresa May admits the initial investigation was "deeply flawed". On Thursday, announcing the findings of an inquiry by Mark Ellison QC, May told MPs that, far from catching the killers, the police sent an undercover spy into the Lawrence family camp to relay "fascinating and valuable" intelligence to the team preparing the defence of Sir Paul Condon, then Metropolitan police commissioner, against charges of incompetence or worse.
One senior officer in the counterterrorism squad is sidelined, another officer is under criminal investigation, and Ellison is investigating how many convictions may be overturned because of improper conduct by undercover officers. May said his findings were "deeply disturbing". The prime minister was very shocked. London mayor Boris Johnson called it "sickening".
All this comes as the Conservatives are talking more openly about who might be the next leader of the party. Johnson furiously dismissed speculation last week that he should return to parliament now to join David Cameron's loyal supporters.
The mayor put the record straight directly with Cameron after last week's Westminster Abbey memorial service for Nelson Mandela. The occasion must have reminded them that Mandela was an early champion of justice for the Lawrence family, having met them in London in May 1993, a month after Stephen's murder, to back their call for prompter action by the police.
Some in City Hall believe the home secretary was burnishing her credentials as a candidate last week, with her outspoken condemnation in her Commons statement of police conduct. Certainly both the May and the Boris camps are flexing their muscles over law and order in the capital. Oversight of the Met used to reside with the home secretary but it passed to the mayor and probably represents his most significant power.
The mayor is is now responsible for the Met's priorities and performance, and, with the home secretary, appoints "Britain's top cop", the Metropolitan commissioner. Some may wonder why anyone wants that job, given the fate of recent incumbents.
Shortly after becoming mayor in 2008, Johnson ushered the Blairite Met commissioner Sir Ian Blair off the premises in the aftermath of the shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes in 2005. His successor resigned after 2½ years in the job for accepting favours from a former News of the World executive.
The pressure is now on current commissioner Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, who is doing all he can to prevent his future becoming a bone of contention between the mayor and the home secretary. They both put him in the job as a compromise candidate after the government's idea of bringing in an American outsider, Bill Bratton, the former chief of New York and Los Angeles police, ran into resistance.
Hogan-Howe has deftly bent to the whims of his rival bosses. He backed the mayor on water cannon for the Met and supports May on curbs to stop-andsearch powers, a matter on which she is still in dispute with David Cameron. Black people are seven times more likely than whites to be stopped by the police. The home secretary argues that this is both an inefficient way of fighting crime and carries the whiff of "institutional racism" first put in common parlance by the Macpherson inquiry into police handling of the Lawrence murder.
Home secretary, commissioner and mayor are united in the view that the Met must be made to look more representative of diverse London, but accept that the practical transformation of the police profile has barely begun.
Hogan-Howe describes the revelations of police spying and corruption as the worst day of his career and pledged to reform the Met. The mayor was noticeably warmer towards the commissioner than May, insisting that he was "absolutely ... right to be ruthless in pursuing all suggestions of past misconduct and corruption".
Boris and May serve different constituencies and so diverge on key questions. The home secretary, for example, chooses to talk and act tough on immigration and deportation because she has inoculated herself against accusations of primitivism by her stands on stop-andsearch and justice for the Lawrences. Boris is tied to the performance of his police force and needs to hug it close, but the Conservative party has distanced itself. "We don't go around saying the police are the backbone of the nation any more," one Cameronite commented.
On questions such as pay, pensions, and absenteeism, the government sees the police as just another awkward manifestation of the public sector. May is seizing on police errors to force reforms, using the Lawrence revelations to introduce an offence of "police corruption". The Conservative party increasingly shares this suspicious approach to the forces of law and order. David Davis has led the attack on the Met and the Police Federation over the Andrew Mitchell affair. Jacob Rees-Mogg has called for Hogan-Howe's resignation.
Mitchell's tribulations should not be overestimated in all this. He has been vindicated in two important side issues: the serving police officer's false claim to have witnessed his "pleb" row as a passer-by, and the attempt by Police Federation activists to misrepresent a meeting with him. Yet the question of what Mitchell said to the police at the No 10 gate remains unresolved after investigation by the cabinet secretary, the police and the Crown Prosecution Service. The libel case brought by PC Toby Rowland against Mitchell may settle it.
These are just a few of the problems piling up in Hogan-Howe's in-tray. The Independent Police Complaints Commission is looking into his role at the Hillsborough disaster when an inspector in the South Yorkshire constabulary. MPs are challenging the veracity of police crime statistics. Internal Met investigations report "endemic corruption" by organised crime.
By far the most serious are the issues raised by the inquiries into the Lawrence case and the use and abuse of undercover agents. They didn't happen on Hogan-Howe's watch but he has pledged to clear up the mess. Cameron and May say he has set himself a massive task. If he fails, they'll know who to blame, and it won't be them.
@adamboultonsky
Document ST00000020140309ea39000q7
