{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3110"}
____
  
News
Ukip suspends 'poster boy' over racist tweets
OLIVER WRIGHT WHITEHALL EDITOR   
452 words
25 April 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
4,5
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News
Ukip has been forced to suspend the "poster boy" of its European party election broadcast, after it was revealed he had posted a series of vile racist comments on Twitter.
Andre Lampitt, a builder, was one of the principal characters in a slickly produced promotional film that was aired on the BBC and ITV on Tuesday night.
Mr Lampitt, who is on the Ukip candidate list for Merton council, was shown walking across a building site describing the difficulty he had finding work as a result of unrestricted immigration from Europe. "Since the lads from Eastern Europe are prepared to work for a lot less than anybody else, I've found it a real struggle," he lamented. "It's getting hard to provide for my family."
But despite appearing to be an immigrant himself from Zimbabwe it was Mr Lampitt's other views which landed him in hot water. In a series of tweets going back over more than a year, he reveals his thoughts on everything from Muslims to Aids, Syria and forced sterilisation. They do not make pretty reading.
He wrote: "Muslims are animals their faith is disgusting their prophet is [a] pedophile" [sic].
Other topics he addressed include Ed Miliband ("He is Polish and not British so how'd he know what's good for Britain?") and Africa ("I was born and grew up in Africa please leave Africa for the Africans let them kill themselves off").
A party spokesman said: "We are deeply shocked that Mr Lampitt has expressed such repellent views. His membership has been suspended immediately pending a full disciplinary process."
Party sources described the latest embarrassment as "demoralising" after Ukip's leader, Nigel Farage, said he would drive out "Walter Mitty"-style characters ahead of elections. "It is depressing that someone like that had got through the net," they said.
But the Liberal Democrat president, Tim Farron, suggested that it showed the true nature of some Ukip supporters. "These staggeringly racist views might even make the BNP wince with embarrassment," he said.
LAMPITT'S TWEETS
"All Muslims needs to leave Europe America and Oz, or denounce their pathetic satanic religion."
"I loathe Oxfam. They are raising money for future dictators. I grew up in Africa, let them kill themselves off."
"Inner peace will come when Aids does what it should and reduce African density."
"Born British in Rhodesia and proud of heritage sad at how Britain is run."
"At least Putin loves his country. David Cameron does not love Britain he loves the EU."
"Most Nigerians are generally bad people I grew up in Africa and dare anyone to prove me wrong."
Document IND0000020140425ea4p0000q
