{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3702"}
____
  
News
Charles right for calling Putin Hitler
Cyril Dixon   
620 words
22 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Northeast
7
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
PRINCE Charles is to be spared an awkward face-to-face meeting with Vladamir Putin after he compared the Russian leader to Adolf Hitler.
Both men are due to attend a memorial for the 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings in France.
But the Prince's spokesman confirmed yesterday that they will not have a direct meeting at the Ceremony of Remembrance in Normandy on June 6. It came as hundreds of supporters took to Twitter to say they agreed with Charles and praise him for speaking out.
World leaders and heads of state are expected to sit together during the Normandy events but Clarence House said there was no possibility of President Putin and Charles meeting and that the Prince would leave "immediately afterwards".
His remarks about Mr Putin were made in Canada during a visit to the Museum of Immigration in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on Tuesday.
Referring to Russian involvement in Ukraine he told a museum volunteer, who had described her flight from Nazi-occupied Poland: "Putin is doing just about the same as Hitler."
His remarks - made privately to Marienne Ferguson but overheard by witnesses - were seen as a breach of the convention under which senior royals avoid making political statements.
But Mrs Ferguson, 72, who settled in Canada after the Second World War, said: "I must say that I agree with him and am sure a lot of people do." Similar sentiments were expressed on Twitter yesterday.
One supporter called @Dr Rumba said: "Prince Charles simply said what politicians are afraid to say politically."
And @Karen b said: "I agree with Prince Charles he will be a great King of England."
But in Moscow the reaction was quite different. A news source close to the Kremlin accused the Prince of risking an "international scandal".
And the website of popular newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets warned that Charles "risks complicating the already far from cloudless relations between Great Britain and Russia".
The Prince himself continued his tour of Canada yesterday apparently unruffled by the row.
He even confronted a bear - but not a Russian one. Instead he met a polar bear called Hudson at a zoo in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Back in Britain, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg spoke up for Charles saying: "I have never been of this view that if you are a member of the Royal Family, somehow you have to enter into some Trappist vow of silence. I think he is entitled to his views."
Prime Minister David Cameron refused to give an opinion on the comments, despite being asked three times in an interview on BBC Radio 4's World at One.
He said: "I'm not going to comment on the private conversations of anyone, least of all Prince Charles."
Labour leader Ed Miliband said: "Lots of people across the country will share Prince Charles concern about President Putin and his actions in the Ukraine.
"I think he has got a point about President Putin's actions and I think he is absolutely entitled to say that there are real concerns about that."
A Clarence House spokesman said: "We would like to stress that the Prince of Wales would not seek to make a public political statement during a private conversation."
comment: page 12
Yes: 0901 792 5306 no: 0901 792 5307 Yes text DXTHURYES to 86611 no text DXTHURNO to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight. q Is Prince Charles right to express his concerns on Putin?
Document THEEXP0020140522ea5m0001x
