{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"811"}
____
  
News
The splendours of spring in New England
Paul Roberts   
1,128 words
26 February 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
19
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
In association with Noble Caledonia
Explore the glories of the USA's northern seaboard on a fascinating small–ship voyage, says Paul Roberts
The north–eastern seaboard of the US provides a living lesson in American history, taught in one of the world's most attractive classrooms. Along this coastline of rocky bays, forested hills, oldworld cities and picture–perfect villages, a fledgling nation forged her own identity and stamped her personality on the world.
At Philadelphia, the Declaration of Independence was first penned. At Washington DC, an empty wilderness became one of the world's most majestic capitals. At Ellis Island, America welcomed more than 12 million immigrants and made them her own. At Kitty Hawk, two shy brothers inaugurated the age of the aeroplane.
In some places history can be felt as a living force – at Martha's Vineyard, propelled from rough whaling centre to chic celebrity playground, or Bar Harbor, where magnates from smoking industrial cities created the green paradise of Acadia, one of the country's first national parks.
In others time has stood still, as at Mount Vernon where visitors can step back more than 200 years into the home of America's most celebrated son, George Washington.
The best way to experience these natural and historical riches is to arrive as the original settlers did, by sea – and guided by experts who can give unique insights into every destination.
This is exactly the aim of two tours being organised in May 2015 by connoisseur cruise operator Noble Caledonia, under the enticing banner "Splendours of Spring in New England".
For more than two decades Noble Caledonia has specialised in offering a range of trips that are educational, enjoyable and, above all, different Unlike most travel companies, its voyages are constantly evolving, shaped by actfile world events, new discoveries, historic themes and the sheer drama of human endeavour.
If the word "cruise" suggests inhabiting a floating metropolis with excursions blighted by a seething throng of passengers, fear not. For both these trips Noble Caledonia has chartered American Glory, a boutique ship accommodating just 49 guests in a choice of spacious staterooms with large picture windows or private balconies.
She's big enough to offer every amenity, from a large sun deck with putting green to a delightful restaurant where every seat commands a panoramic view.
But she's small enough to create a relaxed, friendly, "country club" atmosphere – and, on the second cruise, to leave the Atlantic and scoot nimbly up the Hudson River as far as historic Albany.
Everything is included in the price, from scheduled flights and all excursions, to full board, drinks with meals, taxes and gratuities. Each shore trip is led by an expert local guide, and onboard experts and historians will enhance your knowledge of the places you visit through informal lectures and discussions.
Both itineraries are designed to provide a real insight into the history, culture and natural beauty of the north–eastern seaboard. The first tour, the 13–night "History and Nature of the American East Coast", begins at Alexandria, the port of Washington DC, on May 8,2015.
The first excursion is Mount Vernon, overlooking the grand Potomac River and frozen in time in 1799, shortly before Washington's death. Afterwards there's a tour of the city that bears his name, or a browse in Alexandria's art and craft stores.
In 1903, the sand dunes of Kitty Hawk provided a perfect and private test–bed for the world's first aeroplane, and park rangers at the Wright Brothers National Memorial will recreate all the excitement of those pioneering flights.
Reaching Yorktown, a drive through the Virginian countryside takes you to the 18th–century colonial city of WiUiamsburg. There's more history the next day in Baltimore, also a centre for crab fishing. After Philadelphia, cradle of democracy, American Glory sails past the Statue of Liberty into New York where an orientation tour takes in the city's highlights.
She moors overnight, so you could visit Greenwich Village or take in a Broadway show, perhaps, before a morning harbour cruise to Ellis Island, where the superb museum gives a poignant insight into the immigrant experience.
At Newport, Rhode Island, with its vividly painted wooden houses, an afternoon tour explores the ocean–side mansions built by 19th–century socialites, culminating in Cornelius Vanderbilt II's 70–room pile, The Breakers.
Martha's Vineyard, with its fishing villages and serene beaches, is alive with history. Edgartown is an architectural gem of 18th– and 19th–century sea captains' houses, while the Old Whaling Church is one of New England's finest Greek Revival buildings.
After a scenic cruise though the Calendar Islands of Casco Bay, American Glory arrives in historic Portland, Maine, a city of cobbled streets with a classic 18th–century lighthouse. Bar Harbor, with its rock–bound coast and pink granite cliffs, is one of America's most venerable resorts. Here you can sail between sleepy islands among eagles and harbour seals, or tour Acadia National Park and Cadillac Mountain with sweeping views over island–studded Frenchman Bay.
The final destination is Bost on, "the Athens of America", with visits to Old North Church, where Paul Revere began his famous ride, Beacon Hill's lovely turn–of–the–century houses and the three–masted frigate USS Constitution, the oldest commissioned warship afloat.
The second tour, "Spring in '–New England", lasts 12 nights ' and sails from Boston on May 20, 2015. It follows the first tour's route to New York, with extra stops at Camden and the whaling centre of Nantucket Island. Pretty Camden is an archetypal New England town, with white–steepled churches, narrow streets and stately old homes.
At New York, American Glory leaves the Atlantic for two nights on the mighty Hudson River, beginning with an afternoon in idyllic Poughkeepsie, home town of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt.
Then it's up–river to Albany, one of the oldest settlements in America, before turning downstream again to Sleepy Hollow. This riverside town was immortalised in the works of Washington Irving, creator of Rip Van Winkle, and his country home, Sunnyside, retains fascinating memories of the man.
A final 24 hours in New York makes a fitting end to this glorious tour, before guests reluctantly fly home to London.
Factfile
Noble Caledonia's Splendours of Spring in New England, departing in May 2015, costs from £5,995 per person including flights, full–board accommodation on board American Glory including wine, beer and soft drinks with lunch and dinner, shore excursions, Noble Caledonia Tour Manager, transfers, port taxes and all gratuities.
'American Glory sails past the Statue of Liberty into New York where she moors overnight'
Document DT00000020140226ea2q0006a
