{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"372"}
____
  
Guardian Comment and Debate Pages
Diary: Hugh Muir
Hugh Muir   
730 words
1 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
39
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
✒What would be the fate of EU migrants if Nigel Farage marched into Downing Street? As journalist Ros Taylor points out in her excellent blog @EasterlyEU, the answer was once simple: very many faced the threat of deportation. "EU citizens who have been established in the UK for seven years or more will, depending on their circumstances, be able to apply for permanent leave to remain (provided they fulfil certain criteria and are eligible to apply for work permits)," the policy said. Taylor notes: "This has now vanished from Ukip's website." Instead it reads: "Immigrants must financially support themselves and their dependents [sic] for five years. This means private health insurance (except emergency medical care), private education and private housing." So that's newcomers. But what of those already here? "Has Farage just granted them an amnesty, or does the party's commitment to leaving the union mean that they would no longer have the right to remain?" asks Taylor.
 And will expats be summoned back?
✒Farage walks away from the parliamentary vacancy in Newark. If I stood and lost, he told the BBC, "the bubble would burst". But it's for the best. He's in the right place. This is one of his recent contributions: "Is the commission aware that pornographic images which were posted on a public web profile by a head of cabinet and placed on file as exonerating evidence in criminal proceedings went missing during investigations carried out by the Belgian judicial authorities as part of the criminal proceedings, which were brought by the head of cabinet in 2007 and in which a member of the commission president's cabinet is a witness for the prosecution? Did a member of the commission president's cabinet play a part in the disappearance of the pornographic images?" In the Dog and Duck they speak of nothing else.
✒All eyes on Newark, the seat vacated by former Tory minister Patrick Mercer following allegations relating to parliamentary lobbying. Time to "fess up", he said. Admirable. It's worth saying, nonetheless, that our dealings with Mercer weren't entirely satisfactory. He gave his imprimatur to Glen Jenvey, a self-styled security expert, describing him as "an extremely capable and knowledgeable analyst who needs to be listened to". Soon it transpired that Jenvey had been feeding dodgy stories to the redtops. Asked about that, Mercer told us he had enjoyed slight dealings with Jenvey. Then, thanks to a dogged blogger, we learned that Mercer's office had actually been helping Jenvey pitch material to the Sunday papers. So he will be missed, but not by us.
✒A fresh episode of Friends. The one where Chandler Bing (aka actor Matthew Perry) renews his assault on Mail on Sunday columnist Peter Hitchens over drugs. The two did not get along on Newsnight when Hitchens told Perry, an anti-drugs campaigner and former addict, that addiction is mainly about willpower. "When he said that addiction was a fantasy, I didn't know what to do," Perry tells Time Out. "I made a move to hit him, because he was attacking something I've spent so much of my life battling. He happens to be one of the few people I can beat up!" Really? "He's quite a bit younger, so possibly," says Hitchens. Still, Perry didn't actually throw that punch. "Funny how he can control his desires when failing to do so might have got him in trouble with the law," says the columnist. Those two! Cue exterior shot. Roll credits.
✒Finally, though their worlds occasionally collide, there is still not much bonhomie between London mayor Boris Johnson and predecessor Ken Livingstone. Not much respect either. "The Telegraph had a picture of him standing in front of his desk after his fifth anniversary of being mayor. My shock was that he hadn't moved a single thing. The desk was exactly as I left it the day I walked out; he hadn't even moved the pot I kept my pens and pencils in," Ken tells the New Statesman. Boris may rise still further. Labour may have to confront him. The advice: don't be afraid. "They must concentrate on the fact they're dealing with a fairly lazy tosser," says Ken.
diary@theguardian.com
Twitter: @hugh-muir
Document GRDN000020140501ea510000j
