{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3826"}
____
  
News
UKIP'S 'BRIT BEGGAR' IS EU MIGRANT
TOM NEWTON DUNN   
327 words
26 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Ulster
2
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
NEW FARAGE SHOCK Poster star named as Irish actor
A "JOBLESS" British worker in a controversial Ukip immigration poster is actually a foreign actor, it has emerged.
Irishman David O'Rourke was paid to pose for the begging image that sparked a furious row earlier this week.
Above the snap of cross-legged and miserable-looking Mr O'Rourke in a builder's hard hat, the headline reads: "EU policy at work: British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour."
Trouble-hit Ukip was accused of "extraordinary hypocrisy" for giving immigrant EU citizen Mr O'Rourke work over a UK-born model or actor. Tory MP and former communities minister Bob Neill dubbed it "another example of Ukip being cynical and not being straight with voters".
Labour MP Mike Gapes said: "The level of hypocrisy with this poster would beggar belief from most political parties, but nothing surprises me with Ukip.
"It is part of an attempt to conceal their real politics, which is anti-foreigner."
Nigel Farage's party hit back to brand the attacks "nonsense".
A Ukip spokesman said: "The vast majority of people used in political poster campaigns are actors."
The row is the third PR disaster for the anti-EU party's Euro election campaign. Previously it emerged that a female "voter" pictured in Ukip's manifesto was Mr Farage's events manager, 27-year-old Lizzy Vaid. And a star of a TV election broadcast on Wednesday, Andre Lampitt — also a party council candidate — was suspended for sending racist tweets.
Yesterday Ukip refused to suspend West Country activist David Challice after he mocked Islamic law in a local newspaper advert.
Meanwhile, Mr Farage appeared to withdraw his offer to have his EU expenses independently audited, saying he would only do it if "every other British MEP wants to".
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk The Sun Says — Page Eight
Document THESUN0020140426ea4q000ud
