{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"548"}
____
  
Features
GIMME SHELTER
JAMIE MERRILL   
779 words
8 April 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
34,35
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
Features | HERITAGE It's housed Blitz-battered Londoners and Caribbean migrants. Now the last of the capital's Second World War bunkers is up for rent. JAMIE MERRILL goes underground
For rent: one Second World War bomb shelter, prime south London location, very secure, tenants must embrace "troglodyte existence" and not be daunted by 178-step spiral staircase.
It sounds like something from a John le Carré novel, but 100ft beneath Clapham South, just down from the Tube station and hidden under a smart block of luxury flats, one of the deepest tunnels in the capital is available to rent.
Completed in March 1942 to house 8,000 bomb-weary Londoners, the Clapham South deep-level tunnel is one of eight shelters now owned by Transport for London. And while the other seven tunnels are rented out to document storage firms, a film archive and even an underground farm, this final remnant of the Blitz is sitting empty.
In the sunshine at ground level, Nigel Holness, one of TFL's operations directors, explains that the bomb shelter is actually two vast train tunnels, each of which is 17ft in diameter and 1,600ft in length.
"It was to be the Crossrail of its day," says Nigel, explaining that the shelter was first designed as a great north-south train line. "The idea goes as far back as the 1930s, but the war intervened."
With the Luftwaffe battering London night after night, the Government decided to dust off the deep-levels plans to create 10 shelters across the capital. Only eight were ever completed, though, at Clapham South, Clapham Common, Clapham North, Stockwell, Goodge Street, Camden Town, Belsize Park and Chancery Lane.
At Clapham South, work was completed in 1942 and the bunker could house nearly 8,000 bunks in 15 sections, each named after a famous naval officer. Many of the bunks are still in place, though the medical posts, kitchens and lavatory blocks have all seen better days.
As we descend, our guide is TFL's in-house tunnel expert, Philip Aish. He's quick to apologise for the lack of lighting on the staircase.
"Ironically, the worst of the Blitz was over by the time this tunnel was completed," says Aish. "And by then the Government feared a troglodyte existence would set in among the population, so other than some troops, they languished pretty-much empty until the doodlebug rocket raids of 1944."
At the bottom, before the overhead lighting finally engages, it's hard to imagine what it would have felt like descending during wartime. It's a constant cool temperature and aside from our voices, the only noise is the disembodied rumble of a Northern Line train overhead.
During the war, many of these tunnels were used by troops preparing for Operation Overlord, while the shelter at Goodge Street was used as General Eisenhower's D-Day headquarters.
The end of the war saw most of the shelters fall into disuse, but Clapham South found a role as a hostel for unfortunate tourists during the Festival of Britain in 1953. They also offered a less-than-glowing welcome to 492 immigrant workers from Jamaica who arrived on the MV Empire Windrush in 1948.
"It wasn't the warmest welcome to give," says Aish. "Interestingly, though, the nearest labour exchange was in Brixton... explaining why Brixton became such a centre of the West Indian community."
Rattling around the vast tunnels, it strikes me that this place would make a fantastic nightclub. "Afraid not," says Nigel. "It just doesn't meet today's fire and safety regulations."
The rent alone is £100,000 a year and more realistic renters include document storage firms, though at the Clapham North shelter, a pioneering underground farm, which has the backing of Michel Roux Jr, the chef, has been established.
It's hard to imagine much growing at the bottom of the Clapham South deep level tunnel, though. Down yet more steps is the shelter's sump room, which pumps out rising ground water and houses an electricity switching station and a mercury-arc rectifier. If this unusual-looking object looks like a monster from Doctor Who, that's because it was and featured in the show during the 1960s.
It's pretty surreal stuff and Nigel is fascinated by the historic power supply. "It's odd to think that up above us, people are just walking by, unaware that there's all this transport and Second World War history beneath their feet," he says.
To see more of the tunnel, watch 'Headline London' tomorrow at 12.30pm on London Live or visit Londonlive.co.uk
Document IND0000020140408ea480002o
