{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"1567"}
____
  
News
Clegg and Farage agree on one thing: Labour and Tories lost
ANDREW GRICE   
700 words
27 March 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
4,5
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News | The Ukip leader won louder applause but the Deputy Prime Minister looked more relaxed. ANDREW GRICE reports on their first head-to-head debate on Europe
Nick Clegg tried to match Ukip's trump card of immigration last night as he went head-to-head with Nigel Farage on whether Britain should remain in the European Union.
In the first of two live broadcast debates, the Liberal Democrat leader said the British people deserved "the facts" on immigration as he accused Ukip of trying to "scare people". He brandished a Ukip leaflet claiming that 29 million people could come to Britain from Romania and Bulgaria, more than the total number of people living in those two countries.
A post-match YouGov survey of 1,003 people found that 57 per cent believed Mr Farage had performed best, while 36 per cent thought Mr Clegg had won. Among Conservative supporters, the Ukip leader was judged the winner by a margin of three to one. Mr Farage also came top among Labour voters, by 51 to 42 per cent. Surprisingly, one in five (20 per cent) of Liberal Democrat supporters thought Mr Farage had won, while 77 per cent named Mr Clegg the winner.
Neither leader landed a killer punch in the hour-long debate, staged by the LBC radio station and screened by Sky News. Mr Farage won louder applause from the audience but Mr Clegg looked more relaxed.
Inevitably, both the Liberal Democrats and Ukip claimed victory. The Liberal Democrats said their man had won "hands down" the battle of the facts and figures, while Ukip hailed a "great breakthrough", claiming it had taken over the leadership of Britain's Eurosceptic majority.
The two leaders clashed over immigration, an issue that is believed to have boosted Ukip's appeal much more than its desire to leave the EU. Mr Clegg argued that migrants made a net contribution of £22bn between 2001 and 2011 through taxes, saying the NHS would collapse overnight if the UK "pulled up the drawbridge". He insisted that nine out of 10 new jobs being created in the UK went to British people.
But Mr Farage accused him of evading the crucial question: that EU membership meant Britain having an "open door" to 480 million people.
Mr Clegg repeatedly warned that leaving the EU would cost jobs, with more than three million linked to trade with the EU. "I am not prepared to see anyone lose their job on the altar of Nigel Farage's anti-EU dogma," he declared. The Ukip leader retorted that the only "dogma" he believed in was the British people deciding their own fate.
He claimed that 75 per cent of the UK's laws were now made in Brussels, while Mr Clegg put the figure at 7 per cent. The Liberal Democrat leader disputed Mr Farage's claim that the UK paid a £55m-a-day bill for its EU membership, which did not take account of the rebate won by Margaret Thatcher.
Although some exchanges were heated, the debate did not descend into personal insults. Mr Farage did say that Mr Clegg had never had a "real job," in contrast to his own 20 years in the private sector. Mr Clegg retorted that the two men became MEPs on the same day, that he had left the European Parliament after five years while Mr Farage was still a member 15 years on.
The Ukip leader confirmed he still opposed gay marriage, even though his party recently claimed he had changed his mind, saying he might think again if the power of the European Court of Human Rights was diluted.
Conservative and Labour strategists will wonder whether they might be punished for opting out of the first big debate on Europe since the 1975 referendum.
Liberal Democrat and Ukip officials believed both their parties would emerge as the winners, by prising some voters away from Labour and the Tories. Although the Liberal Democrats and Ukip were never going to agree on who won last night, they did agree that the Tories and Labour were the losers.
Document IND0000020140327ea3r0000g
