{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"933"}
____
  
News
Academic says it loud and clear: victory for nationalism a disaster for Scotland
Mike Wade   
746 words
3 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Scotland
14
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
If you haven't heard of Jill Stephenson there's a fair chance you'll read more of her in the months ahead, should you ever buy newspapers or stray into places on the internet where the independence referendum is discussed. The Professor Emerita of History at Edinburgh University has become one of the most compelling voices in support of the Union — as an essayist, letter writer, blogger, a member of the FT's readers' panel. In every forum her voice is loud and clear. To paraphrase: "A victory for Scottish nationalism would be a disaster for Scotland."
In her main sphere of conflict — "hours every day" on social media — it is not always a popular view. Professor Stephenson, 70, is Edinburgh born and has lived in the city almost all her life but she is not Scottish enough for her online critics. "I feel I am an alien in my own country now, because I am being made to feel I am not Scottish," she said. "I am very proud to be Scottish but not proud of the way some Scots are behaving. I do not see the point of breaking up the Union, I just don't see it.
"I was a Scottish Nationalist when I was a child. I was in the Nat Club when I was a first-year student. They had a flat in Potterow where you could go for coffee and I hung out with them for a while. I got over it quite quickly."
She and other academics such as Adam Tomkins, Professor of Law at Glasgow University, are the most articulate people for the Union cause, not necessarily because they wanted to, but because they felt they had to, since Better Together, the official campaign for a "no" vote, was simply not good enough.
"The cerebral approach is admirable," she said, "but it doesn't win votes." Her complaints are legion. On the day when the SNP's "untenable" childcare policy was falling apart, Better Together was too preoccupied with celebrity supporters to exploit the opportunity. They don't even moderate their Facebook page properly, to prevent its "wall" being smeared with nationalist posts, she said. "There are a lot of people disenchanted with Better Together but not with the cause. It is a matter of great frustration for people who are desperate to fight for the Union."
Her particular focus is on tackling the nationalists' "mythology", their attempts to "detoxify" independence. She explained: "The notion that independence will not affect the things you hold dear — pensions, currency, universities, the BBC — when the opposite is true. They are trying to persuade people that these things will continue. In reality we will be a foreign country as far as the rest of the UK is concerned.
"Somehow they contrive to say: 'We will not be part of the UK but we will be British.' It's nonsense. At first I thought they were misguided. Now I believe they are being deliberately misleading."
The "myth" of Scotland's easy journey to EU membership rankles as does "the notion we would enjoy the same benefits as before". Neither position holds water, she said. "We would not get the UK's rebate or opt-outs negotiated by the UK in the early 1970s and subsequently — these are not available to new members.
"Application conditions would require a commitment to join the euro, at some point. The SNP's stated immigration policy would require a border. By contrast, Ireland's immigration policy is closely aligned with the UK's. A small country, a new entrant, would not be able to dictate terms."
On VAT, she said: "It would have to be at least at five per cent but possibly 15 per cent, on food, children's clothes and the other 52 items on which the UK is currently able to zero-rate VAT. Better Together should have hammered home the advantages Britain enjoys. Paying VAT on food and children's clothes would certainly raise the cost of living in 'iScotland'."
Perhaps the greatest myth perpetuated by the nationalists, she said, was the notion that the unionists are fighting the more negative campaign. "Putting the Union side in the position of having to answer the question [on the ballot paper] in the negative was a mistake. There is nothing so negative as trying to break up the Union."
Document T000000020140503ea53000ll
