{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2945"}
____
  
NEWS
Student given late reprieve on deportation as BA refuse to take her
By Tom Whitehead Security Editor   
355 words
31 March 2014
20:01
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Yashika Bageerathi’s MP said the flight operator had refused to fly her back to Mauritius as he urges Home Office to reconsider
A student fighting deportation has had a last minute reprieve – after British Airways refused to take her on a flight, according to her MP.
The Home Office and BA have refused to say why Yashika Bageerathi’s planned removal was postponed yesterday but it came amid a high profile campaign to stop it.
Plane operators have previously refused to take deportees when they have become disruptive shortly before take-off but Miss Bageerathi was not being a nuisance and was not even on board when the decision was taken.
The 19-year-old, from Mauritius, was at Gatwick Airport awaiting deportation when she was returned to a detention centre.
The teenager, who lost an appeal last Wednesday, fled Mauritius with her mother and brother in 2012 to escape a relative who had been physically abusing her.
She was due to fly back this afternoon, having been in detention at Yarl's Wood Immigration Removal Centre, Bedfordshire, since Wednesday.
It came after extensive campaigning by her fellow pupils, who used social media and demonstrations to protest against the decision to send Ms Bageerathi back.
A petition by the students calling on Immigration Minister James Brokenshire and Home Secretary Theresa May to stop the deportation and allow the student to complete her A-levels garnered nearly 23,000 signatures on change.org.
Model Cara Delevingne also made a plea on Twitter to Mrs May not to send the aspiring maths teacher back.
The teenager’s MP, David Burrowes, has made representations to the Home Office to delay her deportation.
He said the Home Office tod him British Airways (BA) refused to take Ms Bageerathi on the plane but neither BA nor the Home Office would comment.
The MP for Enfield Southgate added that the decision to remove the teenager would have had to be delayed regardless because "the minister has to consider my representation before removal.
Document TELUK00020140325ea3p0050l
