{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"129"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
The gloves come off for the second round
485 words
3 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
21
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
Round two of the great Clegg–Farage TV clash took place last night – and this time it was personal. The Deputy Prime Minister likened his Ukip opponent to a fantasist who believed Elvis was not dead and the Moon landings never happened. For his part, Mr Farage accused the Lib Dem leader of twisting the facts and "lying to the British people" about the number of laws emanating from Brussels.
The BBC were the hosts for an event similar to one that the veteran chairman David Dimbleby had hosted 40 years ago between Roy Jenkins and Tony Benn. The arguments then were about joining a Common Market and no one under the age of 60 has since had a say on whether it has worked out as intended.
There were times when last night's event threatened to descend into bickering rather than debate, and once again it exposed a fissure in modern British politics between Mr Farage portraying himself as the outsider and Mr Clegg as the representative of the political establishment. The Westminster village was shocked last week to discover that people who had watched on television considered Mr Farage to have won, when the pundits had called it for Mr Clegg. For the return match, therefore, the Lib Dem leader had clearly decided to sound more passionate, and was less effective as a result, losing by a bigger margin than last week, according to polls.
Mr Farage's avowed admiration for Vladimir Putin as a political leader has been seen as a gaffe by his detractors; but he stuck to his view that the EU was "expansionist" and provocative to Moscow. He is, however, in danger of appearing isolationist in his demand that we should not get involved in "endless foreign wars", even if the country has wearied of such interventions.
Mr Clegg was essentially making the case for continued membership that is shared by the leaders of the other two main parties. He accused Mr Farage of wanting to turn the clock back and suggested – with some justification – that what we are witnessing is an argument over the sort of Britain that people are happy to live in. Certainly, the Ukip leader hit plenty of populist buttons about immigration and the perceived elitism of both Westminster and Brussels, which will doubtless resonate with voters.
To some extent this was a dry run for the in/out referendum that we are promised should the Conservatives win the general election next year. But whether or not that happens may well depend on how well Ukip performs, and Mr Farage's two outings on national television cannot have harmed his party's chances. Mr Clegg is to be commended for challenging the Ukip leader to debate: but might the "political class" come to regret that he did?
Document DT00000020140403ea4300066
