{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"131"}
____
  
News
Nastier Nick gives Nigel the upper hand
Michael Deacon   
1,382 words
3 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
6
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Sketch
BEFOREHAND, a reporter from the BBC asked Nick Clegg whether he thought his debate with Nigel Farage might turn personal.
"I certainly hope not!" replied the Lib Dem leader cheerily. "But there are lots of important issues to talk about, and I'm sure we'll focus on those."
The debate began, and we soon found out what Mr Clegg considered to be the most important issue of all. Mr Farage's sanity.
"He's one of those people who see conspiracy theories everywhere!" cried Mr Clegg, gesturing impatiently at the Ukip leader. "I wouldn't be surprised if he tells us next that there wasn't a Moon landing, Obama isn't American, and Elvis isn't dead!"
Mr Farage, furthermore, lived in "a fantasy world", yearned to "turn the clock back to a bygone age" when "women knew their place", and promoted views about the European Union that were "a dangerous fantasy" and "a dangerous con". (He said "dangerous" and "fantasy" a lot; "Farage the goggle–eyed fantasist" was clearly the theme of his team's brainstorming sessions.)
As for Mr Farage's admiration for Vladimir Putin's actions over Syria, it was "absolutely indefensible": "If I'm the leader of 'the party of in', he's the leader of the party of Putin!" (The success of that line depended on viewers recognising "the party of in" as one of the Lib Dems' slogans for next month's European elections. Mr Clegg and his advisers may have slightly overestimated those viewers' number.)
The second of two debates about the EU between Mr Clegg and Mr Farage was much more aggressive than the first. After last week's debate, snap polling suggested that viewers thought Mr Farage the winner; YouGov called it 57 per cent to 36 in the Ukip leader's favour. To me at any rate it felt like a draw.
Still, there was no denying the differences in the two men's styles: Farage combative, scowling, sweatily indignant; Clegg smooth and assured, almost to the point of aloofness.
This time, Mr Clegg played it differently. More assertive, more emotional, more physical (fists pumping angrily like Tim Henman's after a winning volley). And, above all, more critical of his opponent. He derided Mr Farage's repeated declarations that 485 million EU citizens could set up home in Britain whenever the mood took them. "That's like me saying five million Scottish people are entitled to move to Orpington!"
Again and again he witheringly accused the Ukip leader of living in the past. "This is the 21st century, not the 19th century! Are you going to get WG Grace to open the batting again?" There was nothing wrong with these putdowns individually, but they came in such a torrent of mockery that they risked making Mr Farage, rather than Mr Clegg, look the senior, more mature figure. It also helped Mr Farage that last night, unlike last Wednesday, his face wasn't drenched crazily in sweat.
This isn't to say he was entirely calm.
"You are wilfully lying to the British people about the extent to which we have given away our democracy!" he barked at Mr Clegg. "I am really shocked that you would do that."
"You're making things up to make a point," snapped Mr Clegg.
"Well, you've done pretty well out of it!" snorted Mr Farage.
In an interview with GQ magazine this week, the Ukip leader said he considered Mr Clegg "a very nice guy". Perhaps he's changed his mind.
The debate, incidentally, was presented by David Dimbleby. "Nick Farage!" he announced confidently.
I swear he does these things on purpose.
For all the bizarreness of his views on Putin and Syria, Mr Farage again came across as eloquent and decisive, and his performances during the two debates will probably win his party some votes at the European elections.
But he will be hoping they also win his party something else: a place in the televised leaders' debates ahead of the next general election.
In 2010, those debates were confined to the leaders of Labour, the Lib Dems and the Tories; now, broadcasters will be under greater pressure to include the leader of the UK Independence party as well. Then again, we don't know whether there will actually be any leaders' debates before next year's general election – and Mr Farage's success last night and last week may well diminish their chances of being held.
David Cameron and Ed Miliband have more to lose in confrontation with Mr Farage than Mr Clegg did, and they won't fancy handing a dangerous underdog the chance to embarrass them live on prime time television.
If they can't succeed in excluding him, they may decide simply to exclude themselves.
That would make them seem gutless – but perhaps they will feel it is better to flee and survive than to fight and lose.
The Telegraph
Phone Farage: Telegraph readers can question the Ukip leader at 1 pm tomorrow in a live broadcast on www.telegraph.co.uk
To take part, please email phonefarage@telegraph.co.uk with your question
Telegraph writers give their verdict
Tim Stanley
What a wonderful debate. For once, two politicians discussed the things that define us as a country: where we've come from; what we want to be; what it means to be British.
It felt more like a US presidential debate in its scope, and suggested that if we do have a referendum on EU membership, it might be one of the defining moments of our recent history.
Nigel Farage won easily. Last week he looked sweaty and shouty. This time he was cool and funny – Farage v the establishment. Clegg ranted, made claims of homophobia or racism, or was forced to defend past statements.
Voters are too angry about the status quo to care if Ukip's policies are loony or not. They just want to send Westminster a message.
Toby Young
I thought Nigel Farage won convincingly. He wasn't just more at ease, he also seemed to be enjoying himself, whereas Nick Clegg was nervous and uncomfortable.
I didn't think Clegg lost last week's debate but the polls told a different story and for that reason he decided he needed to be a bit warmer and more human. He came armed with pre–scripted "jokes", each more painful than the last. That always goes down badly. Television is a medium that rewards spontaneity not preparation.
Farage improved as the hour went on, while Clegg got worse. He ended on a high note – his anti–Establishment call to arms – and it felt like he was connecting with the public in a way that Clegg never managed.
Mary Riddell
Is it me, or is Nigel starting to look like part of the Westminster wallpaper? Less shiny, less outsiderish. Nick tried to help him reclaim his insurgent status, comparing him to Crazy Horse or Sitting Bull. The question was if Nick would be the sitting duck.
He was good on immigration, right on Europe and patchily persuasive on foreign policy. But the facts hardly matter. While Nigel's are hazy, those who like him won't know or won't mind. Clegg mocks Billy no–mates Britain, but Nigel is best friends with Billy no–mates. Last week he reached out to others. Will he keep them?
However, those who believe in "diversity, compassion and outwardfacing values" would opt for Nick. He gets my vote.
Dan Hodges
It was like watching last week's debate all over again – but through a looking glass. Nick Clegg attempted to out–Farage Nigel Farage, and Nigel Farage tried to out–Clegg Nick Clegg.
Clegg traded sober analysis for passion and aggression. He attacked the Ukip leader directly – over his admiration for Vladimir Putin, his employment as an MEP at the taxpayers' expense and his longing to rewind the clock on modern Britain.
Farage consciously toned down the bombast that undermined him in their first encounter. He was more measured and controlled.
Neither man landed a knockout blow, but Clegg's attacks were more effective.
The margin was tighter but it was again Clegg's victory.
Document DT00000020140403ea430006m
