{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2027"}
____
  
News
Far–Right candidate held for quoting Churchill
Martin Evans   
565 words
29 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
13
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A CANDIDATE in the European Parliamentary elections has been arrested after making a speech quoting from a book by Winston Churchill about Islam.
Paul Weston, the chairman of the far–Right Liberty GB party, was making the speech on the steps of Winchester Guildhall, Hants, on Saturday, when a member of the public complained to police and he was arrested.
He had been reading from Churchill's book The River War, written in 1899 when the future prime minister was am Army officer in Sudan and which claims that "the religion paralyses the social development of those who follow it".
Mr Weston, who is standing as a candidate in the South East region in the European elections on May 22, was detained after he failed to comply with a request by police to move on and was arrested on suspicion of causing religious/racial harassment.
The former Ukip candidate, who fell out with the party over what he described as its failure to address issues around Islam in Britain, founded the British Freedom Party.
The group formed an alliance with the far–Right English Defence League, but he quit last year and set up Liberty GB.
Mr Weston, who recently predicted a war in Britain within 20 years between the white working class and immigrants, is married to a Romanian migrant.
He claims to have worked as a deep sea diver, a pilot in Africa and a property developer in the Czech Republic.
A Hampshire police spokesman said: "A 50–year–old man from Dorset was arrested outside Winchester Guildhall at approximately 2.30pm on Saturday April 26 after he failed to comply with a section 27 dispersal order …
"He has been bailed pending further inquiries to report back to police on May 24."
also gave an account of the incident: "Reportedly, a woman cam
A Liberty GB spokesman e out of the Guildhall and asked Mr Weston if he had the authorisation to make this speech.
"When he answered that he didn't, she told him 'It's disgusting!' and then called the police."
"Six or seven officers arrived … The police had a long discussion with Mr Weston, lasting about 40 minutes.
"At about 3pm he was arrested. They searched him, put him in a police van and took him away."
His arrest has raised concerns about freedom of speech, particularly given that Mr Weston was reading from a book by Winston Churchill.
However, members of the Muslim community said the police were correct to act if Mr Weston's actions were deliberately intended to incite hatred.
Mohamed Shafiq, leader of the Ramadan Foundation, said: "Of course there should be freedom of speech, but with freedom of speech comes responsibility.
"If someone was to deliver this message in the centre of Bradford for example where there is a large Muslim population then it could be seen as a deliberate act of incitement.
"We are banning extremists from the Muslim community, the likes of Anjem Choudary, so it is right that the policy is applied equally."
A spokesman for the Muslim Council of Britain added: "We are sure that even Mr Churchill, if confronted with what he wrote as a young man would now blush at his own writings, just as he would when presented with his description of Gandhi as a 'half–naked fakir'."
Document DT00000020140429ea4t000b2
