{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1155"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Guards face manslaughter trial over deportation flight death: CPS reverses decision in 2012 not to bring charges Three men say they will fight case vigorously
Matthew Taylor   
488 words
21 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
2
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Three G4S guards are being charged with manslaughter following the death of a man as he was being deported from the UK. Jimmy Mubenga, 46, died after being restrained by the three men on board a plane at Heathrow airport in October 2010.
Yesterday the Crown Prosecution Service said the guards, Stuart Tribelnig, 38, Terry Hughes, 53, and Colin Kaler, 51, would be charged with manslaughter.
Mubenga's wife, Adrienne Makenda Kambana, said: "My children and I have waited a long time for this decision. We hope the CPS will now move this case forward quickly. We feel like we are another step closer to getting justice for Jimmy."
The three guards were arrested after Mubenga's death but in 2012 the CPS decided not to bring any charges. That decision was reviewed following an inquest into Mubenga's death last year in which a jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing after an eight-week hearing.
Malcolm McHaffie, of the CPS special crime division, said: "We have completed a fresh review of all of the evidence relating to the death of Jimmy Mubenga, including the new evidence arising from the inquest, and decided that three men should be prosecuted for manslaughter."
The CPS said it had decided not to prosecute G4S for corporate manslaughter as there was insufficient evidence.
Mubenga and his wife came to the UK in 1994. His family said that as a student leader in Angola he had fallen foul of the government and he had to flee. He was eventually granted exceptional leave to remain and he and his family, including five children, moved to Ilford, Essex.
In 2006 Mubenga was convicted of actual bodily harm and sentenced to two years in jail following a nightclub brawl. After serving his sentence he was transferred to an immigration detention centre and the process to deport him began.
The three guards are due to appear at Westminster magistrates court on 7 April.
Their solicitors said they would vigorously deny the charges. A statement on behalf of the men said: "My clients are very disappointed with the CPS decision, having previously been told after a very lengthy police investigation that no charges would be brought against them."
Deborah Coles, co-director of the Inquest campaign group, which has supported Mubenga's family, said the CPS's decision "reiterates the importance of legal aid. "It is legal aid that ensured a robust examination of all the evidence, which has ultimately resulted in today's welcome decision. The cuts to legal aid mean that cases like this in the future may well not receive this kind of scrutiny."
Jimmy Mubenga had fought against deportation.
He died on the plane that was meant to fly him back to Angola
Document GRDN000020140320ea3l0007a
