{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3794"}
____
  
News
UKIP's surge into the lead rocks Conservatives
Tim Shipman; Dipesh Gadher   
493 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
DAVID CAMERON will refuse to make any further concessions to Eurosceptics despite UKIP surging into its first lead in the polls this weekend.
The prime minister was struggling to contain a growing Eurosceptic tide last night as he faced calls from Conservative MPs and the public to take a tougher line with Brussels to counter the UKIP threat.
Senior Tory backbenchers disclosed that they would visit Downing Street after the vote on May 22 to demand that Cameron outline more extensive plans for the repatriation of powers from Brussels.
But Cameron will put himself on a collision course with his party after privately dismissing their concerns and vowing not to give an inch — even if the Tories are humiliated in the European elections. Tory jitters will be stoked by today's YouGov poll for The Sunday Times on the EU elections, which puts UKIP in the lead for the first time, with the Conservatives trailing a distant third.
Despite a week of controversy, Nigel Farage's party has risen to 31%, three points clear of Labour, with the Tories languishing on a lacklustre 19 points.
In another blow to the prime minister, the former Tory donor backing UKIP has indicated that he will bankroll the party at the next general election — boosting Farage's chances of winning seats at Westminster for the first time.
Paul Sykes, who is worth £650m, according to next month's Sunday Times Rich List, and is among the 200 wealthiest people in Britain, also revealed that he had funded "at least another two waves" of UKIP adverts before the European elections.
The prime minister, in a newspaper article last month, detailed the powers he wanted to reclaim from Brussels before his proposed in/out referendum in 2017. They included demands to stop "mass migrations" when new countries join the EU, curbs on benefits for EU migrants, and "red card" powers for national parliaments to join together to block future EU laws.
But senior backbenchers on the Eurosceptic right are preparing to tell the prime minister that he must address the issue of border controls for existing EU migrants, the European Commission's attempts to impose the Charter of Fundamental Rights on Britain and the need for national vetoes of existing European laws.
A senior Downing Street figure has revealed, however, that Cameron will refuse to spell out further red lines.
In a move that will enrage many, Cameron has privately stated that he has no intention of placating the Eurosceptics.
The new poll shows that it is the MPs not the prime minister who have public support: 42% of voters do not think his plans for renegotiation go far enough, against 25% who say they are about right.
A total of 56% of voters think curbing immigration should be the top priority for Cameron's new deal with Brussels — a view that Farage has exploited.
Document ST00000020140427ea4r000z4
