{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"871"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
Clarkson and Ukip say boo and we all panic
Libby Purves   
1,008 words
5 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Our hypersensitivity about certain words is often silly - but it suggests the veneer of social tolerance is still very thin
There was a creepy fascination in seeing on screen the man behind the many letters: Demetri Marchessini. The retired businessman was on Channel 4 News as the "sixth biggest donor" to Ukip. Only ten thousand quid, but an irresistible chance for Michael Crick to sound shocked as Mr M reiterated his malign views on women, gays and slavery.
Women should be banned from wearing trousers because trousers do not "excite" men; rape in marriage is impossible because the woman signed up. As for homosexual love, it's impossible because even when men are partners they are just "roommates" who cruise for a dozen tricks a night. Oh, and slaves had a better life in the plantations than in Africa. Mr Crick elicited these views from the poor old loon, and was further rewarded by provoking from Neil Hamilton the defence that they were not party policy because "everyone knows that Christine wears the trousers in our house".
Many of us in media have been long familiar with the Marchessini letterhead. This year he even took a quarter-page ad in The Daily Telegraph to condemn me, following it with a demand for a public debate. A mild refusal provoked an invitation to lunch (no!) and a box of chocolates delivered to the BBC (the little ladies may dislike compulsory skirts and rape, bless 'em, but can be mollified with cocoa-butter). We offered them to the nearest gay colleagues. It's not only journalists: one theatre director was so impressed with his many Marchessini letters that he became convinced it was a Rupert Everett hoax and replied joyfully claiming he'd rumbled him.
That this elderly, angry, affluent man should be attracted to Ukip was inevitable. As flies to a dungheap it draws people with confused resentments about a world they fear is leaving them behind. Some are genuinely, dangerously racist: various Ukip candidates have been outed telling Lenny Henry to go to a "black" country, calling Muslims "devils' kids", etc. Less malevolent idiocies make spot-the-nutter a sport: calling women "sluts" for poor fridge hygiene, thinking gay marriage causes floods. That selfappointed verbal outlaws should crowd to Ukip as candidates, donors and creators of nasty slogans is Mr Farage's problem, and he has not dealt with it well. It has made even reasonable Euroscepticism and worries about mass immigration equate in many minds with embarrassing xenophobia and malicious narrowmindedness.
But reflecting on the extremes, I found my eye sliding sideways to the Jeremy Clarkson affair and a more general quirk of human behaviour. Clarkson is not, I suppose, a racist.
But an unbroadcast "Eeny, meeny, miny, moe" clip caused demands that the BBC sack him, because in slurring he might have seemed to use the N-word that used to be in the rhyme. Harriet Harman — never knowingly under-pompous — says "someone who uses the N-word in whatever context, in public or in private, has no place on the BBC". Any context, even historical and linguistic? Any private place? Come on — it's nasty, but it's not the Word of Power which unmakes the cosmos.
Fifty years ago horses and labradors bore the name and sofas were advertised as "n*****-brown". Many good people were unaware of its origins as a belittling insult associated with unforgivable persecution. As understanding grew it was outlawed, together with other markers of unjustifiable scorn: poof, taffy, left-footer, crip, pleb, yid — painful even to type them. Almost the only unthinking insult to someone's origins you can get away with now is "toff".
But when words or ideas become unsayable by decent people, they can develop a perverse magnetism. In private, between close associates who would never hurt a fly or join Ukip, mild xenophobic or homophobic asides become jokes. Oh yes they do. Especially among unimaginative middle-aged people. It's a mixture of defiance and nostalgia, possibly laced with a mischievous pleasure in imagining how it would upset Harriet Harman. And though we cannot know, it is easy to suspect that Clarkson was showing off to his crew the retro-laddish insouciance that is both his nature and his job, doing that mumbled take with an aren't-I-naughty giggle. It is not unimaginable that somewhere in his head he was being "free" and "brave". Just as when he insulted Mexicans or said "slope" in Burma.
Forbidden words give some people a guilty thrill, like cycling no-hands or flipping a V-sign to a policeman's back. By the same token — without suggesting that it actually happened — it is not impossible to imagine a stressed MP snarling "pleb" at an obstructive policeman. And regretting it.
It is not admirable but it is a common folly, an unfortunate relief of impotent stress. Go a bit deeper and you start to air private theories about lady-trousers and make lying, stupid generalisations about minorities. Silly, pitiable, not quite evil. The really interesting thing is how much it panics the rest of us, even from some no-hope candidate, powerless nutter or showbiz maverick. Marchessini's donation and Clarkson's bêtise both made national news, even in a week when we jailed a lying judge and a sexually criminal celebrity PR and saw tragedies from Ukraine to Afghanistan. This outraged wincing feels as if the skin of social tolerance and understanding is still very thin: as if we fear that mere words from silly people will rip it open.
On balance, the hypersensitivity is probably a good thing. But it would be wonderful to think that in twenty years' time we'll be able to shudder and turn away, as if it was of no more significance than an obscene T-shirt slogan or a drunken burp in church.
Part of the thrill is in imagining how it will upset Harriet Harman
Document T000000020140505ea550004j
