{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1735"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
Farage and Salmond want you to live in Outopia
David Aaronovitch   
1,152 words
17 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Scotland
29
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Ukip and SNP leaders come from different political traditions but they share more than they'll ever admit
When Alex Salmond and Nigel Farage look at each other, what do they see? Opposites? That's certainly what their supporters claim. Mr Farage's anti­Europeanism is decried as right­wing by the supporters of Scottish independence. Mr Farage, for his part, sees the Yes campaigners as vandals wanting to break up a valuable union.
Farage is shorthand here for those in the UK, including around a third of Tories. who want separation from the EU — or Brexit as it's known. Salmond is a figurehead for those in Scotland who want separation from the UK — or Sexit as it isn't known, but should be. And for those who want neither, it is increasingly hard not to see the similarities.
The kernel of both groups' arguments consists of the same materials. Their favoured polity — Scotland or the UK — has been diminished by its association with, or absorption into, a larger grouping. Despite devolution or the appearance of national government, it is really "Westminster" or "Brussels" — the Sodom and Gomorrah of governance — that rule, and rule badly. Either dilutes the capacity of the smaller body to rule itself properly. The people of Scotland didn't vote for David Cameron. The people of the UK didn't vote for José Manuel Barroso.
Looking at the UK and Scottish separatists' arguments it seems almost absurd that, with very few exceptions, they don't wholeheartedly support each other. Which Salmondian precept on independence does a Faragist really disagree with? How, if you think Westminster (whose MPs you directly helped to elect) is a distant and alien place, can you wish to be "ruled" from Brussels? To illustrate this point even further, the imagined alternatives to the UK or Europe also turn out to be the same and for pretty much the same reasons. The SNP/Scottish manifesto, Scotland's Future, apparently mentioned Norway 57 times. "Small independent nations of comparable size to Scotland are the world's happiest", claimed the Yes Scotland website, citing one of those dubious compendium reports from Unesco.
Switzerland too, is a better model. Or, as one separatist­minded writer put it recently, "compared with the Brits, the Swiss have far more Jobs, better schools, live longer, earn a lot more money, pay lower taxes and are much less in debt", and crime is much lower.
You may or may not have guessed that the latter was actually praising Switzerland as a model non­EU country. But the psychology of the argument is a pretty exact match. Smaller is better: if we could Just separate from them and assume full control, we too could be good and bonny and blithe and gay.
The idea of the separate neo­paradise — you could call it Outopia — has a particular appeal for those whose other Gods have failed. Last week two former Scottish Labour councillors endorsed independence. One, Gordon McKenzie, was quoted as saying: "We will become a more socialist country if people vote yes."
I have heard other Left nationalists argue that not only will Scotland become a more social­democratic place (as all Scandinavian nations are imagined to be), but that it will then act as a "beacon" for the rest of the UK to follow suit. This notion that if you subtract a large number of social democratic voters from the UK then the UK will become more social democratic, follows a logic that I would not recommend living one's life by.
If both Brexiteers and Sexiteers are enJoying a similarly attractive dream of separation, they also share the same real­life problem. The debate about whether iScotland and RUK (the rest of the UK) will share a common currency illustrates what this is. To have a common currency with a nation ten times your size means having to play very Junior partner when it comes to decisions being made by the Bank of England. So the independence would be substantially illusory. In fact I don't think RUK would enter such a union, so a different problem would arise.
But how about this little potential drama? One of the reasons some iScots give for wanting to leave is English anti­Europeanism. So, suppose there is indeed an EU referendum in RUK in 2017, one year after Sexit? And suppose that the Sexit fears are realised and the vote is to leave the EU? Where on God's good earth does that leave Scotland? Scots, having had no influence on the vote, would then either be looking at trade tariffs on the movement of Scottish and RUK goods plus customs houses on the border, or else Scotland would have to stay out of the EU too.
In the meantime precisely the same logic would apply to a UK (with or without Scotland) that was exiting the EU. We would seek to get the most advantageous trade terms we could and — though they wouldn't quite be good enough — we would pay a price for them in terms of the conditions and regulations attached. Norway does. Switzerland, in a different manner, does. But, like the absent Scots at the 2017 referendum, we would be absent from the decision­making in the EU and, contrary to the claims of the Brexiteers, that influence is substantial.
It is not surprising, then, that a common language of complacent and ill­founded reassurance is used by separatists of both camps. It will be all right. They're Just bluffing. Scotland/Britain is too important to the UK/Europe for them not to allow us to separate on our terms. Of course we'll get the division of the assets/the trade terms we want. It's even more in their interest than it is in ours! Nae/no problem!
So it isn't surprising either that those whose businesses are immediately and directly affected by the possibility of separation tend to a less rosy view. In the City those who have been following the development of the European Central Bank and post­crash financial regulation seem in little doubt that "in" is where the UK needs to be.. The same is broadly true in Scotland. The closer one is to having to plan for a future involving your own or your client's money, the less attractive any kind of exit becomes.
There are differences. I accept that Alex Salmond likes immigration and Nigel Farage is less keen. That one extols whisky while the other praises beer. But to those of us who don't believe in Outopia, they are hard little peas from the same inedible pod.
Nationalists and Ukippers both love Norway and the Swiss
Businesses don't like the idea of leaving the the UK or the EU
Document T000000020140417ea4h000f5
