{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"215"}
____
  
NEWS
David Cameron: Foreigners fleeing eurozone countries pushing up UK net migration
By Peter Dominiczak Assistant Political Editor   
528 words
13 May 2014
19:49
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Prime Minister insists that he will hit his target to reduce net migration to below 100,000 people but says people coming to the UK from struggling eurozone countries are pushing up the numbers
Economic migrants fleeing failing eurozone countries like France and Spain are threatening Britain’s bid to reduce immigration, David Cameron has said.
Mr Cameron insisted his pledge to cut immigration to below 100,000 be next year is still “perfectly feasible” but admitted his Government has not reduced numbers “as much as I’d like”.
He blamed European Union countries with faltering economies for the spike in foreigners coming to the UK.
Figures are on Wednesday expected to show that 30,000 immigrants have come from Romania and Bulgaria alone since the start of the year.
Net migration soared to 212,000 last year.
“I think [the target] it is perfectly feasible,” Mr Cameron told the Commons liaison committee. “We have brought net migration into the UK down by a fifth under this Government – not as much as I’d like.
“The figures have been altered by the fact that in the last couple of years, because our economy has been growing more rapidly than the other European economies, we’ve seen an increase in the number of people coming from EU countries to the United Kingdom.”
Mr Cameron added: “Some of the biggest increases are actually from countries like Spain and Italy and France and the original EU members.
“The target remains, the commitment remains. I want net migration to be down to the tens of thousands. I think it is absolutely achievable.”
Figures from the Office for National Statistics in February showed a huge surge in the number of people coming to Britain from the EU countries which have been hardest hit by the economic crisis.
The number of Italians arriving in the UK last year rose 66 per cent to 44,000. Spain was up by 36 per cent to just under 52,000 and Portugal was up 47 per cent to 30,000 people.
Mr Cameron used his appearance before the MPs to reject claims that his Government’s bid to cut immigration has harmed UK universities.
The Prime Minister faced claims from MPs that foreign students have been put off applying to UK universities because of the crackdown on immigration.
The number of foreign students coming to the UK from India has decreased in recent years. Indian politicians have repeatedly blamed Conservative rhetoric over immigration for the fall in numbers.
However, the Prime Minister accused people of “pretending” that the focus on cutting net migration is “injuring our higher education system”.
Mr Cameron said: “I profoundly believe you have immigration control and get the net migration numbers down at the same time as getting the best international students to come to Britain and the evidence shows that’s exactly what’s happening.
“And so we must not throw out the success in getting net migration numbers down by pretending it’s injuring our higher education system when it isn’t.”
Document TELUK00020140513ea5d005v8
