{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"758"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Ukip accepts withdrawing from EU could take several years
Patrick Wintour Political editor   
371 words
25 February 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
7
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Ukip will have to negotiate a withdrawal from the European Union over many years and the party still has to work out the details of how it would secure such an exit, a leading Ukip MEP candidate in May's European elections has conceded.
Janice Atkinson, who is number two on the party's candidate list in the South East England constituency, admitted it would be impossible just to walk away from the EU. Her remarks last week underline the extent to which key details of Ukip policy have yet to be developed.
Atkinson was also reluctant to give details on the party's policies on immigration and housing: "We have got policies but we're not releasing them just yet."
Polls suggest a tougher approach to immigration is one of Ukip's chief appeals, but the party says its position on existing migrants from the EU and other immigration matters is still being developed.
Asked if it would take as long as five years to leave the EU, Atkinson told the meeting: "You can't just walk away because we have got so many trade agreements." But she insisted that the EU could not stop the UK's withdrawal, saying there were various ways out including invoking article 51 of the EU treaty.
"We won't get into the nitty gritty of it . . . we can do it," she said. "We are discussing how we will have this withdrawal. We will have something on that pretty soon."
At the same event, another prospective Ukip MEP Ray Finch said:"We have to be good neighbours - part of being good neighbours is negotiating a free and fair withdrawal from what the EU means."Finch said Ukip would make St George's Day a national holiday.
He cited George Orwell from his essays The Lion and The Unicorn claiming "the British intelligentsia is the only one in Europe that hates its own country".
The Liberal Democrat president, Tim Farron, responding to Atkinson's remarks, said : "Finally, Ukip admit they are putting millions of British jobs at risk. Pulling out of the EU would be a disaster for Britain.
Document GRDN000020140224ea2p0009o
