{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"666"}
____
  
NEWS
Ukip MEPs told to divert allowances to party; Party faces fresh questions over financial arrangements after MEPs told to give allowances to party coffers
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
394 words
10 March 2014
10:55
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip MEPs were asked to divert funds from their Brussels salaries and allowances to the party’s central office, it has emerged.
MEPs were told to give “a minimum of £10,000 per annum" to the party’s coffers in an email sent to the party’s MEPs by Alan Bown, a Ukip donor and member of the party’s National Executive Committee.
Funding domestic political activities with European Parliament allowances may breach rules that require such expenses to be directly linked to the work of an MEP’s office.
The email, sent in June 2011, said: “Most MEPs drew a salary of £80k+ per year plus generous expenses of approximately £320k, some of which does not require receipts."
Mr Bown said it costs the part £125,000 to get each MEP elected but many have a “very poor record of helping the party financially."
“Some MEPs do an excellent job for the party, but with some of them we have to ask ourselves whether they are good value for money at £125,000," the Times quoted him as writing.
In a statement, the party insisted its MEPs did not break any rules.
“Ukip MEPs who donate to party funds do so out of their own post-tax salaries. Ukip MEPs work for withdrawal from the EU just as they promised the voters that they would when elected in 2009. For the avoidance of doubt, Ukip MEPs are careful to observe European parliamentary rules when spending resources on advancing the goal of British withdrawal."
It comes as a new analysis shows up to 30 per cent of voters could potentially be drawn to the party, meaning the party has far from peaked.
Three in ten voters are either eurosceptic and against immigration, or eurosceptic and politically dissatisfied, leaving them open to voting for Nigel Farage’s party, according to research by academics Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin.
“UKIP are currently winning over one voter in ten but their potential far exceeds their current support in the polls by a margin of three to one," said Dr Ford. “This revolt has been a long time coming, but may have a long way to run."
Document TELUK00020140310ea3a0020e
