{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"815"}
____
  
Features
letters@the-sun.co.uk
502 words
26 February 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
41
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
The page where you tell Britain what you think
IN law, ignorance is no defence. Chris Moyles has been very stupid but must have been aware he was legally avoiding tax.
But at £1million in tax, he is small fry. I do not want HMRC to focus on celebrities. I want to see large corporations that make billions in the UK brought to account so the country would not be in such a penny-pinching mess.
BARRY JOHNSON Hornchurch, Essex
DON'T talk such rubbish, David Moyes. No person on this planet is worth £300,000 a week. It's obscene and an insult to the many living on earth.
Yes, Wayne Rooney, pictured, does score the occasional good goal but he is not in the same class as Lionel Messi, Cristiano Ronaldo or Eden Hazard.
TERRY MULQUEEN Rainham, Kent
LAURA CUNLIFFE, who cooked her kitten in a microwave for five minutes, should be banned from keeping any pet for life.
There are no excuses for this horrific torture and the court should make an example of her when sentencing.
CAROLE STABLES By email
WHAT Laura Cunliffe did to that poor four-month-old kitten beggars belief.
I hope the rest of her life involves moving from place to place. She will probably get a few hours' community service, a couple of years' ban from keeping a pet and told not to do it again.
The UK courts are too soft in dealing with animal cruelty.
ALAN BARCLAY Stirling
SINKHOLES are perhaps nature's warning that we should have an understanding of what could happen if fracking is allowed.
We have all recently witnessed the power of the sea and rivers, so why not harness this natural moving water, 24 hours a day for free?
MELVILLE POLMOUNTER St Austell, Cornwall
THE NHS cites "Movember" for delays in cancer treatment as men are more aware of possible symptoms and Shadow Health Secretary Andy Burnham blames David Cameron's NHS reorganisation.
Mr Burnham should realise that his own party's opendoor immigration policy is mainly responsible.
GILLIAN SYKES Sheffield
MY 95-year-old father is in a Bupa nursing home. The staff are wonderful and he is very happy but he had to sell his property to pay for it.
He served his country, away from home for four years in the Second World War and later raised a family, always paying his dues.
Why is this country treating him so shabbily, penalising him for working? Something has gone drastically wrong.
JUNE WADE Dartford, Kent
IF I had a coat worth £30,000 I would eat, sleep, drink, bathe, sunbathe and walk the dog in it — so well done Rita Ora, pictured, for wearing it more than once.
But maybe she should have thought about what she was buying rather than how good it looked. The thought of wearing what was once a living creature's skin would put me off before the price.
MARIE JENNINGS Norwich
Document THESUN0020140226ea2q00084
