{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"279"}
____
  
News
It's a stick-up: UKIP steals Ed's thunder
Tim Shipman ; Jack Grimston   
1,098 words
11 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
14
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A new poster campaign aims to woo voters by lifting Labour's line on the 'cost of living crisis' and blaming Brussels for it
NIGEL FARAGE will hijack Ed Miliband's cost-of-living campaign this week in an attempt to win over the "soft underbelly" of Labour support from working-class voters.
The UKIP leader will release adverts arguing that it is Britain's membership of the EU that has pushed up the price of food and fuel.
The raid for blue-collar votes comes amid growing fears from Labour MPs that their leader is failing to give them the tools to fight UKIP on the doorstep.
Senior backbenchers last night warned Miliband that Labour's failure to offer policies to reduce immigration had bolstered UKIP support in its northern England heartlands ahead of local and European elections on May 22. MPs say that Miliband's staff assured them at a subcommittee meeting of the parliamentary Labour party six weeks ago that they would have a new and distinctive policy on migration. One backbencher who was present said: "We are all asking where this great promised policy disappeared to. There has been nothing — nothing."
Today Farage will unveil two campaign posters on the cost of living. The first tells voters to "Use your loaf" and claims food bills could be £400 a year cheaper in every UK household. In a reference to Miliband's pledge to freeze fuel bills, the second, of a lightbulb, argues that "Without the EU, every UK fuel bill would be £112 cheaper."
Farage said he believed the posters would "resonate with working-class voters".
"I agree with Mr Miliband that there is a cost-of-living crisis going on. But I intend to expose the fact that much of it is down to Labour's own policies when it was last in government and in particular its acquiescence to diktats coming out of Brussels," he said. "Food prices and energy prices are two key components of the squeeze on living standards. And in both cases the EU is right at the heart of the squeeze."
Labour figures point out that the party has announced a series of immigration policies. These include measures to prevent employment agencies recruiting only from abroad. But Labour MPs said this was not as eye-catching as Miliband's pledge to freeze fuel prices and restrict rent rises. One said: "It doesn't do much at all to control the numbers coming here."
At a meeting last month Labour MPs from northwest England challenged Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary. Lindsay Hoyle, the MP for Chorley, proposed using wounded soldiers no longer capable of fighting to help the UK Border Force screen lorries and check passports.
Another asked Cooper what she thought of banning new British citizens from holding dual nationality to cement their loyalty to the UK.
An MP present said: "It was disappointing how little Yvette was able to say. The leadership don't have anything on the subject and people are constantly raising it when we go out on the doorstep." Frank Field, the MP for Birkenhead, was not present at the meeting but said this weekend that immigration was his party's "Achilles heel". He added: "It is a toxic issue on the doorstep. They [the leadership] need to get it. It is now too late for the European election. We have to have something for the general election."
Miliband aides say Labour has learnt its lessons on immigration: "We do recognise that people feel their voice was not being listened to and their concerns about the pace of change in their communities was a legitimate subject."
However, attempts to adopt a tougher stance on immigration could endanger party funding. Next month, Labour's biggest donor, Len McCluskey's Unite union, will discuss a motion to cut its funding by 10% if the leadership adopts any policy of "scapegoating migrants".
Miliband will instead retreat to home turf this week, putting the NHS "front and centre" of his campaign with a speech tomorrow and an election broadcast on Tuesday featuring footage of the Labour leader working in a hospital. His election coordinator, Douglas Alexander, has resisted calls to pander to Farage-leaning voters. "We won't win by becoming a better UKIP," he said. "We will win by becoming a better Labour party."
MPs say frustrations about immigration policy are a bellwether for concern about Miliband's leadership style. His claim last week that he had "more intellectual self-confidence" than David Cameron was recognised by many as fair, but it made some cringe.
In a speech at Labour's headquarters last week Miliband told staff they were "in the fight of our lives" to win the general election. He pledged that Labour would provide the "boldest, most radical offer laid before the British people for a generation".
Polls show that his big ideas are his most popular. A You-Gov survey for The Sunday Times found that 69% backed his energy price freeze, 63% capping rent rises, 60% Labour's flirtation with renationalising the railways and 54% supported higher council tax for properties left empty.
But YouGov's Anthony Wells said: "Popular policies are not increasing perceptions of Ed Miliband himself — 56% still think he hasn't made it clear what he stands for, 48% see him as weak leader. Only 23% think he would be up to the job of prime minister."
Allies say he should be applauded for uniting Labour and putting it "in the game" 12 months before the election.
One said: "In 2010 the assumption was that Labour would implode, that we were somehow irrelevant and we would be out of power for a long time. We're recovering from our second-worst defeat since the introduction of universal suffrage. The fact that we are competitive is an extraordinary achievement."
Miliband's party is expected to gain 500 council seats but he could be the first opposition leader not to top the poll in the Euro elections since Neil Kinnock in 1984.
MPs say Miliband's reluctance to take on UKIP and his preference for theorising about creating a new kind of capitalism does not connect with the blue-collar workers who backed Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair. "The trouble with Ed is that he is so aloof he does not have a clue what people are concerned about," one MP said. Miliband makes Labour the UKIP of the left, Editorial, page 22 @shippersunbound
Document ST00000020140511ea5b000yo
