{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1754"}
____
  
Features; Opinion Column
Dear Nigel, I would like to be your British PA
Deborah Ross   
725 words
24 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
42
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage was accused of hypocrisy this week when, having launched Ukip's antiimmigration n campaign, it emerged he employs his German wife as his secretary. His wife, Kirsten, is paid £27,000 a year by the European Parliament and has amassed more than £200,000 since she began working for him, but Farage insisted no Briton could do the job.
"I don't think anybody else would want to be in my house at midnight going through emails and getting me briefed for the next day," he said. Yet I believe a British person could happily be employed by Nigel Farage, and have sent him an application letter:
Dear Mr Farage
I am writing to you to in the hope of convincing you that a British person could be your secretary and to express my interest in the position.
I believe I would be an excellent fit, given that I have considerable experience both in staying up quite late and attending to emails, even though I am not German. I would also be able to brief you for the next day and, better still, brief you from the perspective of a British person. That is, a fourth-generation British person, which I am sincerely hoping is British enough. What if you made us all count back and we found we were all immigrants somewhere along the line? If I am successful in this application and if my job description allows, I would advise you to steer clear of that discussion as it will only end in tears.
I have much to offer. I can work as part of a team, have excellent interpersonal skills, once stayed up until nearly 3am (a significant achievement for a non-German) and also share your profound love of this country. Although at present I struggle to misremember it nostalgically as the most perfect place on Earth until foreigners mucked it up, I am a quick learner and believe I could remedy this in no time.
Why do I want the position? I am currently working as a journalist, but am seeking a new challenge that would allow me to use my creativity and imagination more fully, with less recourse to the facts, preferably to Europhobic ends. And I believe working with you would afford me this opportunity.
As you will see from my attached CV, I did once work for Dolcis, the shoe shop, but only for a week. This is because as soon as I discovered it was all about selling shoes to people with smelly feet and that there would be no opportunities for deploying my creativity and imagination to Europhobic ends, that career held no further interest for me. I also once had a Saturday job in Garfunkel's, but left for the same reason. A help-yourself salad bar is no consolation in such instances and I would say the same even if the salad bar hadn't simply been a few upturned tins of sweetcorn.
I believe if I were your secretary it would provide exactly the right environment for my creativity and imagination to fly and I could make a significant Europhobic contribution. What if, for instance, we were to say that Brussels plans to ban scones? Or take the orangey bit out of Jaffa Cakes? That it just isn't orangey enough to count as actual orange, according to European law?
Mr Farage, at the risk of sounding presumptuous, aren't I already sounding like someone you'd enjoy having around the house? Aren't I already sounding like someone who would go beyond sometimes staying up a bit late? Germans are all very well, but just how much distance can they realistically put between the whipping up of nationalism and xenophobia and its ultimate consequences? This is why you need a British person for the job!
Lastly, I should say that although your current secretary goes to bed with you (or so I assume), I won't. However, on those occasions when I'm not too busy still being up at midnight, I will certainly clean behind the fridge. I'll pull it out and everything.
I look forward to hearing from you ...
What if we were to say that Brussels plans to ban scones?
Document T000000020140424ea4o00061
