{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3146"}
____
  
News
BLUEKIP
JONATHAN REILLY; RHODRI PHILLIPS   
448 words
24 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
15
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
SCANDAL No2 FOR TOP AIDE
A KEY aide to Ukip leader Nigel Farage was last night at the centre of a sex scandal after explicit naked snaps of her emerged.
Lizzy Vaid, 27, was photographed taking part in a series of lewd acts.
The Sun has seen the sexually explicit shots, which are too graphic to reproduce — or even describe — in a family newspaper.
It is the second controversy Ms Vaid has been involved in this week.
Yesterday we told how she posed as a "voter" from Devon in the party's manifesto — despite being a fulltime Ukip employee. After we approached Ms Vaid over the raunchy photos — taken when she was 20 — she contacted cops.
It is understood she has blamed an ex-boyfriend over the release of the images.
Last night the Met Police confirmed they were investigating if any crime had been committed.
On her Twitter account Ms Vaid, of Brighton, describes herself as "Ukip Events Manager and Assistant to Nigel Farage, as well as a lover of social occasions".
In November she appeared on the front of the Ukip monthly bulletin after writing an article slamming UK leaders headed: "They have failed a generation."
Inspiration In it she said: "There are 20million jobless in the Eurozone. Many are now heading to Britain but we have 2.5million unemployed of our own, including 1million 18-24 year olds.
"Open borders is a nonsense, which Ukip will end." This month she defended her party's immigration policy — and blasted critics for calling them racist.
She tweeted: "I am half-Indian, I work for and support @UKIP policies. I am not a racist. Our immigration policy is about SPACE and NOT race!" In one Ukip election broadcast Ms Vaid is filmed in a yellow vest top and leopard print heels.
She has also appeared in online "selfie snaps" of Mr Farage's entourage.
Ms Vaid calls the Ukip leader "not only an inspiration, true statesman, a genuine man but a friend". Last night, a party spokeswoman said of the explicit pictures of Ms Vaid: "It is a personal matter. It is not a matter for the party."
QFORMER Army boss Lord Dannatt has slammed a Ukip poster which shows the Union Flag on fire.
He called it "disrespectful" to those who have lost their lives fighting for Britain.
The party's European election campaign ad shows the flag with a hole burned out of the middle to display the EU emblem underneath.
It carries the message: "Who really runs this country? Seventy-five per cent of our laws are now made in Brussels." jonathan.reilly @the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUN0020140424ea4o000bm
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:28
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
