{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"319"}
____
  
News
Eurosceptics are in danger of losing everything
By Daniel Hannan   
940 words
2 May 2014
19:41
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
David Cameron could not have been more definite. “I would not continue as prime minister unless I can be absolutely guaranteed that this referendum would go ahead on an in-out basis,” he announced during a phone-in on Sunday.
He has, in other words, made a referendum on leaving the EU the one declared condition of participation in a future coalition. Not defence or taxation or the voting system: Europe.
Now you might respond by slapping your hands over your ears and shouting “Nah-nah-nah, can’t hear you”. Or you might express the same sentiment in the way that half-clever people sometimes do online do, by saying “You can’t believe a word any politician says”. You might – I sense that some of my regular commenters are already itching to do it – start talking about “Cast-Iron Dave”.
If you begin from the position that anything a politician says is a lie then, by definition, I’m not going to convince you. But I’d ask you to ponder the actions, not just the words, of Conservative Party. Every Conservative MP voted for an In/Out referendum in July. Labour and the Lib Dems, having tried to talk the Bill out, were too cowardly to vote against it in the Commons, instead killing it off quietly in the Lords. But if a Conservative MP comes high enough in the next Private Member’s Bill ballot, the legislation will be reintroduced and, if necessary, subjected to the Parliament Act.
The Bill sets out what the electorate will be (people who can vote in general elections plus the citizens of Gibraltar – the other British territory in the EU) as well as how the question will appear on the ballot paper (“Do you think that the United Kingdom should be a member of the European Union?”)Again, if you’re worried that EU nationals might be enfranchised, or the question loaded, you don’t have to take anyone’s word for anything: you can read the legislation.
What of the accusation that we have already had broken promises on a referendum? It’s a fair charge to lay against Gordon Brown, who wriggled out of Labour’s commitment to a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty by claiming that a name change made it redundant. It can be laid, with force, against Nick Clegg, who fought the last election promising an In/Out poll, but has since moved Heaven and Earth to prevent one.
When it comes to the Conservatives, though, it’s only fair to be accurate about the chronology. With the exception of a couple of absentees, every Conservative MP voted for a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. When that vote was lost, and the treaty ratified, the party announced that it would not retrospectively seek a referendum on something that had already passed into law.
That decision was a terrible error, and probably cost the party an absolute majority the following year. I thought it unconscionable, and resigned from the Euro front bench in protest. But an error is not the same thing as a lie. A lie would have been to fight the 2010 election promising a referendum, and then to renege afterwards, la Clegg. It was precisely because he didn’t want people to feel deceived that David Cameron announced the new policy well in advance of the election campaign.
I realise that this story may have passed the point of correction: the idea that the Conservatives promised a referendum at the last election has somehow lodged itself in lots of people’s minds. It’s paradoxical that, of the three Westminster parties, the one that is most frequently accused of lying over a referendum is the only one that didn’t.
This matters, not least because many of those protesting about being denied a vote don’t seem especially interested in winning it. And it could be upon us very soon.
Why assume that a re-elected Coalition would wait until 2017? If Clegg has agreed to an In/Out referendum – and it is not credible that the PM would have spoken as he did otherwise – he has probably insisted that it to be held early, so as to avoid the mid-term unpopularity that afflicts all governments.
My worry is that if the “No” campaign is dominated by Ukip, and focused on the issue of immigration, it will lose. I don’t blame Ukip for galvanising its vote; but almost nothing it says appeals to voters who are undecided on EU membership. Hence the paradox that several psephologists have observed: the better Ukip fares in the polls, the lower support for Brexit sinks.
The case for independence needs to be warm, optimistic, internationalist. We need to explain why the EU has been made redundant by technological advance, why it no longer makes sense to be trapped in a declining customs union. It’s not that Ukip is wrong about immigration: obviously we shouldn’t exclude highly skilled professionals from outside the EU so as to free up space for unskilled migrants from inside. But that can’t be the main message. We need a “No” campaign that appeals to voters of Left, Right and Centre, to children of immigrants, to Scots, to white collar public sector workers, to students. We need to conjure the vision of a global Britain, interested and involved in the affairs of every continent, including Europe.
Above all, we need to ensure that we get such a referendum; and that means supporting a party that can deliver it.
Document TELUK00020140502ea52004jy
