{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3226"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Last Briton in Guantanamo is seriously ill, say lawyers
Jon Swaine in New York   
576 words
9 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
8
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The last British detainee at Guantanamo Bay is suffering from a potentially life-threatening medical condition as well as post-traumatic stress disorder and should be returned urgently to his family in London, his lawyers have argued.
Shaker Aamer, who was cleared for release by the US seven years ago, "requires psychiatric treatment, as well as reintegration into his family and society", according to the 20-page report of a medical evaluation carried out by Dr Emily Keram, an independent psychiatrist, who grimly depicted Aamer's declining health after extended periods of torture and mistreatment.
Aamer has been imprisoned at the US naval base in Cuba since February 2002. US military files leaked in 2011 said he was suspected of being "a member of al-Qaida, with significant ties to senior-level extremists". However, he has never been charged with a crime. US and British authorities have not explained publicly why he remains detained. Foreign Office minister Alistair Burt said in the Commons last year: "I have a supposition, but it's not a detail I can go into." Burt suggested Aamer had been cleared only for transfer to Saudi Arabia, yet wanted to be with his wife and family in London, where he has permission to remain. However, a clearance document given to Aamer did not specify that he could be transferred only to Saudi Arabia.
His lawyers said in a motion filed to a federal court in Washington that both the Geneva conventions on war and US military regulations suggested that he should be released due to ill health. "Even if he receives the intensive medical and therapeutic treatment his condition requires, Mr Aamer will take many years, if not a lifetime, to achieve any significant recovery," they said.
Keram's 20-page report depicts a bleak 12 years in the life of Aamer, a Saudi citizen who once worked for immigration lawyers in London, where his wife and four children still live. He has suffered "significant disruptions in his ability to function", according to the psychiatrist, and frequently lost concentration or began "suddenly and loudly singing" to distract himself during their interviews.
After 25 hours of evaluation, Keram concluded that Aamer was suffering from severe edema, which, "if left untreated, may reflect an underlying life-threatening organ or vascular dysfunction". She also found he had severe tinnitus, debilitating headaches, asthma, ear pain, worsening vision, kidney pain and other ailments.
Keram said that she had further diagnosed Aamer with PTSD and depression. She said that he was suffering from anxiety, paranoia, insomnia and a number of other serious psychological problems, and experienced difficulty eating and using the bathroom after years of being deprived access to both.
Aamer claimed to have been beaten and tortured by his Afghan captors in 2001 and then by the US forces to whom he was transferred. He was kept awake for 10 straight days while detained at Kandahar airfield, he said, where one interrogator threatened to rape his young daughter.
The mistreatment continued at Guantanamo, Aamer said. He claims to have been tied up for 36 hours and left exposed in an open-air cage. "I told the interrogators everything to decrease the torture severity," Keram reports him as saying.
Captions:
Shaker Aamer has been imprisoned at the US base on Cuba since 2002. He has never been charged with a crime
Document GRDN000020140409ea490001n
