{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3063"}
____
  
Guardian Travel Pages
Travel: Giorgio Locatelli: TheWayISeeIt: Ancient Roman bikinis, Arabic couscous and the world's best ice-cream ... The Italian chef tells of his soft spot for Sicily
1,143 words
26 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
7
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Sicily is the most exotic place in Europe. It was the most important piece of land in the Mediterranean for thousands of years and lots of Greek and Arabic influences remain.
I'm from northern Italy and I didn't go to Sicily until I was in my 30s. I've been back many times with my family. I've put Sicilian dishes on the menu at [my London restaurant] Locanda Locatelli. Sicily changed my cooking: I now use fennel, pistachios, almonds . . .
The first thing to do when you arrive is rent a car. Italy doesn't have a well-developed public transport system, and in Sicily it is catastrophic. But the roads are quite good so you can let it rip! There is so much to do: spend a couple of days in each place and then move on.
My perfect day would be spent in Mazara del Vallo, a big fishing port. In 1998, a local fisherman caught a statue of a dancing figure in his nets. It turned out to be an ancient bronze satyr, cast between the fourth and second centuries BC. (I've met the fisherman who landed it - he can often be found in the local bars.) The Dancing Satyr is now on display at the town's Museo del Satiro in the church of Sant'Egidio. The statue is so beautiful and elegant, and most of the time you have the little museum to yourself, but there were huge queues when it came to London's Royal Academy in 2012. Afterwards I'd go to one of the Tunisian bakeries or restaurants - there are lots of Tunisian immigrants in Mazara.
The most famous archaeological site is the Valley of Temples in Agrigento, but I love Selinunte, further up the coast. The landscape is wilder there. I walk from the beach up and around the remains of the acropolis, necropolis and old market, all from about 650BC. The view is incredible and you can feel the presence of the ancient Greeks.
The island has so many magical places: the ancient amphitheatres of Syracuse; the little town of Erice, where there are more churches than houses; the Norman cathedral of Monreale. The Villa Romana del Casale, just outside the town of Piazza Armerina, has an incredible collection of Roman mosaics. They include beautiful mosaics of girls in bikinis. Romans! In bikinis! My kids thought that was so funny; they loved it.
Enna, in the centre of the island, is a huge stone with a town on top. It is so breathtaking, I can't believe it exists. It has wonderful Easter celebrations, as does Modica in the south.
Mount Etna, one of the most active volcanoes in the world, is also one of the most beautiful areas of Sicily. You can take the cable car up to 2,500m and then walk to the crater. Make sure you wear warm clothes, even in summer. The view from the top is unbelievable.
Palermo is fantastic for markets. La Vucciria and Ballaro are two of the most exciting, with an Arabic vibe and a craziness reminiscent of Bangkok. You can also buy a beautifully made suit in Palermo, from one of the old sartorie (tailors).
A symphony between land and people still exists here. There is a great fishing culture. In Sciacca, you can buy fish direct from the boats - a euros 10 box of sardines will feed 20 people.
Food is very seasonal, fresh and cheap. Look around you for pine kernels, pistachios, artichokes. Almonds from Noto. The best peaches are found on street corners in Triscina. When a mafia boss was found in hiding in Sicily, all he had in his fridge was bitter chicory and ricotta. He was probably worth a couple of billion! But in Sicily, you don't need a huge variety of ingredients.
The dish that epitomises Sicily is pasta con le sarde from Palermo, made with sardines, fennel, saffron, pine kernels, sultanas and a light, sweet tomato sauce. I also love Sicilian fish couscous, which reflects the island's Arabic heritage - there is a couscous championship once a year in San Vito lo Capo (6-8 June, couscousfest.it).
The olive oil is exceptionally good. Groves near the sea have a salinity that you can't get anywhere else in Italy. I bought some groves and I make my own unfiltered, velvety oil on an estate in Agrigento province.
The street food in Palermo is incredible, such as stigghiola (stuffed, grilled lamb intestines) and pane con la milza (spleen sandwiches). In Bagheria you can get the best sfincione (Sicilian pizza). The dough is sweet and soft with the fluffiness of a cloud, almost like a doughnut, and it is topped with onion and anchovies but no tomatoes. (Bagheria also has a fantastic museum dedicated to the painter Renato Guttuso, museoguttuso.it.)
My favourite place to eat is Da Vittoria (ristorantevittorio.it) in Porto Palo di Menfi. A restaurant with rooms, it serves traditional Sicilian fish dishes right on the beach. There is no menu: you get antipasti and pasta and grilled fish. It's very friendly and relaxed: if you want another bottle of wine, you help yourself from the fridge. Palermitanos go there, and it's just off one of the major wine routes, so there are usually a few wine tourists too - Sicily makes fantastic wine.
The best ice-cream in the world is at Caffe Sicilia in Noto. Noto is a beautiful town - it was destroyed by an earthquake in 1693 and rebuilt 8km away, so it's like a stage set. The baroque centre, with a duomo and dozens of churches, is a world heritage site.
The beach at San Vito lo Capo is like the Caribbean - white sand, beautiful sea - and is part of the Zingaro nature reserve.
My favourite hotel is La Foresteria (doubles from euros 90, planetaestate.it), an exceptional place on top of a little hill in wine country. There is a beautiful pool, gardens with 16 kinds of sage, an estate with 250 kinds of birds. Guests all eat together around a big, 30-seat dining table.
Tourists often worry about the mafia but there's no need. Most Sicilians are good people and I've never experienced any crime.
* Giorgio Locatelli is chef patron of Locanda Locatelli in London (locandalocatelli.com). His book Made in Sicily is published by Fourth Estate (rrp pounds 30). To buy a copy for pounds 24 inc free UK p&p call 0330 333 6846 or visit guardianbookshop.co.uk
Interview by Rachel Dixon
Captions:
Giorgio Locatelli in Sicily and, above right, a market and ancient mosaic bikinis
Document GRDN000020140425ea4q000dv
