{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1506"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: ARTS: She doesn't bleed: In Under the Skin, Jonathan Glazer's film about an extraterrestrial driving around Scotland in search of male prey, nothing is certain, except, says Leo Robson, Scarlett Johansson's uncanny ability to act like an alien
Leo Robson   
1,587 words
15 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
18
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Scarlett Johansson has a striking face and a resonant voice, though it seems that either will do. In Spike Jonze's Her (2013), which came out last month, she plays the title role but never appears. Now we have Jonathan Glazer's science fiction film of Michel Faber's novel Under the Skin, in which she is present, deadpan and dead-eyed, throughout, but barely says a word.
Johansson's role in Glazer's film, despite its restrictions, gives her the opportunity to draw equally on the different elements of her personality - sunny and neurotic, sassy and glassy. Woody Allen explored both of these sides in Match Point (2005). In his later film, Vicky Cristina Barcelona (2008), the two heroines were opposites, with Johansson playing the uninhibited risk-taker, and the twitchy, indoorsy role being taken by Rebecca Hall.
Under the Skin is to some extent a film of two halves, corresponding to a change in the character's sensibility, but it permits Johansson to be a number of things right from the start. As Laura, an extraterrestrial in voluptuous and dark-haired female form, she is functioning as a screen for our projections. The film's screenplay, written by Glazer and Walter Campbell (his first credit), does without the context supplied in the novel. What we see is all we get - Laura drives a van around Glasgow and the Scottish Highlands, picks up men, talks to them, sometimes drops them off and sometimes kills them using an elaborate technique whereby immersion in murky water removes their insides before causing them to pop like a balloon. Johansson's few lines of dialogue involve her engaging her passengers in banal chitchat, occasionally offering an awkwardly delivered compliment ("You're very charming"), after which her face tends to settle back into something tougher. The move from affability to froideur is engineered without so much as a transitional blink.
A potential precedent for Johansson's performance, Robert De Niro as Travis Bickle in Taxi Driver (1976), is in reality almost her opposite. Travis looks around New York and sees "filth and scum", a community of creeps that deserves to be flushed down "the fuckin' toilet", whereas Laura's project, though unspecified, could hardly be social or municipal. One of Glazer's achievements in the film is a high level of discomfort, arising from familiar things being severed from their customary uses. The tradition of film grammar dictates that you cut between spectacle and spectator - from De Niro's eyes to pimps on the pavement, and then back again. A famous teaching exercise conducted by the Soviet film-maker Lev Kuleshov, with the actor Ivan Mosjoukine as his guinea pig, illustrated that context determines the emotional tone of a close-up - if it is a woman's corpse, we read the reaction shot as deeply shocked; if it is a bowl of soup, less so. Hitchcock invoked the Kuleshov experiment when describing his own method in Rear Window (1954), reasoning that a James Stewart smile seems "kindly" when he's looking at a dog, "dirty" when he's looking at a girl.
The logic is complicated, even scrambled, when this cutting scheme is retained, but the person watching is known not to share our biology, let alone our social outlook. When Laura's eyes glaze over, we are trained to read it as menace, just as we see melancholy when she fixes on a point in the distance. A tool of identification is repurposed as one of estrangement; Glazer's recourse to clarifying rhythms serves only to tell us how little we understand. The precedent is not Taxi Driver, then, but any instances of the human face as closed book - Janet Leigh at certain points of Psycho (1960), perhaps, or Myra Hindley, her black eyes and frozen features yielding nothing to the policeman's camera. Bela Balazs described the close-up as a silent soliloquy; Johansson is part of a rival tradition of silent nonsense verse.
Glazer's last film, Birth, which came out a decade ago, contains - along with some extraordinary set-pieces - a memorable close-up, four minutes on Nicole Kidman's face as her character absorbs a visit paid by a 10-year-old boy claiming to be her reincarnated husband. Johansson is a better fit for the kind of acting required by Under the Skin - whereas Kidman is a porcelain doll, her facial register always operating somewhere between anxiety and anguish, Johansson's face at rest is capable of something close to blankness. Glazer's first film, Sexy Beast (2000), has a scene that asks us to understand what falling down a hillside feels like for a boulder, and just as Sergio Leone said that he looked through Clint Eastwood's face and saw a block of marble, so Glazer gets something boulder-like - impassive, abstracted - from Johansson.
On the whole, clarity of expression is not what Glazer is after, though he does flirt with the odd theme and display the occasional flash of intention. Faber wrote his novel as a Dutchman mostly raised in Australia, so he saw Scotland through a particular lens. Laura is a kind of immigrant - as well as coming from another planet, she speaks with an English accent - and she meets another traveller early in the film. "Why here?" she asks, and he replies: "Because it's nowhere." You can hardly expect a film that doesn't explain where its only character comes from, what she wants and what she comprehends, to unpack the connotations of its title, but the phrase "under the skin" seems like part of an anti-racial slogan, a reminder that despite our racial or ethnic differences we share some basic components. Laura herself, of course, does not. If you prick her, she doesn't bleed; she just peels a bit, revealing something tar-black and sticky. The question of whether she has a soul is harder to assess: a series of encounters in the middle of the film appear to humanise her, teaching her pity and self-consciousness, as well as curiosity about human customs (her encounter with a chocolate sponge cake doesn't end well). But this is a film in which appearances have limited power to communicate.
A feminist undertone is easier to identify, Laura being both a watcher and predator of men. In the society she enters, and to which she brings nothing besides a body, Laura is a sex object, in dress and demeanour a kind of sex toy; she might have come to Earth to prove a point about male expectations of women. The film recalls the SF thriller Species (1995) - about a half-alien/half-human who develops a sexual appetite - but as remade with a stern coldness learned from Kubrick or Tarkovsky; if Under the Skin communicates any gender-politics message, it does so through the disparity in excitement between the male characters' reaction to Laura and that of the camera.
Another possibility is that the film seeks to undermine our conventional strategies of creating meaning. In the opening scene, in which Laura is created, we are shown a light that reminds us of an eye - and then, with a cut, it becomes an eye. Elsewhere, human form rhymes with natural landscape, and we are never far from an implied comparison between nationality and species.
Still another possibility is that Under the Skin is primarily comic. There was a certain amount of muted humour in Birth, which displayed a Bunuel-like ability to play a zany scenario completely straight (it was co‑written by Bunuel's long-time collaborator, Jean-Claude Carriere), and some verbal slapstick in Sexy Beast, the film that established Glazer as a director specialising in water, long takes and a fragile atmosphere of not-quite-reality. Under the Skin invites laughter of a more distant, knowing kind. It is a piece of science fiction set in a landscape dominated by shopping centres and Celtic shirts - surely the first work of its kind to contain the line: "This isn't Tesco's, is it?" We don't tend to associate genre cinema with Tommy Cooper, baked beans or pebbledash, but here they all are. Although Glazer's tone is never less than dignified, he suggests now and then that there is a joke and he is in on it. There is evidence of overt dramatic irony in the moment a man carries Laura across a deep puddle - he endures a dislikable sensation to save her from one that she wouldn't notice. And there are moments of calculated bathos, such as a cut from a shot of the Highlands to a dowdy hotel dining room, that suggest Glazer is not only aware of the film's juxtaposition of the sublime and the banal but keen to cultivate it.
We are never told what we're watching. Social panorama seems no more or less plausible than po-faced parody. The only certainty is Glazer's interest and investment in Johansson's face, helpfully deconstructed by one of the hitchhikers: "Your eyes. There's summat about your eyes. Your lips. Your black hair."
Under the Skin (15) is out on general release.
Captions:
Deadpan and dead-eyed . . . Johansson in Under the Skin
Document GRDN000020140314ea3f0005m
