{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"280"}
____
  
NEWS
Up to 200,000 Romanians and Bulgarians now in UK
By Tim Ross Political Correspondent   
809 words
11 May 2014
08:50
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
At least 30,000 Romanians and Bulgarians have come to Britain to work in the last year, as border controls were lifted to comply with EU law, figures are set to show this week
Tens of thousands of eastern European migrants have moved to Britain for work in the last year at a time when border controls were being relaxed, official figures are forecast to show this week.
In an exclusive analysis prepared for The Telegraph, economists from Oxford University predict that the figures will show at least 30,000 more Romanians and Bulgarians were working in the UK in the first three months of this year than during the same period in 2013.
The increase - of more than 25 per cent - is likely to take the total number of migrants now living in Britain from these two countries alone to 200,000, when their unemployed family members are taken into account.
The figures follows the lifting of all restrictions on new migrants coming to Britain from Romania and Bulgaria, the European Union’s poorest member states, on January 1.
On Wednesday, official employment statistics will provide the first indication of the impact that lifting the partial ban has had on immigration to Britain.
In the weeks before the border controls were removed, Conservative MPs called for restrictions on the two countries to be extended but ministers refused, arguing it would have broken European laws.
The figures come at a highly-charged time, with less than two weeks until European Parliament elections are held across Britain. David Cameron is under pressure to take a tougher approach to European immigration in order to win back voters from the UK Independence Party .
Bulgarians and Romanians have been able to travel to Britain without a visa since they joined the EU in 2007. However, temporary restrictions were placed on employment, with work permits and quotas for low-skilled jobs in farming and food processing.
This meant most Romanians and Bulgarians took seasonal work such as fruit picking unless they were self-employed.
All restrictions ended on January 1 this year and Bulgarians and Romanians are now entitled to claim the same benefits and NHS care as other EU citizens.
On Wednesday, the Office for National Statistics will publish an estimate of the number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in the UK between January and March this year, the first three months after the restrictions were lifted.
Analysts from Oxford窶冱 Migration Observatory  unit said the number was almost certain to be higher as it had risen even while controls were in place.
In the first quarter of 2007, there were 29,000 Romanian and Bulgarian workers over the age of 16 living in Britain. By the same January-to-March period last year, the figure had almost quadrupled to 112,000.
Dr Carlos Vargas-Silva, an economist and senior researcher at the Migration Observatory, said he expected to see “a big increase” when the official results are released.
“It is almost certain that we are going to see an increase in that number from the first quarter in 2013 to the first quarter in 2014,” he said. “We would expect at least 30,000 more. It is difficult to predict, but that would be the minimum you would expect.”
By December 2013, there were 144,000 Romanian and Bulgarian workers in the UK.
While there were restrictions on workers taking jobs with large employers, there was no limit on migrants registering as “self-employed”.
Dr Vargas-Silva said: “It is possible to argue that many of the people who wanted to come to the UK are already here because they are working as self-employed.
“Or it may be the case that many of them are looking for jobs with big companies so they are coming to the UK now.”
Migration Watch UK, another think-tank specialising in immigration data, predicted that a total of about 50,000 more migrants from the two countries would arrive every year for the next five years.
Alp Mehmet, vice chairman of Migration Watch UK, and a former ambassador to Iceland, said there would be “additional pressures” on schools, housing and the NHS from “an influx of people of this order”.
“The addition to the population has quite a significant impact on all of us, not least at a time of limited resources,” he said.
Philip Hollobone, the Conservative MP for Kettering, said next week’s immigration figures would be “further confirmation that we have no control whatsoever over EU migration” and called for Britain to leave the European Union.
“Immigration is the number one issue on the doorstep,” he said. “Unless we tackle the issue of our EU membership we are not going to control levels of EU migration.”
Document TELUK00020140511ea5b0012y
