{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3008"}
____
  
Features; Opinion, Column
Why the Tories dread another five years of Chairman Clegg
ISABEL HARDMAN   
628 words
9 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
22
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
With just a year till the general election, both Coalition parties are getting excited about the prospect of going their separate ways. In their excitement they've upped the bickering, leaking letters about Liberal Democrat opposition to Tory plans for tougher sentences for knife crime.
This fighting would be fine if there was no chance at all that the two parties would have to work together after 2015. Instead, there is a strong possibility that ministers will return to their desks with the colleagues they've spent months taking pot shots at.
This raises the question of how a second Tory–Liberal Democrat coalition could work. Admittedly, those at the very top of the Government enjoy a far more effective relationship than anyone could have predicted. But lower down, frustration is so great that some influential Tory ministers have made it known to colleagues that they would vote against a second coalition in a secret ballot.
Most discussions about post–2015 partnerships focus on policy. But it is the way the Coalition is plumbed that most affects how easily policies flow out of it.
Nick Clegg is chairman of the home affairs committee, a Cabinet committee which oversees most domestic policies, including health, immigration, schools and welfare, as well as political and constitutional reform. He secured this as part of the negotiations in 2010, and no one quite realised the implications. One Tory minister who would oppose another coalition moans: "It's not just Clegg blocking stuff on this committee, but he takes ages to get through all the policies. It's immensely frustrating."
It was through this committee that Mr Clegg blocked tougher sentences for repeat knife offences, and it will be through it that he could kill off any radical Tory reforms after 2015.
The Deputy Prime Minister and his colleagues have also worked out what it is that David Cameron will roll over on, to the frustration of Conservative ministers and advisers whose pet policies get flattened. One says: "Cameron tends to get a bit bored with Nick going on at him about something and give up, but that just reinforces the sense that Nick can get away with it again next time."
All of this means a sizeable number of those Tories who have day–to–day dealings with Chairman Clegg would quite like to see him leave the committee in a second coalition. They think it gives him more power than is merited, given the relatively small number of MPs his party brings to government.
But Mr Clegg has privately indicated that he doesn't want a great office of state – and given his influence on the committee, he'd have to win a big prize from the Tories in exchange for giving up the chairmanship. The Conservatives don't seem to have considered what this could be, which is not reassuring to those who hope a post–2015 government would actually govern, rather than bicker endlessly about Michael Gove and leak more and more letters.
Wanting to win in 2015 is not a good enough excuse for failing to ensure that the party is as ready as possible to get the best deal from negotiations. Otherwise the new government will plod along, grumbling and tired, like a reluctant teenager on a walk.
A Conservative–Lib Dem government in 2015 would have half the policies and twice the grudges. And while that might motivate the Tories to campaign jolly hard for a majority next year, it should also set them thinking about how on earth they could make another five years of dealing with Chairman Clegg work.
Comment on Isabel Hardman's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140509ea590003s
