{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2822"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Ambitious Ed won't convince Labour HQ he can get a majority
ISABEL HARDMAN   
711 words
28 February 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
22
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nick Clegg is normally teased for looking a bit sad, but this week he was more on the grumpy side, as the Tories and Labour suggested they didn't much fancy five (more) years of coalition with him and his party. The Telegraph reported that David Cameron might rule it out, and Labour came under pressure from the unions to do the same – but neither has.
While the Tory position is somewhat complicated by the number of MPs and ministers who would vote against another partnership in 2015, Labour wants to rule out the idea of going it alone in a minority government. Senior sources insist "we are definitely not keen… We want a stable majority." Or failing that, a coalition.
But just because the party says it is focused on a stable majority doesn't mean that everyone involved in the general election campaign agrees. In fact, there are tensions within Labour over whether it should aim for a majority, or simply to be the largest party.
You could draw a comparison here with those unseasoned long–distance runners who pound off from the starting line at an unsustainable pace. For a couple of miles, they charge along feeling wonderfully impressive, then, huff, puff, they drop out because they can't keep up the effort. The trick is not to waste all your resources so that you never finish.
This is the thinking behind a push from figures in Labour headquarters to change the thrust of the campaign: they don't consider the party to be fit enough to run for a majority in 2015, and instead want to settle for the largest–party option, which they feel to be sufficiently ambitious.
I understand that private party–strategy documents are conceding that the current list of 106 target seats is too big and should be scaled back to as few as 60 constituencies, or possibly 80. HQ bosses want the party to limit its ambitions, and have always harboured worries that 106 would be just too many. When the list of target seats was drawn up, some key members of the campaign team wanted 90. But 60 would mean that Labour is taking the largest–party option and not going for a majority.
This doesn't really come as a huge surprise when you remember that Labour HQ largely backed David Miliband, not Ed, in 2010. The relationship between the leader and staff at Brewer's Green continues to wax and wane, and I am told by campaign sources that Mr Miliband still hasn't convinced headquarters that he's capable of winning a majority. One insider spoke of a certain fatalism on the part of Labour officials: "The best they could hope for is some kind of minority government or coalition and that is reflected by having a small offer and a small seats list."
Some have tried to warn Mr Miliband about this, though his team say they continue to be ambitious about target seats. Naturally those at the bottom of that list of 106 would receive fewer resources than those at the top. But the Labour leader will need to keep an eagle eye out for any attempts to move HQ–funded organisers from lower target seats into those that are most winnable.
Mr Miliband will also need to spend this summer standing up to those who want to "shrink" the party's manifesto so that it doesn't deal with awkward issues such as immigration and welfare. A senior party source insists that "those involved in the manifesto are not in the business of shrinking the offer". But other Milibandites are privately concerned by aggressive briefings against campaign guru Arnie Graf and policy chief Jon Cruddas. They worry that these two men are being targeted because they are "outriders" for a majority strategy.
If Mr Miliband doesn't watch his back, he could find that it's not pressure to rule out a coalition that he needs to worry about, but his party ruling out fighting for a majority without him having much of a say about it.
Comment on Isabel Hardman's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140228ea2s0004f
