{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3830"}
____
  
News; Opinion Columns
'Our press is the world's best — it is fearless and without favour'
Alice Thomson; Rachel Sylvester   
1,850 words
26 April 2014
The Times
T
3; National
34,35
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
SaJid Javid is relishing his new cabinet role, write Alice Thomson and Rachel Sylvester This week, Sajid Javid has been to the Matisse show at Tate Modern and visited the National Gallery, Tate Britain, the British Museum, the British Library and the Government Art Collection, as well as seeing Hamlet at the Globe Theatre to celebrate Shakespeare's birthday. His World Cup tickets are on the way and he drinks his tea from a Visit Britain mug. It's been a crash course in culture, media and sport for the new secretary of state. The son of a bus driver, whose father arrived in Britain from Pakistan with only £1 in his pocket, has had an extraordinary rise. A Muslim whose first language was Punjabi, he grew up in Rochdale and Bristol, spending much of his childhood with his four brothers in a two-bedroom flat above a shop.
His head teacher tried to ban him from taking maths O level but he insisted on sitting it, passed with flying colours, then made millions as a banker in New York before going into politics. After only two years as an MP he became economic secretary to the Treasury, before being promoted to the cabinet this month after the resignation of Maria Miller. Now he is regularly discussed as a possible future leader of the Conservative party.
When he was young, his only regular outing was to the library, where his mother, who had never been to school, would instruct her five sons to read for two hours. "Our parents understood that education was hugely important if their children were going to get anywhere. In many Asian families, they say: 'You must join a profession, be a doctor or an accountant.' My parents just said: 'You must get a good job.'" The culture secretary, 45, admits that he has never been to the opera and says the only ballet he has ever seen was at his children's school. He doesn't know The Luminaries or The Goldfinch, the latest Man Booker and Pulitzer prize-winning novels. The last fiction he read was Philip Pullman's His Dark Materials trilogy.
"As a young lad I didn't have the opportunity to go to the theatre, opera or ballet, it wasn't even on my radar because it was a real treat just to go to the cinema," he says. "That was a money thing ... Now, there is not much time outside work and what I do get is very precious, like for any working parent. I have four kids and a lot of the choices are dictated by them. The weekend before I got promoted I went to see War Horse with my daughter but Frozen is often what they want to see."
Although he has been criticised by the arts establishment for his lack of expertise, he says: "There are some people who think that only Picasso can be culture secretary ... but my cultural background is more like the 90 per cent than the 10 per cent of the population."
Most government departments would be thrilled to have this Tory rising star, who showed sure-footedness and intelligence at the Treasury, in charge. "In my old job I travelled the world and I have seen for myself in China, Brazil and India just how important our culture is," he says. He is setting up an £18 million cultural exports fund to promote British theatre, art and film abroad. "If more people in China are going to see War Horse, Sherlock and Harry Potter, they will gain an understanding of Britishness and the best of our values and beliefs. We need this sector to grow."
Personally, he prefers David Hockney to Damien Hirst and LS Lowry to Tracey Emin, but he doesn't want to meddle. "I appreciate there can be art I don't enjoy but others do," he says. "It is not my job to pick winners. History will decide what is great and the population what is popular but my role is to make sure creativity can thrive."
Schools must promote the arts, he insists. "Art and design should be a key part of education ... Our authors, directors and actors are known around the world, but we can't take that for granted. Even though we have something so successful, we will have to run to stand still."
Museums and galleries will stay free as long as he is culture secretary. "When I was 11, I went to the Natural History Museum with the school and we had to pay for the whole trip, which was very expensive, so widening access to the arts is important to me and free access to museums is a huge part of it."
The future regulation of newspapers may be the contentious part of his brief and on this Mr Javid appears to be striking a different tone from his predecessor. "The press is hugely important and freedom of speech is a cornerstone of our democracy," he says. "I'm proud of the press ... Notwithstanding the fact that any industry has its bad apples, I think our press is the best in the world. It is fearless without favour."
After the phone-hacking scandal there was, he says, general agreement that the Press Complaints Commission "wasn't really working and something had to be changed". He doesn't want another showdown. "It is now a decision for the press what they want to do next. I don't see any further role for government in this but the most important thing has got to be that the press is respected for the role they've played. Our country has benefited hugely over the ages from having a press that is vibrant and fearless."
The newspapers were, in his view, justified in pursuing Mrs Miller over her expenses. "I think one of the important roles of the press is to hold public officials to account and Maria herself recognised that she made mistakes ... As long as they are presenting facts I think that is perfectly healthy."
The internet is his greater concern. He intends to legislate by the autumn to force people accessing online pornography to prove that they are over 18. "I've got three girls and a boy, aged five to 14, and I do worry about it. Just as you restrict access to this kind of material in newsagents, or the sale of alcohol to children, it's legitimate for governments to be involved."
Mr Javid's eldest daughter is called Sophia, the name his mother would "have given him had he been a girl. "My parents were desperate to have a daughter," he says. "They kept going and had five boys."
When he was growing up, it was "brothers looking after each other" while parents were out at work. His father, who had a job in a cotton mill, as well as on the buses, was called "Mr Night and Day" by colleagues. After years living in Britain, he gave up his Pakistani nationality.
"This was his country, this was his home. It wasn't a temporary stop, it was the future for him and his family," the minister says. "There were lots of things about Britain — the culture, the sport — that were hugely important to him. He was very proud of being British."
Mr Javid feels the same. "As soon as I was sent to school, all my experiences were the same as any other British child. The end result is that I feel as British as any man on the street."
Margaret Thatcher convinced his father, who had always voted Labour until 1979, that she was "a woman who would sort the country out". The family is now Tory and the culture secretary hangs a picture of Thatcher over his desk. Now, though, the Conservative party is struggling to attract ethnic-minority voters. "A lot of polling has suggested there's an issue," Mr Javid admits. "If I had to pick one thing that explains it, it would be the speech that was made the year before I was born by Enoch Powell. That is not the Tory party, it wasn't even the Tory party then."
He thinks "it takes time" to change perceptions. "Engagement [with ethnic-minority communities] is a big part of it, listening to concerns, turning up at events and talking to people. In the past the Conservatives haven't done as good a job at that as Labour. We can do more."
Immigration policy is not in his view the problem. "In fact concerns over excessive immigration in Britain are there equally among people from ethnic-minority backgrounds."
David Cameron infuriated some this Easter when he suggested that Britain was a Christian country but Mr Javid, whose wife is a churchgoer, says: "I agree with the prime minister. Clearly our history and our culture are Christian. That's impacted everything from how we run our country to the festivals we have. I think it's something we should be proud of, and a lot of people of other faiths would respect that as well."
He is appalled by the idea that Islamic extremists may have infiltrated some schools in Birmingham, demanding that girls sit at the back in class. "It's totally unacceptable ... to have segregated classes. Michael Gove is right to take this really seriously, send in an inspector and get to the truth because if this kind of thing is really going on then we've got to deal with it now."
Despite the number of Old Etonians in the cabinet, this comprehensive schoolboy feels that Westminster is meritocratic. "I can't say I've felt any social or racial discrimination in politics," he says. So does he think that Britain could have a Muslim prime minister? "We had the first woman prime minister. In this country, anything is possible." Leading article, page 24 Sajid Javid Curriculum Vitae Born December 5, 1969 Education Downend School, Filton Technical College, Exeter University Career Joined Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, vice-president aged 25. Joined Deutsche Bank as a director in 2000, managing director in 2004, then global head of Emerging Markets Structuring. Moved to Singapore as head of private equity businesses in Asia. Elected MP for Bromsgrove in 2010. Economic secretary to the Treasury, then financial secretary. Made culture secretary this month Family Married to Laura, with four children Quick fire Strictly Come Dancing or the Royal Ballet? Strictly Come Dancing Veronese or Matisse? Matisse Hamlet or King Lear? Hamlet British Museum or British Library? British Museum Puccini or Wagner? Joaquín Rodrigo The Book of Mormon or Wicked? My daughter tells me Wicked (left) is wicked Damien Hirst or David Hockney? Hockney Cricket or football? Football Winner's medals or prizes for all? Medals David Bailey or Annie Liebowitz? David Bailey
There is art that I don't ENJOY but others do. My role is to make sure that creativity thrives "
Document T000000020140426ea4q000dq
