{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2363"}
____
  
Guardian Society Pages
Society: 'The client is the core of everything I do': Interview: A tireless fighter for vulnerable people's rights, honorary QC Nicola Mackintosh is a rebel with a cause
Fiona Bawdon   
1,464 words
16 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
41
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The rank of honorary Queen's counsel is a rare accolade which the lord chancellor bestows on just a handful of the most respected lawyers each year. It's a safe bet that there are few among their esteemed ranks whose mailbag has been known to include a giant incontinence pad inscribed: "This is what I've been given to use. It would fit an elephant!" or letters from a client with obsessive compulsive disorder, which had been thoroughly washed before sending.
But then Nicola Mackintosh is not a typical solicitor. A one-time punk, now a sole practitioner in south London, she was made an honorary QC this week in recognition of her pioneering work in community care law. "The client is the core of everything I do," she says. "It is their experience of their disability, and how the world treats them, that is the most important thing."
In 1999, Mackintosh successfully challenged the establishment in the landmark Coughlan case. After a two-year legal battle, the case resulted in the court of appeal setting down guidelines for when the NHS must pay for specialist healthcare for those in care homes or in the community. It was a groundbreaking decision, which has spared countless older and disabled people from selling their homes to pay for nursing care.
In the main, Mackintosh's clients are intensely vulnerable: dementia patients whose care home is about to close; a child with a tracheotomy, threatened with the loss of lifesaving 24-hour nursing care; a young man with learning difficulties who won't come out of his locked bedroom for treatment for septicaemia. In the last case, she spent around four hours trying to persuade the man, who had been sexually abused for most of his life, that it was safe to unlock the door. When he finally let her in, the bedroom was crawling with flies and maggots from all the dirty crockery under the bed.
Mackintosh's clients are also, she is quick to point out, some of the most fascinating and likeable people she has ever met. "I'm so lucky to have found a vocation where I enjoy the intellectual challenges, and which allows me to meet the most wonderful, varied group of people, courageous and brave - and I can fight for justice. What a combination." She sounds delighted and amazed in equal measure at her good fortune.
Solicitor Stephen Pierce says that it was while Mackintosh was working for him as a "determined and spirited" trainee doing housing work that she first started talking about community care and "the totally novel notion that people had enforceable rights in relation to services", he recalls. Mackintosh was quick to grasp the implications of the NHS Community Care Act 1990, which gave people the right to have their needs assessed. Pierce says: "When she first wrote to local authorities demanding services, they were bewildered."
While many legal aid lawyers have reached a state of battle-weariness after years of subsequent governments chipping away at a scheme that was set up in 1949 to provide advice and representation in court to those who cannot afford to hire a lawyer, Mackintosh remains as up for the fray as ever. "You must never give up," she says. "You must be realistic and pragmatic, but you must never give up."
Pierce, who is about to quit practice to become a social security tribunal judge, admits to being "lost in admiration". He says: "She goes on doing it, year after year. She is indefatigable. Despite everything that happens, she remains engaged and interested in every development, every policy that changes."
In her role as co-chair of the Legal Aid Practitioners Group (LAPG), Mackintosh was at the forefront of lobbying last year against the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act. It was an exercise that Mackintosh threw herself into with characteristic gusto, according to LAPG director Carol Storer. "She identifies issues that need dealing with, rolls up her sleeves and tackles them."
One such issue was the proposals added to the bill at the last minute to force community care clients to use a "telephone gateway" to gain access to advice. Mackintosh shudders at the thought of dementia patients having to go through what she calls "an algorithm of questions", rather than seeing a lawyer face to face.
After discussions with the Ministry of Justice got nowhere, she and a consortium of firms started judicial review proceedings, and the idea was quickly dropped. However, while campaigners scored some notable victories, April 2013 saw unprecedented cuts to legal aid, with large areas of family, immigration and housing law removed from the scheme.
Mackintosh's work has suffered less than most, as community care remains covered, but the firm has not emerged unscathed. Relations with the Legal Aid Agency, which replaced the Legal Services Commission, are dire. Mackintosh describes it as "an atmosphere of complete distrust". Stringent means-testing has been introduced in disputed deprivation of liberty cases, even for those on income support or guaranteed state pension credit. This is an area where a recent House of Lords select committee concluded that the law was being abused to keep people effectively prisoners in care homes.
Equally alarming are government moves to restrict the use of judicial review, an invaluable weapon in the community care lawyer's armoury.
"You have someone in a care home, settled, who has lived there for years. Then they get a letter from the local authority saying: 'We're going to move you next Tuesday.' The information from their GP, their consultant, their psychiatrist, is that this will effectively result in their mental breakdown, but they have no voice at all. That is a really, really common scenario. Something enormously important to that person that could break them," she says.
In 80% of such cases, a solicitor's letter threatening judicial review will prompt the local authority to back down, she says. "That's not to say the person will never be moved - just not next Tuesday, and not without considering the impact on them." With the threat of judicial review gone, local authorities will simply allow cost considerations to trump the rights of vulnerable patients, she says.
The daughter of two economists, Mackintosh became fascinated with mental health issues at 15, after a work experience stint on a psychiatric ward. "I've always been interested in unusual people and perhaps a bit more comfortable with people who don't fit in with the norm. I suppose there's always been a part of me that's been a little bit rebellious, not necessarily fitting in with the establishment."
She retains the fondness for black clothes and kohl eyeliner of many an erstwhile punk, and bats away suggestions that her work is unglamorous.
"OK, dealing with the maggots wasn't glamorous - but it is glamorous to be able to say now that a client is living independently, with support, and has a much happier and positive life."
In her office, she has a more recent photo of the client she coaxed from his flyblown bedroom, holding the first ever cake he baked- a sponge affair, oozing jam and cream. Mackintosh can't decide whether to be relieved or offended he didn't actually offer her a piece.
Despite her pioneering work, Mackintosh remains little known outside legal circles. She is, she says "overwhelmed" to be made an honorary QC (bursting into tears when she heard). The irony that she will be presented with the "letters patent" by Chris Grayling, the justice secretary whose reforms are dismantling the scheme that Mackintosh has spent her career championing, is not lost on her.
But ever the optimist, she hopes her newfound status may give her extra clout in battles to come. And she believes that even Grayling is not beyond hope. "I like to think he has yet to see the light. I have faith in him."
If anyone can change Grayling's mind, it is likely to be Mackintosh.
Curriculum vitae:
Age 47.
Lives South-east London.
Family Partner, three stepdaughters and four stepgrandsons.
Education Schools in Norwich, Malaysia and Cambridge; Oxford Polytechnic, joint honours degree in law and psychology.
Career 2011-present: sole principal Mackintosh Law; 1999-2011: partner, Mackintosh Duncan; 1995-99: solicitor, TV Edwards; 1992-95: trainee, Steel & Shamash. Qualified as a solicitor in 1992.
Public life Co-chair, Legal Aid Practitioners Group; member, Law Society's Mental Health and Disability and Access to Justice Committee; 2003-11: member, Civil Justice Council.
Interests Building restoration, batik and mosaics.
Document GRDN000020140416ea4g0007u
