{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2706"}
____
  
NEWS
Foreign student numbers 'drop for first time in 30 years'
By Graeme Paton Education Editor   
686 words
2 April 2014
07:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A report from the Higher Education Funding Council for England finds that the number of foreign students recruited by universities has dropped for the first time in three decades
The number of foreign students being recruited to English universities has dropped for the first time in almost 30 years following a rise in tuition fees, according to research.
A study from the Government’s Higher Education Funding Council for England found that enrolments from overseas declined by around 4,600 last year – reversing a long-term upwards trend.
It emerged that the number of undergraduates from mainland Europe, who pay the same tuition fees as British counterparts, fell by a quarter in 2012/13.
The number of postgraduate students joining English universities from India and Pakistan also dropped by around 25 per cent in a year and has now halved since 2010, it was revealed.
The disclosure follows a near tripling of annual tuition fees to £9,000 for the first time in September 2012 combined with a tightening up of student visa controls.
Last year, leading vice-chancellors warned that a culture of hostility towards international students had been allowed to build up as a result of the Coalition’s drive to cut levels of net migration.
It followed calls from a group of Conservative MPs in marginal seats to place a cap on foreign students at all but the very best universities.
But the latest study warned that the decline risked having a “major impact” on university finances, with around 30 per cent of institutions’ total income currently coming from foreign students.
It also places a question mark over the viability of some subjects at English universities such as science, maths and engineering which are currently hugely reliant on admissions from overseas.
Sally Hunt, general secretary of the University and College Union, which represents lecturers, said: “As we face continued uncertainty about the future of funding for our universities, the government should be doing more to encourage foreign students.
“Ministers need to recognise that attempts to sound tough on immigration at home are also reported elsewhere and it is not surprising if students consider studying in the countries that make an effort to welcome them.”
HEFCE analysed international undergraduate and postgraduate entries to English universities in 2012/13.
It found that entries had increased practically every year since 1981 when just 44,762 foreign students took courses in England. By 2011/12 total numbers had increased seven-fold to 311,800.
But the study found that entries declined for the first time in 2012/13 when 307,205 overseas students enrolled. It represented a drop of 4,595 – 1.5 per cent – in 12 months.
HEFCE said it was the first time numbers had actually fallen since 1983.
The study said that “growth in overseas entrants to higher education in England has reduced significantly since 2010” and actually declined for the first time in recent history last year.
It added: “The numbers of full-time European Union undergraduate entrants (who have to pay the same fees as UK students) fell by almost a quarter in 2012/13, probably as a result of the recent increase in tuition fees in England.”
In terms of postgraduate students, the study said: “Entrants to English higher education institutions from India and Pakistan have halved since 2010, at the same time as their numbers are growing in other countries.”
Daniel Stevens, international students’ officer for the National Union of Students, said the decline could be traced to the Government's Immigration Bill, which tightened up rules on the length of time students could work in the UK after graduating.
“These new figures are hardly surprising and confirm what we have been saying all along," he said.
"Many international students feel unwelcome in the UK as a result of the government’s hostile and overzealous policies.
“The immigration bill’s proposals are set to create new barriers to international students at the same time that our global competitors are welcoming them with open arms."
Document TELUK00020140402ea42000b9
