{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2265"}
____
  
News
British politics in centre of gravity says Farage
MACER HALL   
1,286 words
21 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
4,5
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
INTERVIEW
NIGEL Farage predicted last night that his UK Independence Party is heading for a spectacular victory in tomorrow's European elections – and warned it will "shift the centre of gravity" in British politics.
Millions of voters will back the anti–Brussels party, not to protest but because "that is the feeling in their hearts," he said.
The Ukip leader has vowed his "people's army" will defy a series of attacks and slurs to top the poll.
Mr Farage said: "I think we are going to win. And I think the implications for the other three party leaders are pretty major.
"I seriously think it could lead to the demise of Nick Clegg."
Mr Farage brushed aside recent polls suggesting support for his party has been slipping over the last weeks of the campaign.
He said: "I said three years ago we would win these elections, to much ridicule. I set the bar high. Was it a gamble? Yes. But you know what? We only live once."
He admitted the recent flurry of accusations that he and his party are racist had been "very hurtful".
"The establishment have clubbed together, they are terrified of us," he said. "We are absolutely not a racist party in any way at all; never have been and never will be.
"I think, ironically, it has made those who support us even more likely to stick with us in subsequent elections."
COST OF LIVING
Mr Farage said that Labour leader Ed Miliband had correctly identified the crippling rise in the cost of living as the key issue for millions of families.
But he had come up with the wrong solution to the problem.
He added: "The normal aspirations that families have are disappearing. I mean the prospect of buying houses, even the option of getting social housing.
"The prospects of many youngsters to actually find work at all.
"For those in work, it's a matter of declining income against rising energy prices and everything else.
"Labour are right to have identi–fied the problem. But they have no solutions to offer whatsoever. And the EU thing fits into all this.
"These Brussels energy commitments mean the average consumer's bill by 2020 will have a 20 per cent surcharge on it. We want to bring down energy prices, we want to bring down food prices.
"And we want to find a way in which our 4.8 million men and women who run small businesses as sole traders can be given the incentive to take more people off the unemployment register and put them into work."
HEALTH
Successful business leaders need to be recruited to run the NHS and root out billions of pounds of wasteful spending, Mr Farage said.
He explained: "We seem to base our debate on the NHS, through the Labour years and the Cameron years, on how much we spend, not what value for money we're getting. So we will make in our manifesto an absolute commitment to healthcare, free at the point of access. But we will equally say we are not getting value for money. It is astonishing how much money is wasted on bureaucracy and failed IT systems.
"We would advocate a much more business–like approach: put somebody in charge from a big commercial organisation."
SCHOOLS
Public funds should be used to send bright youngsters from less well–off backgrounds to the top private schools, the Ukip leader said.
"We want a radical change in our education system," he insisted.
"There is an absolute refusal from our public–school educated middle class to allow that same opportunity to the kids of average voters. We haven't written the manifesto, but you will see a commitment to selective education.
"You will see a commitment to grammar schools and to the return of the assisted places scheme.
"I was at a private school with lots of kids whose places were paid through local authorities.
"It gave them amazing opportunities in life. It was a great scheme. "Eddie George went to my school, his dad was a postman – and he went on to become governor of the Bank of England."
IMMIGRATION
Mr Farage was unapologetic for raising concerns about migrants from Romania.
He has been criticised for saying people have "concerns" about the idea of living next door to "a group of Romanian men."
But yesterday he insisted: "I in no way want to give the impression that it would be right or moral to discriminate against Romanians. I do not.
"But I have a huge problem with Romania.
"It's a post–communist country that has not made the full transition to a Western democracy.
"The country is in the grip of organised crime and I don't want that crime on the streets of London or anyone else in the UK.
"I've spoken to the boys at Dover – the police, the Border Agency – and they are tearing their hair out because they don't have the ability to do anything about it."
Referring to the strong Ukip performance he expects in tomorrow's European election vote, he added: "I think it will mark the shifting of the centre of gravity in our politics.
"It won't be good enough anymore for Labour and the Tories to say we must have controlled migration when it is perfectly obvious that we don't."
PROTEST VOTE
Millions of people planning to vote Ukip on Thursday will not simply be registering a protest vote – but will be acting out of belief that the party is "on their side", Mr Farage said.
He insisted: "We are attracting a very large number of people who would not have voted in these European elections. The standard protest in a European election used to be to stay at home.
"We have got people out there who have never voted in their lives going out to vote Ukip on Thursday.
"The use of the word protest is a self–defence mechanism for the political class. They did it after Eastleigh.
"Yes, there will many voters who vote Ukip because it is a European election.
"But there will be many more who vote Ukip because that is the feeling in their heart.
"They believe in us because we're on their side."
Mr Farage also revealed that he will take more of backseat role after the euro elections and focus on his job as an MEP.
And he promised that work will soon begin on a new Ukip election manifesto that will widen the party's appeal.
He plans to appoint a string of senior spokesmen and women who will become the new faces of Ukip in the months ahead – tasked with demolishing accusations that the party is a one–man band.
The Ukip leader also insisted that he personally was coping with the intense pressure of round–the–clock campaigning.
He said: "I am doing remarkably well, considering. I'm pretty tough.
"That's not to say there haven't been reflective moments when I haven't considered my position.
"But they have never lasted long because I absolutely believe in what I am doing."
OPINION: PAGE 12
'People believe in their hearts that Ukip is on their side'
QDo you think it is important for Britain to quit the EU? YEs: 0901 792 5304 NO: 0901 792 5305 Yes text DXWEDYEs to 86611 No text DXWEDNO to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight.
Document THEEXP0020140521ea5l0004x
