{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1597"}
____
  
Only one person is laughing at the Farage-Clegg EU pantomime
By Fraser Nelson   
1,328 words
27 March 2014
23:14
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The PM is offering a grown-up discussion on radical reform of the European Union, along with the Germans and Dutch
David Cameron has always teased Nick Clegg for trundling off to LBC Radio every Thursday for a half-hour phone-in. Why, the Prime Minister wonders, subject yourself to a regular roughing-up by Labour activists posing as ordinary radio listeners? Cameron likes to keep his distance from the media, and now and again moans that his attempted early nights are disrupted by the BBC’s Nick Robinson giving live commentary outside his window at 10 Downing Street. There will be plenty of time for debates, Cameron believes, when the election comes.
But Clegg just can’t wait. His party faces wipeout at the European elections, with Ukip highly likely to come first. In a mild panic, Clegg is deploying a radical new tactic – to play Nigel Farage’s game, but on the opposing side. He has decided to enter a polarised, shouty row about Britain’s future in the EU – but position himself as anti-Farage, rather than as a moderate; a Europhile headbanger, rather than a Ukip headbanger. He’s hoping that all those growing tired of Mr Farage will vote for him. He challenged Farage to two fights, and LBC aired the first on Wednesday.
Seldom has so much nonsense been packed into such a short period. Clegg declared that EU membership is about “your job – or the job of someone you know” and “if we cut ourselves off from Europe, jobs will be lost”. No one is proposing to “pull up the drawbridge”, as he ridiculously put it – we’d trade, just as well as Norway and Switzerland do now. We would not be “withdrawing from the world’s largest economy”. Clegg’s image of a post-EU Britain – isolated, impoverished and living on boiled potatoes – is laughable.
Mr Farage has spent years on the town-hall circuit revving up the party faithful, so his hyperbole is even worse. Does observing European law really represent “the destruction of all the great principles of British liberty”? Is it really true that Brussels designs “all” regulations affecting business? And while wrong-headed EU directives cause a great many problems, do they really dictate life in Britain? We can fire missiles into Syria if we choose to, fix the deficit in a couple of years if we choose to, annex Gibraltar if we choose to. We have not “lost the ability to govern our country” and Farage sounds daft claiming otherwise.
But neither is laying it on for effect; both are quite serious. Farage has devoted his political career to exposing the flaws in EU membership. His party now seems weeks away from an extraordinary victory in the Euro elections, so he can claim to be the most successful political insurgent in recent history. Perhaps this is why he seems to be daring himself to make ever more sweeping claims – cumulating in his extraordinary accusation that the EU had “blood on its hands”, in encouraging Ukrainians to rise up in Kiev. It’s one thing to be against bureaucracy, another to sound as if you prefer Moscow to Brussels.
Clegg is a committed Europhile, who speaks Dutch (although, I’m told, with a comically posh accent), German, Spanish and French. He worked in the European Commission before becoming an MEP. Like many Brits, especially those (like me) who try to speak a foreign language at home, he feels proud to be European. He sees in Farage a vulgar Little Englander representing an “ungenerous, backward-looking politics”. Clegg would like their battle to be seen as representing a wider question of nationalism, identity and what it means to be British. That way, he might rally more supporters to the Lib Dem cause.
David Cameron said he wouldn’t be watching the Clegg vs Farage rematch, which is a shame. If he did, he’d see the two extremists push each other ever further to the edges – leaving the centre ground wide open for the Conservatives. The Prime Minister can be honest about the advantages of the EU, and his preference for staying in it. There is much to be gained from what it originally offered: free movement of goods, services and people. But the price for this membership, he says, has been ratcheted up and now bears little resemblance to the deal Britain voted on in 1975. His party rebels forced him to offer a referendum, and he should be grateful. This has left him in the most sensible position.
Cameron alone is speaking frankly about the way that he wants a new settlement with the EU, and one that he can put to the public in an in-or-out referendum. The PM can reject both Clegg’s horror stories of Britain being dependent on membership, and Farage’s talk of a new dictatorship. And while he’s saying little about what he wants from Europe, he now seems to be the only leader in Westminster offering anything resembling grown-up discussion.
As Westminster waited for the next instalment of the Clegg vs Farage freak show, grown-up discussion was continuing yesterday. Germany backed Cameron’s plans to deport jobless immigrants no matter where they’re from. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, visited Chequers recently to discuss his radical plan for reform. He wants any EU directive to be struck down should a third of states vote for its abolition. He also wants to stop the hated EU directives, and establish a new rule: anything that can be left to national parliaments should be. The Swedes and Austrians are on board.
So radical reform is coming. Not that Clegg would acknowledge the need for it – the work is being done by the real Europeans, the ones who recognise it is not an altar to be worshipped, but a power-hungry bureaucracy that needs to be cut down to size. We hear relatively little about this because Cameron is refreshingly free from Blair-style fantasies of Britain somehow “leading” Europe and reshaping a continent in Surrey’s image. He just wants a deal that the public will find acceptable.
Labour is nowhere in this debate. Ed Miliband has said he would deny the referendum that Cameron has promised, perhaps because he realises his party is too deeply split to hold a rational conversation about it. Jack Straw now says it was a “spectacular mistake” to let in so many Poles and Czechs in 2004. He has some cheek. Labour’s spectacular mistake was failing to use the boom years to reform welfare and build infrastructure – not welcoming the industrious Eastern Europeans. Had the welfare system been fixed, British workers would have had an incentive to fill more vacancies.
And yet supporters of immigration, myself included, have to accept that it has downsides as well as upsides. EU membership has been good for those who hire immigrants – as office workers, nannies, architects or plumbers. Not so good for people who compete with them – for jobs, school spaces or social housing. For years, Labour treated concerns with contempt, an attitude encapsulated by Gordon Brown referring to a voter who asked him about immigration as a “bigoted woman”. The Lib Dems are taking the same approach, deriding every criticism as an attempt “to turn our back on the world”.
This is pantomime, rather than debate, but it is entertaining. And the Prime Minister should tune in for the rematch next week. After all, what could be more heartening than watching two of your opponents compete to see who can sound the most over-the-top? As things look now, they will both lose. There is a solution to the European problem, but it is becoming abundantly clear that it will come from neither the Lib Dems nor Ukip.
Fraser Nelson is editor of 'The Spectator窶
Document TELUK00020140328ea3r00001
