{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"864"}
____
  
NEWS
Illegal immigrants, guns and drugs 'smuggled into Britain on light aircraft'
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
472 words
5 May 2014
17:36
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Law enforcement and border officials are increasingly worried that criminal gangs are using non-passenger flights to slip into the UK, landing away from major airports
Illegal immigrants, guns and drugs are being smuggled into Britain on light aircraft landing on rural airstrips or in farmers’ fields, the National Crime Agency has warned.
People living in the countryside near air fields and small landing strips are being asked to look out for any suspicious behaviour in a new campaign launched by the agency.
Law enforcement and border officials are increasingly worried that criminal gangs are using non-passenger flights to slip into the UK, landing away from major airports where most security measures are concentrated.
A senior officer at the agency even suggested that terrorist groups could be making use of small landing strips.
According to the NCA there are almost 3,000 sites where small aircraft can land away from formal airports. They include aerodromes, small airfields, farmers’ field strips, and helipads.
There are almost 20,000 light aircraft registered in the UK, and 47,000 Civil Aviation Authority-licensed pilots.
The agency said that organised criminals and terrorists use the aviation sector for crimes ranging from illegal immigration, importing hard drugs such as cocaine and amphetamines, and trafficking firearms.
In 2006 three members of a people smuggling gang who flew illegal immigrants into the country to secluded airstrips in Kent and the south east were convicted.
Turkish nationals were flown from locations in France and Belgium to airstrips in England. A runway in Lamberhurst was one of the places used to transport the people in a six-seater Piper Cherokee light aircraft.
David Armond, Director of the NCA’s Border Policing Command, encouraged people living near potential landing sites to report anything unusual.
He said: “You might have seen unfamiliar people in sensitive areas of the airport, or unusual patterns of activity such as night-time airdrops.
That information could be key to an investigation into an organised criminal network or terrorist group.”
The National Crime Agency is asking farmers and airstrip operators to look out for planes that are “covered in mud” when only tarmac strips are listed on their flight plans.
Aircraft that stay “very briefly” a foreign destinations despite a huge effort being made to get there should also be reported.
And planes that regularly suffer minor damage and those modified to increase range or load should also be monitored, the agency says.
The NCA say that the criminals will “exploit any opening they can find” in rural airfields, small club strips and old bomber bases.
Pilots who are inexperienced, nervous or who appear to be vulnerable to pressure should also be reported under new guidelines issued by the NCA.
Document TELUK00020140505ea55001uq
