{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2716"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
We can't charge the vulnerable for NHS
Ann Widdecombe   
410 words
2 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
13
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
THE suggestion that charges may soon be levied for using the NHS has caused a predictable outcry, although it is worth stressing that this comes from a think tank rather than a political party, but politicians will have to find the courage to face up to the reality of the NHS sooner rather than later.
The reality is simple: it cannot cope with the level of demand made upon it and is resorting to rationing disguised as the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, queues, postcode lotteries and ever lengthening waiting times to see the doctor.
It cannot cope because it was set up on three false premises: that insurance would play a significant part in the funding; that as we all got healthier demand would decline; that the demographics would stay roughly the same. By the late 1980s the National Insurance Fund could just about cover pensions and contributory benefits, relied on the occasional subvention from general taxation and offered no more than a drop in the ocean towards the burgeoning NHS budget. As for the demographics, the impact of the huge growth in the elderly population and large-scale immigration speak for themselves.
It is however the second false premise which is the most telling for we are now doing routinely in our hospitals procedures that would have been science fiction to the founding fathers of the NHS and the explosion of medical and surgical science has sent demand towards infinity.
With the exception of the Callaghan government all administrations have overseen vast increases in real-terms spending on the NHS and they have all run hard to stand still. I can remember the days when if you rang the doctor you saw him that day and when you spent a fortnight in hospital for something as routine as appendicitis. Now every service is stretched taut. So the NHS can no longer meet every last demand that is made upon it but political cowardice means that successive leaders pretend that it can.
Sooner or later those who can are going to have to start paying but that should not mean all and certainly not those who couldn't pay if they starved for a month and who are the very ones the NHS was set up to help in the first place.
'Politicians must find courage to face up to reality sooner or later'
Document THEEXP0020140402ea4200037
