{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3498"}
____
  
No more surrendering to EU bureaucrats
By Paul Sykes   
941 words
21 April 2014
21:46
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
An outright victory for Nigel Farage will be nothing less than a political earthquake
In Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar, Brutus speaks of a tide in the affairs of men that, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune. Miss the tide and only shallows and miseries lie in wait.
Next month’s European elections represent such a moment in the life of our nation. Overwhelming public support for Ukip – the only political party advocating immediate withdrawal from the European Union – could mean we catch a tide that will restore our proud tradition of national independence. But if we miss our chance, we will be swept ever further into the shoals and sandbanks of a Federal Europe.
Once a loyal Conservative constituency chairman who served on the Yorkshire area committee, I have spent more than 20 years campaigning against the creeping power grab that lies at the heart of the EU. My initial focus was on keeping the pound in the face of mounting pressure from the political establishment for Britain to join the euro. It was clear to me that a single exchange and interest rate for a mixed bag of European countries, ranging from mighty Germany to struggling Greece, would never work. As we watch the Eurozone limp on towards ultimate failure, it comes as no surprise that I was right.
I have spent a great deal of my own money trying to raise awareness of the ways in which the EU has eroded our national sovereignty, and attempting to win the British people a democratic vote on what has stealthily been done in their name these past two decades.
Nowhere is this more pertinent than in the area of immigration. The Single European Act, signed into UK law in 1986, guarantees the free movement of capital and labour across the borders of the 28 countries that now make up the EU. Disgracefully, this measure was adopted without a referendum of the British people.
It was a cruel and heartless act because competition from people from much poorer countries has forced down the wages of British workers – to the shame of Labour MPs and the trade union movement. It also means 485 million people have the right to move to Britain at any time they please. We may have a UK Border Force. But when it comes to the 27 other countries in the EU, we have no borders, and no force.
Many think that Britain’s boundaries start at the white cliffs of Dover. They do not. They start in places such as Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria; they start wherever impoverished EU governments (Malta being the latest) offer to sell passports to the highest bidder, thereby granting people from all over the world the right to come and settle here.
David Cameron talks of reducing immigration to tens of thousands of people a year. But it is a pipe dream. The latest figures show gross immigration is running at 500,000 a year and net migration (deducting those leaving the country from those arriving) at more than 200,000 a year. This is an unsustainable state of affairs.
Which is why I have promised to do whatever it takes to help Ukip emerge as the winner in the European polls next month. I want to help Nigel Farage deliver what he calls a “political earthquake” on May 22. These European elections offer the chance to support a party – Ukip – that represents a complete break with the past, while the other parties, whatever their merits, remain content to work within the existing Brussels straitjacket.
The other parties cannot do anything about immigration or British workers being undercut by cheap foreign labour; they are vassals of the European Court of Justice and the closely related European Court of Human Rights, which stops us deporting foreign criminals and terrorists. The other parties are about to embrace new European controls over our policing and justice systems, they allow interference in our tax system, and they subcontract more and more of our foreign and defence policies to unelected EU bureaucrats.
True, Mr Cameron has promised an in/out referendum in 2017 if the Conservatives win the 2015 general election outright. But he renders that promise meaningless by insisting that he will recommend staying in irrespective of the outcome of his attempts to renegotiate the terms of membership.
In all but name, May 22 is a referendum on our membership of the EU, with a vote for Ukip being a vote for out. An overwhelming victory for the party will break the political mould in the UK, forcing Labour and the Lib Dems to back a full-scale referendum and intensifying the popular pressure for that to be staged much earlier than 2017. Such a result – combined with massive pressure from backbench MPs – would leave Cameron, Clegg and Miliband no choice but to pass a law setting a date for a referendum within a year.
Which is why I view Ukip’s new advertising campaign – which I am funding to the tune of £1.5 million – as more of an essential public awareness campaign. Yes, it is hard-hitting, in order to capture attention. But its real purpose is to show the British people just how many of their democratic rights and powers successive governments have quietly smuggled away to Brussels.
The time has come to take back control of our country and the right to govern ourselves. May 22 is our chance to catch a tide that can restore our freedoms and carry us forward to a glorious new chapter in our nation’s history.
Document TELUK00020140421ea4l004mq
