{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3548"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: NON-FICTION: 'My mother has cut a hole in my underwear': Gary Shteyngart's memoir is his funniest and saddest book so far, writes J Robert Lennon: Little Failure by Gary Shteyngart (368pp, Hamish Hamilton, pounds 16.99)
J Robert Lennon   
1,300 words
22 February 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
8
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
It would be easy to dismiss Gary Shteyngart's new book, Little Failure, by asking if the world really needs a memoir from someone whose early fiction was so clearly drawn from its author's own life. A Russian Jewish immigrant, a sample summary might read, unlucky in love but rich in self-deprecating humour, grapples with familial angst and sexual obsession while observing the comedic fallout from the clash between cultures. This could describe any of Shteyngart's works, including this one. The author acknowledges this fact here, describing the hero of his first novel as "a kind of me". "I knew I wanted to write a novel," he goes on, "and I knew what it would be about. When you're 21 there really is only one subject. It appears in the mirror each morning, toothbrush in hand."
So you've read Shteyngart's three antic, comic, unfailingly energetic and vaguely autobiographical novels. Do you really need to read the memoir? Actually, yes, you do, because Little Failure is terrific - the author's funniest, saddest and most honest work to date. Like many immigrant stories, it's a tale of early suffering, gradual assimilation and eventual self-actualisation. But it's also a powerful and often moving portrait of a troubled man's creative origins, comparable in intent (and sometimes in quality) to some of the genre's high-water marks, and owing particular debts to WG Sebald, Thomas Bernhard and, most significantly, Vladimir Nabokov, whose name Shteyngart often invokes.
The book is framed by a small mystery: a panic attack that the author suffers in 1996, after he sees, in a used book at New York's Strand bookstore, a photo of a familiar place: "The Chesme Church on Lensovet Street in . . . the city formerly known as Leningrad." He recalls flying a toy helicopter there with his father, before his emigration in 1979 - but why the "nervous, twitching body" and "sweaty hands?" He masters himself, leaves the store, returns to his then life of writerly dissolution and frustration. "What happened," he asks himself, "at the Chesme Church 22 years ago?"
Igor (yes, Igor) Shteyngart was born in 1972 in Leningrad into a troubled marriage between a working-class mechanical engineer and a comparatively cultured piano teacher; the couple are handsome and hale, and evidently bewildered by the scrawny and sickly creature they have created. From his father, the asthmatic Shteyngart earns the nickname "Snotty"; his mother will eventually devise the polyglot monicker "Failurchka", or "Little Failure", for the disappointing child. The Shteyngarts struggle to control their son's illness, with his miraculous inhaler still years and a continent away, by holding his mouth open with a tablespoon to enable him to draw breath, and administering a terrifying pseudomedical remedy known as "cupping", which leaves the future novelist with a line of burn marks up and down his spine.
The family's move to America is the result of a Jimmy-Carter-brokered trade agreement: "Russia gets the grain it needs to run; America gets the Jews it needs to run." And though it brings the child (now renamed Gary) respiratory relief, new medical horrors await: the family is persuaded to have the boy circumcised, which procedure is promptly botched. "My mother has cut a hole in my underwear," Shteyngart recalls, "so that my broken penis will not have to touch polyester . . . I lie there with my ruined genitalia exposed to the outside world." Relatives come to visit specifically to observe the "awful thing", and for the next two years, "every act of urination has to be done through gritted teeth". This section of the book contains some of the best writing Shteyngart has ever done. If some readers found the earlier books' authorial self-consciousness straying too close to self-pity, they will find none of that here - Shteyngart's compassion for his young self never cloys. Indeed, he achieves an impressive detachment, incorporating into the narrative not only his childhood pain, but his parents' bewilderment and ignorance ("We didn't know") and his very strong, very focused adult anger.
There's a lot that Shteyngart has to be angry about: like many future artists, he was bullied and misunderstood. But, if one single subject dominates this book, it's his powerful ambivalence about his eccentric, inept parents: their incapacity to love him unreservedly, the side-effects of their displacement, their hostility and condescension that for years he dismisses as "just cultural". His father calls him "nasty swine" and beats him on the neck; his mother serves him terrible food and subjects him to two-day-long silent treatments. (Even when he becomes successful, they will torture him with criticism of his work that they find on the internet.) And their marriage, the impending dissolution of which haunted the young Shteyngart, suddenly improves the moment he leaves for college.
In the end, though, Shteyngart finds a way, if not to absolve his parents, then to understand them; in the book's final chapter, the family returns together to Leningrad. Secrets are revealed, and the mystery of Chesme Church is solved (if not with quite the bang that the first 300 pages seemed to promise). Whereas most chapters are accompanied by a photo of the author embroiled in the events described therein, this one - and the entire book - ends with a handsome portrait of his parents, looking relaxed and happy on the Leningrad trip. We are invited to see them as the complexly flawed people they are; and if Shteyngart has not managed to extract from them the kind of love he always wanted, he has clearly learned to give them some of the love they didn't know how to earn. It's a beautiful and revealing ending, a surprise from a writer who has always been more comfortable with irony and obfuscation.
The path to this moment, however, is a bit meandering. Awkward repetitions of certain facts and events betray the book's origins as a series of discretely published essays. And the story flags somewhat once the author finds love, becomes a writer, and sells his novel; with his parents largely off stage and his transformation from underdog to famous author well under way, his angsty humour loses a bit of its edge. But there is great writing even here, as Shteyngart describes his affection for Infocom computer text adventures, his parodic juvenilia (an alternate Torah featuring references to Star Wars, Tom Selleck and John McEnroe), his friendships with older father figures, his adoration of his complicated girlfriends (even the one later imprisoned for attacking a subsequent paramour with a hammer), and his drinking and drug use. There is a hilarious section devoted to his undergraduate years at Oberlin that features a loving portrait of the fiction writer Diane Vreuls, his teacher, who crawls around on her office floor - "all six feet of her plus the gray halo of long hair" - to demonstrate a flaw in his descriptive writing.
It must have helped. Though he refers to his work as "the responsibility that will haunt me for the rest of my life", Shteyngart admits that he has never suffered a moment of writer's block. And that's a good thing because he is that rare specimen, a writer who gets better with every book.
To order Little Failure for pounds 12.99 with free UK p&p call Guardian book service on 0330 333 6846 or go to guardianbookshop.co.uk.
Captions:
Underdog to famous author . . . Gary Shteyngart
Document GRDN000020140221ea2m000ag
