{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1068"}
____
  
Guardian Leader Pages
Leading Article: Ethnic minority voters: Identity politics
Editorial   
724 words
7 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
32
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
As usual, some of the figures are open to debate. The implications for the political parties are not. The centre-right thinktank Policy Exchange grabbed headlines this week by saying, in a new report, that ethnic minorities will make up a third of Britain by 2050. In fact, this was how some newspapers chose to headline the story. The report itself, A Portrait of Modern Britain, was more cautious. It rehearses differing estimates that black and minority ethnic communities will represent "between 20-30% of the UK's population" by 2051. This is rather different. There is a big gap between 20% and 30% - and 30% is both a maximum estimate and not the same thing as a third. Since the current figure for BME communities is already 14%, the increase over the next 35 years could actually be relatively modest if the figure turns out to be closer to the 20% that one expert cited in the report has estimated.
But the political implications of Britain's changing demography remain challenging, irrespective of the precise nature of the figures that give rise to them. In Britain, as in most other developed economies in the western world, changing demographics are already a reality. They are also already shaping the agendas, assumptions and methods of the old politics. That change will intensify, as the second and third generations of migrants reach voting age and as differential birthrates recast the ethnic map. Crucially, as the report stresses, Britain's political parties are unprepared for the lasting importance of such changes.
Ethnic minorities in Britain share roughly similar levels of partisanship - identification with a political party - to the white population. In many other respects, however, the political and electoral profile of BME voters is very different from that of whites. BME citizens are less often registered to vote than whites, a divergence that may increase when individual voter registration is introduced. But the biggest difference is in the degree to which all BME groups identify with and overwhelmingly vote for Labour. In the 2010 election, in which Labour lost and did badly, 68% of all BME voters nevertheless voted Labour, compared with 31% of white voters. On the other hand, only 16% of BME voters voted Conservative, compared with 37% of whites.
Combine the increasing size and proportion of the BME electorate with that striking difference in political identification, and it soon becomes clear that these figures pose a historic challenge for both Labour and the Tories - as well as for other political parties. The challenge is, of course, the reverse one for the two main parties. For Labour the challenge is to retain its grip on BME voters. For the Conservatives it is to increase its appeal. But since only around two-thirds of the electorate now identify with either of the two main parties, the possibility of a majority government of either stripe may hang on the outcome.
For Labour the problem is complacency. But the challenge facing the Tories is much more acute. Any strategist who looks at the figures - as Lord Ashcroft has also done - will see that the Tories need to appeal more consistently to BME voters in order to win enough seats to form a government. So the first thing any strategist's memo to David Cameron would say in the light of the Policy Exchange report is to beware the impact on these vital BME voters of any sudden lurch towards Ukip and its predominantly white electorate in the aftermath of the European elections later this month.
That is not the same as saying, for example, that the Tories should do a U-turn on an issue such as immigration. That is unlikely to be what BME voters want anyway. But it does mean that the Tory party needs to avoid lazy stereotypes and to reach out to the different ethnic groups on the issues that concern them. The party also needs to be much more self-critical and humble than parts of it are often tempted to be about a range of the party's stances on issues from education to policing. A party of white people speaking only to white people is no longer an option for any party that seeks to speak for the new Britain.
Document GRDN000020140507ea570001c
