{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3568"}
____
  
Features
in short
Iain Finlayson   
467 words
22 February 2014
The Times
T
1; National
13
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Our America: A Hispanic History of the United States
by Felipe Fernández-Armesto
Norton, 402pp £17.99 £16.19
It may please the white Anglo-Saxon Protestants to claim that American history began in 1607 with the settlement of Jamestown by English immigrants, but Fernández-Armesto moves the historical perspective away from the standard Anglocentric narrative. He points out that in 1505, San Juan became the first city now in US territory to be settled by Europeans. Nowadays, the former Spanish colonies in Puerto Rico, Florida and the southwest have more meaning for electoral politics than the Mayflower. Even fictional Hispano-American characters such as Zorro and the Cisco Kid, who battled gringos in defence of poor Californios, are now used to reinforce America's heroic character. The Hispanic history of America confirms the capacity of Americans to construct a cultural unity founded in diversity.
The Gap: The Science of What Separates Us from Other Animals
by Thomas Suddendorf
Basic Books, 358pp £19.99 £17.99 e-book £19.99
Humpback whales sing songs they learn from each other. The good news is that the information content of the songs is as simple as a pop lyric. The bad news is that there is no conversation beyond basic mateattraction. Whales, like other animals, are intelligent in their own way; just not in our way. Suddendorf, a psychologist, reinforces the point that it is the human capacity to articulate and develop language that distinguishes us from animals. Our success as a dominant species, he says, has depended on our ability to imagine and communicate. But he goes further, suggesting that the gap between humans and animals is widening, not because we are becoming smarter but because we are killing off our closest intelligent animal relatives. Suddendorf brilliantly fills in the gap with telling detail and acute analysis.
Erotic exchanges: The World of Elite Prostitution in 18th-Century Paris
by Nina Kushner
Cornell University Press, 296pp, £22.95 £22.95
The careers of the great French courtesans (les grandes horizontales) of the 19th century are well known: less so are the lives of the kept women of mid-18th-century Paris, les dames entretenues, famous for their glamour and beauty. The dossiers of 550 women under surveillance by a Paris police unit from 1747 to 1771 are the basis of Nina Kushner's inquiry. Men of the elites gained status and a reputation for virility from their liaisons with professional mistresses, who provided sex, company and an escape from arranged marriages. Sex workers have rarely had a better reputation, though the career of a certain Mlle Dallière resembled a fast-moving Feydeau French farce. Kushner paints an alluring, amusingly anecdotal picture of a Parisian culture in love and at ease with itself.
Iain Finlayson
Document T000000020140222ea2m000fz
