{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2240"}
____
  
News
Tory MP tells white working-class parents to turn TV off
Marie Woolf   
374 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
9
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A SENIOR Conservative MP has told white working-class families to "turn the telly off" because it is damaging their children's education.
Graham Stuart, chairman of the Commons education committee, said children from poor white families were being held back at school because the television was left on constantly at home.
Stuart, who was educated at Glenalmond College, Perthshire, a private boarding school, made his remarks while taking evidence on the underachievement at school of children from white working-class families.
Stuart, who makes his two daughters do their homework and music practice before they watch television, said white working-class children could not concentrate on homework because the television was rarely off.
He said: "I am not trying to demonise people who leave the telly on if they do not know how damaging it is because no one tells them and [if] they do not know how important two hours' extra homework every fortnight is. If we do not challenge that then we are not serving those communities very well."
He said that doing homework with the television off was a key to success, pointing out that some poor children from ethnic minorities outperformed their white classmates because they worked hard. "We have got this race issue in here: there are some immigrant communities in dire housing and dire poverty whose children do well because they work harder," Stuart said.
His remarks were criticised by Chris Williamson, Labour MP for Derby North, as "patronising". Williamson, a former bricklayer, said: "Television is part of our culture these days. This once again demonstrates how cut off these privileged members of the Conservative party are. It's not about whether kids are watching TV, it's about lack of opportunities."
Ian Mearns, Labour MP for Gateshead, who is part of the Commons inquiry, said it drives him "up the wall" that in his constituency "bright girls" all want to be hairdressers. "Places like Gateshead do not need 500 new hairdressers every year," he said. " There is a problem about aspirations among white working-class kids."
Push on and we'll all get a good school, Eleanor Mills, News Review, page 6
Document ST00000020140309ea39000rs
