{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"631"}
____
  
Business
Britain can learn a lot from Canada in the global race to woo the entrepreneurs vital to creating jobs
David Prosser   
512 words
10 March 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
55
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
Business
If you took a drive last year out of San Francisco down Highway 101 towards Silicon Valley, you would have sped past a giant billboard emblazoned with a huge red maple leaf. Its sales pitch, "H-1B Problems? Pivot to Canada", was an appeal to international entrepreneurs who have moved to Silicon Valley but run into problems with the US's H-1B visa programme for high-skilled workers.
The billboard was paid for by the Canadian government, which hopes those frustrated entrepreneurs will relocate north of the border. To encourage them - and other high-skilled foreign citizens - to do so, it has been offering permanent residence to entrepreneurs who speak English or French, have completed at least one year of college, and can show they can raise funding for their business ventures.
Canada's Start-Up Visa is not a million miles away from the UK's Tier 1 Entrepreneur Visa programme, which sets similar requirements. But in Britain, we offer only a temporary permit to live and work in the UK, at least initially.
A report by the independent Centre for Entrepreneurs illustrates why it is foolhardy to put obstacles in the way of these people. One in seven UK companies was set up by a migrant, it reveals, and migrant-founded companies create 14 per cent of all jobs at small and medium-sized companies. In the UK's migrant community, 17.2 per cent of people have launched their own businesses, compared to only 10.4 per cent of people born in the UK. Migrant entrepreneurs also tend to be younger.
The implication is clear. If Britain wants to foster an entrepreneurial economy, which is crucial for job creation, we should be doing everything we can to attract potential founders of new businesses to this country. Immigrants are coming here to make our jobs, not take them.
The Government is doing more than you might think in this regard. As well as the Entrepreneur Visa, different arms of government are involved in specific projects such as the Sirius Programme, run by UK Trade & Investment, which offers international graduates financial and practical support with getting a business off the ground in Britain. Successful applicants have begun working with business accelerator programmes around the country and qualify for up to £12,000 of financial assistance, plus a mentoring programme and visa endorsement. More than 1,500 graduate entrepreneurs from 93 countries enrolled in Sirius in its first year.
It may be some time before the fruits of this labour are quantifiable, but the work done by the Centre for Entrepreneurs suggests we need more of these programmes - and much less of the toxic rhetoric that surrounds the debate over immigration. Why move to Britain to start your business when you'll have to put up with this sort of nonsense when you could just as easily move to, say, Canada and be welcomed with open arms?
Document IND0000020140310ea3a0001h
