{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"206"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Elections: Ukip's black candidates vie for voters in Croydon's melting pot
Robert Booth   
1,339 words
14 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
13
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Before the singing, dancing and sermons, the preacher in Croydon held up the voting form for next week's election and fixed his congregation's attention.
"You have a choice of 15 different political parties," he told the mostly black worshippers at the Elim Pentecostal church. "If you believe in democracy you should vote for a party. This is not a party political broadcast from me but you have that choice."
Influencing which box they tick is a significant new challenge facing Britain's political class. The UK's ethnic minority groups are predicted to grow from 14% to 30% of the population by 2050 and the parties are wrestling with how to respond. With a week to go until the European and local elections, Croydon, in south London, with its tight marginal seats and minority population heading towards 70%, is a key battleground.
"The local MPs want to come and see me because they know that on a Sunday I can get over 500 people coming in," said the pastor, Cornelius Osei-Fosu, after a service which touched on Syria, church expansion and the rapture. "It is not about befriending me, but getting those votes."
The worshippers dancing to I Am Glad I Belong to Jesus included people from west Africa, southern Africa, the Caribbean, Asia and Europe - 40 nationalities that give a snapshot of Croydon's future.
The Tory MP for Croydon Central, Gavin Barwell, has described the demographic shift as an existential threat to the Conservatives, whose national vote among the country's five largest ethnic minority groups was just 16% at the 2010 general election, compared with 68% for Labour.
For its part, Ukip is trying to counter David Cameron's labelling of the party as closet racists by fielding nine black candidates for seats on Croydon council and appealing to migrants with a new pro-Commonwealth outlook.
Two of those candidates are Ace Nnorom and Herman "Coach" Lyken.
Until last year, Nnorom, a Cameroon-born lecturer in public and international law, was a Labour activist involved in David Miliband's Movement for Change, an initiative to create a nationwide network of community organisers.
Lyken, a former soldier from Guyana who runs boot camps for delinquent youths, quit the Conservatives to run for Ukip. Both men found progress tough in the main parties. "I wasn't getting the support I wanted from the local party machine," said Lyken. "In a new party like Ukip it is much easier to make your way," said Nnorom. "When I came to Labour as a new person there was a blockage I could not get through."
The two men shared a stage with Nigel Farage last week at a rally where the Ukip leader laid claim to the ethnic minority vote despite one of the party's MEPs having described Africa as "bongo bongo land" last year, and a candidate telling Lenny Henry last month to "emigrate to a black country" if he wanted to see more black faces on TV.
They stood with around two dozen ethnic minority candidates as Farage declared: "Let this picture of me on the stage with all these men and women from all their different backgrounds be Ukip's clause IV moment".
Just as Tony Blair persuaded Labour to abandon its principle of nationalising industries in 1995, Ukip should not be seen as racist, he said.
But with one prominent supporter, Sanya-Jeet Thandi, leaving the party and telling the Guardian that the party is descending into a form of "racist populism", it seems Farage still has work to do to persuade others.
Nnorom said he had joined Ukip because Labour was wavering over a referendum on membership of the EU, which he thinks is heading towards "something like the Soviet Union in a capitalist context".
"For all of us that have settled here, this country has changed," he said. "When I came, before you gained your rights you had to struggle and you had to integrate and learn the values of the nation. Before it was open door immigration, the quality and value of Britishness was different. You open the border to a whole group of European nations who don't have the same values."
The impact of migration from eastern Europe on what he calls settled ethnic minorities is economic. He has found this argument chimes in Croydon, where more than 7,000 eastern Europeans live: "Black people in my area work in security and the care industries and they are being pushed out. There's a preference among employers to take the Polish or Lithuanian white person rather than the settled black person. There's always that preference. Out of the EU would be better for immigrants "
In 2001, when Nnorom arrived in the UK, 70% of Croydon's population was white. By 2021 the council predicts the figure will be 40%. Among its suburban streets and tower blocks are 31,000 people from the Caribbean, 29,000 from Africa, 1,200 Tamils and similar numbers of Filipinos and Afghans, according to the 2011 census.
These people are hugely under represented in parliament, where only 4.2% of MPs are from ethnic minorities, but their votes will matter enormously in the tight council election on 22 May and the equally tight parliamentary fight next May. There are 37 Tory and 33 Labour members of Croydon council, and Barwell's majority at the last general election was 2,969.
"The current success Ukip is enjoying is a reaction to the way the UK is changing," said Barwell. "My experience is that most people care about the same stuff, rising standards, good schools. But is also the case that minorities have particular issues, say on foreign policy, health or NHS issues."
Barwell has had to tailor his stance on foreign policy issues such as Sri Lanka to account for his constituency's Tamil voters. "It is a massive challenge for political parties because there has been a hollowing out of political party membership, so they have become less well connected to communities," he said.
Barwell's Labour rival, Sarah Jones, said that Ukip's bid for the ethnic minority vote notwithstanding, her party should gain from an increasingly ethnically diverse electorate.
She insists Labour is taking nothing for granted and one or two voters have told her that they plan to switch from Labour to Ukip.
Jones said she was wary of treating different minority groups as a homogenous whole based on their background. "What defines people much more in society is the experience they are having right now in their lives," she said.
The emergence of Ukip's ethnic minority candidates has sparked accusations that they have been promoted by a calculating leadership to paper over xenophobia in other parts of the party, a claim Farage denies.
Earlier this week Lee Jasper, a race relations activist and senior Respect party member, branded the candidates "useful idiots" and several at the Farage rally were heckled as fakes by anti-Ukip activists.
Steven Woolfe, a Ukip candidate for the European parliament whose grandparents were black, Irish, English and Jewish, was one of those heckled. "It was upsetting to be called a fake and racist," he said. "Sadly, on Twitter and Facebook such nasty claims still persist."
Nnorom and Lyken were among a group of ethnic minority Ukip candidates to sign a letter last week complaining many had "suffered the humiliation of being called Uncle Toms' or apologists for a racist party". They wrote: "We demand opponents no longer engage in physical or verbal abuse and support Ukip in fighting to rid politics of racism, discrimination and sectarianism."
14%
Proportion of the UK's population which is made up of ethnic minority groups. This is
projected to reach 30% by 2050
Captions:
A worshipper at the service at Elim Pentecostal church in Croydon, south London, where congregations can reach 500 Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi for the Guardian
Document GRDN000020140513ea5e0009e
