{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3399"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel Farage in car-crash interview as he faces Ukip racism claims
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
860 words
16 May 2014
17:46
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip aide attempts to halt interview as Nigel Farage says people “know” which foreigners make good neighbours
Nigel Farage was accused of being a divisive racist in a car-crash interview this morning that his most senior aide attempted to halt.
People “know” which foreigners make good neighbours, Mr Farage suggested, as he struggled to justify his opposition to European immigration while being married to a German.
Patrick O’Flynn, Ukip director of communications, attempted to stop the slew of questions as Mr Farage was challenged about his party’s expenses.
Mr Farage was asked to justify claims made earlier this year that he feels “uncomfortable” and “awkward” on trains where nobody speaks English and parts of Britain are now “a foreign land”.
He said in February: "I got the train the other night, it was rush hour, from Charing Cross.
"It was a stopper going out and we stopped at London Bridge, New Cross, Hither Green, it was not til we got past Grove Park that I could hear English being audibly spoken in the carriage. Does that make me feel slightly awkward? Yes it does."
Mr Farage’s wife, Kirsten, is German, and his children are bilingual. Mr Farage said she speaks English outside the home.
“You felt uncomfortable about people speaking foreign languages, despite the fact presumably your own wife does when she phones home to Germany,” said James O’Brien, the host of LBC Radio.
Mr Farage replied: “I don’t suppose she speaks it on the train, you know. That’s the point I’m making.”
Mr Farage stood by his view, given in a recent interview, that he would be “concerned” if he had Romanian neighbours.
“I was asked a question if a group of Romanian men moved in next to you, would you be concerned. If you lived in London I think you would be," he said.
He said the crime statistics relating to Romanian immigrants are “eye-watering”.
Asked why that would be different to German children moving in next door, he replied: “You know what the difference is.”
He added: "We want an immigration policy that is not just based on controlling not just quantity but quality".
“I’m not demonising anybody. I’m demonising a political class who has had an open door allowing things like this to happen.”
Mr O'Brien claimed there is an "avalanche of bigotry emerging" from Ukip and it represents "deeply divisive and racist ideas."
He accused Mr Farage of conflating the trend of primary school children who speak English as a second language with those who cannot speak English at all. Mr Farage said the trend shows the need for tighter immigration controls.
But the former category would include Mr Farage's own children, Mr O'Brien said. "The point you are making is that children in the East End are full of children who can't speak English. I want you to recognise that's not true," he said. "Most bilingual children in this country are children like yours."
Mr O’Flynn, a former Express journalist, attempted to halt the interview as Mr Farage was asked whether he would submit his party’s European allowances to an auditor, as Labour MEPs have done.
Mr Farage has previously made the offer, but withdrew it in a recent interview, saying Ukip should not be subject to a stricter audit than other parties.
Mr Farage said: “They have an auditor to make sure they spend the money in accordance with the rules. There are no expenses.”
“You say that as if there is something wrong with it,” Mr O’Brien said, and asked if he would sign up to the rules.
Mr O’Flynn interrupted, saying: “Sorry, we had an agreement about timing, you’ve massively…”
Mr Farage turned to O’Flynn and waved him away, saying: “Hang on, hang on.”
Mr Farage went on: “These are fixed-rate allowances I have spent in accordance with the rules. I am very suspicious of the word audit used in that context.”
As the interview ended, it is understood Mr O'Flynn then pulled Mr Farage out the studio by his suit.
The interview came as Mr Farage faced fresh embarrassment over his candidates’ views.
John Sullivan, a council candidate, wrote on Facebook in February: “I rather wonder if we shot one 'poofter' (GBLT whatevers), whether the next 99 would decide on balance, that they weren't after-all? We might then conclude that it's not a matter of genetics, but rather more a matter of education.”
Mr Farage said he had never heard of Mr Sullivan and said he would face a “disciplinary charge”. He said the party faces greater scrutiny than the main three parties.
A local television producer today claimed Mr Farage refused to appear on her show after learning there would be no make-up artist. The Ukip leader has previously appeared to perspire heavily under studio lighting.
Mr Farage said the claim, made by a producer on London Live, was “a load of rubbish”.
Document TELUK00020140516ea5g003pd
