{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"2075"}
____
  
Features
IN THE CORRIDORS OF POWER
BY JAMES FORSYTH   
1,151 words
18 May 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
41
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
CAN NIGEL STILL WIN THE EU ELECTION? ASK YOUR POSTMAN
THE rest of us are wondering whether that torrid LBC interview, cut off by the intervention of his spin doctor, spells the end for Nigel Farage. But the UKIP leader is already thinking about his next battle.
Tonight hell address more than a thousand supporters in Thanet, Kent. Then on Tuesday hell head to Eastleigh in Hampshire for another big public meeting. What connects these two places? They are both on his shortlist of constituencies to stand in come the 2015 General Election.
Farage knows that the real challenge for him is to convert the support that UKIP gains at European elections into seats in the Commons. Time and again, UKIP have surged at the European vote only to fall back into irrelevance come the serious business of a General Election.
Whether he succeeds will be determined in large part by the result on Sunday night. New parties in Britain are like sharks, if they dont keep moving forward they die. UKIP have to win.
The party is acutely aware of that, and its taking its toll.
Farages forces are happiest as insurgents and not as front-runners. They fret that they may have peaked too early, that they may have given their enemies one too many chances to shoot them down.
Was Farages radio interview on Friday " which managed to be both crude (youd be concerned if Romanians moved in next door to you) and frankly ridiculous (his wife speaks German at home, but wouldnt on the train) " the moment when the UKIP balloon was pricked?
But dont write them off yet. What could get them over the line is postal voting. It is expected that 40 per cent of votes will be by mail and many have already cast their ballots. Westminster is certainly bracing itself. Senior figures in all three main parties admit they expect UKIP to win.
Ed Milibands team is getting its excuses in early, pointing out that Tony Blair never won one of these elections and that the party is concentrating on the local contests also taking place this week.
One Miliband confidant says: The public dont get excited about the European elections unless theres a chance to make a very clear protest vote.
But the simple fact is that Labour should be winning. Combine that with polls showing the Tories ahead and it is clear Miliband has a problem. One Shadow Cabinet member even admits he is operating on the assumption the Tories will win a second term.
Milibands new guru, David Axelrod, who got Obama elected President, told him last week that UKIPs success was part of the age of alienation. Labour is now attacking UKIP in the way Obama did the Tea Party. The argument is that Milibands policies " not UKIPs anger " will ensure everyone gets a decent shot at life.
But UKIP have made inroads into the Labour vote for the first time. Worryingly for Miliband, UKIP think that workers who usually support Labour but who have been won over by UKIPs stance on immigration are more likely to stay with them at the General Election than Tories who are using Thursday as a protest against the EU.
If Labour dont win this vote, Miliband will enter the most challenging phase of his leadership yet. Last week could have been tricky, with the Tories taking the lead in the polls. But the presence of Axelrod acted as a balm on Labour. However, as one attendee at the Shadow Cabinet meeting that Axelrod addressed admits: He didnt say anything people hadnt heard before.
The night before Axelrod left, he dined with Miliband, Labours Election chief Douglas Alexander and their closest advisers. The supper raised spirits as did Axelrods suggestion that he will be back to help prepare for the last conference before the Election.
But it is a sign of the challenge facing Labour that getting Miliband into No10 is looking like a more difficult task than it was to get Americas first ever black president into the White House.
--
HOW BORIS AND DAVE WALKED INTO AN AMBUSH
THOSE lounging in Green Park in Central London on Monday afternoon must have got a shock. For striding past them were Boris Johnson and David Cameron, as pictured left.
The pair were on their way back from campaigning in Harrow, North-West London. The joint effort was meant to show they are on the same team and that Boris is no longer fuming about what his followers saw as a George Osborne-led attempt to bounce him into announcing he would stand for Parliament at the next Election.
Cameron, ever keen to escape the confines of Prime Ministerial security, had grabbed the chance to get off the Tube a stop early and walk back to Westminster.
But as the pair strolled, a booming voice rang out. You should become an MP, Boris, a man shouted. Why dont you become an MP, Boris?
Boriss response: Osbornes spies are everywhere.
--
LIKE London buses quipped one Tory Minister when a second poll came along putting the Tories ahead.
The timing couldnt be better. It has boosted Tory morale ahead of an election where the party is expected to come third in a nationwide vote for the first time in its history. As one No10 aide boasts: You can point to these polls and show things look a lot better when it is a General Election.
The Tories are increasingly confident that the Newark by-election, 11 days after the European results, will show that UKIP fall away in elections that matter. No10 is doing everything it can to get as many Tories in town as possible. Cameron has visited and Ministers have even been told their prospects depend on pitching in.
Why such frenetic activity? Because the Tories know that if they can hold Newark, it will act as a circuit break against the UKIP surge that would follow a win in Europe.
--
NORMALLY, when a Secretary of State and a Minister who attends Cabinet thrash out a text line by line it is for a matter of utmost national importance. But for Education Secretary Michael Gove and his Lib Dem deputy David Laws last week, it was merely to write a newspaper article at the behest of Nick Clegg.
The Lib Dems had demanded Gove put his name to a piece with Laws to declare support for Cleggs free school meals scheme, which had come under fire from former Gove adviser Dominic Cummings. But Laws somehow missed Goves line that they were not like the last survivors in a Bruce Willis movie, only popping out occasionally to blast each other with shotguns. It seems Gove wasnt taking his assignment entirely seriously. Perhaps he should remember that Williss most famous movie, Die Hard, was followed by Die Harder.
Document MOSM000020140517ea5i0000z
