{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3096"}
____
  
News
Report praising BBC 'not worth paper it's written on'
Alex Spence   
446 words
25 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
4
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A report praising the BBC for balanced coverage of the European Union has been attacked as "not independent and not worth the paper it was written on".
Civitas, a right-wing think-tank, argued that the clean bill of health for the BBC "raises serious questions" about the impartiality and competence of the BBC Trust, the oversight body that commissioned the study.
The attack will add to the debate about whether the BBC's news coverage has adequately reflected public concern about immigration and Britain's place in Europe.
Stuart Prebble, a former ITV executive who carried out the review, hit back at Civitas's criticism as an "ill-founded smear". Cardiff University, which carried out the underlying research, said that it stood by its analysis and its staff were independent. It said the authors of the Civitas paper had "a long track record of criticising BBC news coverage from a Eurosceptical viewpoint".
Mr Prebble's report, published last July, examined the broacaster's news coverage of immigration, the EU and religion and concluded that it reflected "an impressive range of opinions". However, the Civitas paper argued that the findings were flawed because academics "made basic data-gathering errors, seriously misrepresented some of their data and used it to reach inadequate and questionable conclusions". The paper was written for Civitas by David Keighley and Andrew Jubb of Newswatch, a group that monitors the BBC for bias. They assert that the Cardiff researchers looked at too narrow a selection of programmes and did not include numerous interviews with subjects who favoured Britain remaining in the EU. As a result, they allege, the report made assumptions that were " biased" against those who favour leaving the EU. It also "crudely lumped together" Ukip and the Conservatives.
They also claim that Mr Prebble was not independent because he used to work at Granada Television with David Liddiment, the BBC trustee who commissioned him to write the study and that some Cardiff journalism professors used to work at the BBC, including Richard Sambrook, a former head of BBC News. Mr Keighley said: "The BBC Trustees have not exercised proper scrutiny in reaching their conclusion that the EU output was properly balanced. This raises questions about their own impartiality and competence."
The BBC Trust is due to examine the balance of coverage again in the summer. A spokeswoman said: "We stand by the [Prebble] report and the conclusions that the Trust drew from it."
A spokesman for Cardiff University said: "The methodology used in the analysis is academically robust. The academics who conducted the analysis are experienced and impartial."
Document T000000020140425ea4p00032
