{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1014"}
____
  
Features
Proportionality test not applied
770 words
19 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
51
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Law Report
European Court of Human Rights Published May 19, 2014 Paulet v United Kingdom (Application No 6219/08) Before I. Ziemele, President, and Judges G. Nicolaou, L. Bianku, N. Tsotsoria, Z. Kalaydjieva, P. Mahoney and K. Wojtyczek Section Registrar: F. Elens-Passos Judgment May 13, 2014 A confiscation order which deprived an illegal immigrant of all savings he had accumulated while working illegally in the United Kingdom for four years and which had only been subject to review on the grounds of either oppression or abuse of process, rather than proportionality, amounted to a breach of his right to property under article 1 of the First Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights.
The European Court of Human Rights so held (Judge Wojtyczek dissenting), in determining the application of Didier Pierre Paulet, an Ivorian national, brought against the United Kingdom. The applicant had arrived in the UK in January 2001 and thereafter lived illegally in Bedford. Between April 2003 and February 2007 he obtained three jobs using a false French passport. On applying for a provisional driving licence in January 2007, his passport was discovered and criminal proceedings were brought against him.
On June 4, 2007, the applicant pleaded guilty at Luton Crown Court to, inter alia, obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception. He was subsequently sentenced to a total of 17 months' imprisonment and a confiscation order was imposed in the sum of £ 21,949.60. On appeal, he argued that the confiscation order had been an abuse of process as it amounted to the confiscation of his entire savings over nearly four years of genuine work.
His appeal was dismissed on July 28, 2009, on the ground that the confiscation order had not amounted to an abuse of process as there was not only a link between his earnings and the criminal offences, but also a wider public interest in confiscation as he had deliberately circumvented the prohibition against him seeking employment in the UK. Ultimately, on October 27, 2009, the Court of Appeal refused to certify a point of law of general public importance for consideration by the Supreme Court. Enforcement proceedings had since been brought against the applicant.
THE COURT said that the applicant complained that the confiscation order was a disproportionate interference with his right to peaceful enjoyment of his possessions within the meaning of article 1 of the First Protocol, submitting that his case should have been distinguished from cases involving more serious criminal offences such as drug trafficking or organised crime.
It was not in dispute that the confiscation order had amounted to an interference with that right and that such interference by a state was allowed under the second paragraph of article 1 to "control the use of property to secure the payment of penalties".
The Court had to consider, however, whether the proceedings as a whole had given the applicant a reasonable opportunity to put his case to the competent authorities so that they could establish a fair balance between the conflicting interests at stake, namely the applicant's right to protection of his property and the requirements of the general interest.
The Court noted that the applicant had argued before the national court that a confiscation order would be "oppressive" or an "abuse of process" under domestic law if the benefit figure could properly be described as disproportionate, either in the traditional sense used in criminal proceedings or in the language of the Convention.
The national court had held that the confiscation order was not an abuse of process as the appropriate link between the applicant's earnings and his criminal offences, in the context of the wider public interest, was plainly established. The Court accepted that, at the time the applicant brought his complaint before the domestic courts, it had been appropriate for him to argue it as he had done. In that regard, the Court noted that it had only been in R v Waya (The Times December 10, 2012; [2013] 1 AC 294), another confiscation case, that the UK Supreme Court had held that it would be preferable under British law to analyse confiscation cases in terms of proportionality under article 1 of the First Protocol than for complainants to invoke the concept of abuse of process.
Nevertheless, as domestic law had only permitted the national courts to consider whether or not a confiscation order was oppressive or an abuse of process at the time the applicant's case had been decided, the scope of review carried out by them had been too narrow. Full text: www.echr.coe.int
Document T000000020140519ea5j0009g
