{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"890"}
____
  
News
Ed Miliband isn't the new Michael Foot. He's the new Michael Howard
By Robert Colvile   
872 words
4 May 2014
13:56
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ed Miliband's first job in politics was as an intern for Tony Benn. And it's starting to feel, as Labour begins to flesh out its policy platform for 2015, that he's doing his very best to keep the old boy's spirit alive.
After last week's kerfuffle over rent controls, the Sunday papers are full of old-school Labour wheezes – a nanny-statist crackdown on fast food, alcohol, obesity and lack of exercise; the renationalisation of the railways; and a letter to the Prime Minister asking him to stop acting as a cheerleader for Pfizer in its attempt to take over that great British company, AstraZeneca.
Admittedly, neither of the first two ideas is – yet – official party policy. But it was extremely striking that, when Ed appeared on The Andrew Marr Show this morning, he refused to distance himself from either of them. Both options were, he insisted, still under review. (He also, incidentally, got some good licks in on Nigel Farage, which had his supporters on Twitter purring.)
For our man on the Marr sofa, Fraser Nelson, it was further proof of what he calls "Labour's Leftward lurch". "Time and time again," Fraser writes, "we see that Ed Miliband’s plans for government tend not to involve government. They tend to involve edicts that he’d issue to those who don’t work for government. Landlords, power companies, moneylenders – and, today, supermarkets."
From a policy point of view, this is deeply problematic. Miliband's agenda may be an elegant solution to how you bring socialism back when you don't have money to spend – but the risk is that by making markets "work in the public interest", you stop them working as markets at all.
But there's something more interesting at work here than just Ed Miliband being a not-so-secret socialist – though obviously, his political instincts are far to the Left of most of the electorate. Rather, it's that he's fallen into the same trap as Michael Howard did as Tory leader.
Think back to Ed's biggest political moment last year – his announcement of an energy price freeze. Never mind that the details were hideously impractical, or that the very prospect of it sent the markets into turmoil and jeopardised vital infrastructure investment. It was both popular and populist, setting the agenda and leaving Ed, temporarily, as king of the political castle.
So what does an Opposition leader do, as the economy improves and the Government remorselessly chips away at his poll lead? He goes back to the same well. Housing costs are a huge problem – so let's cap them. We don't like foreigners buying British firms – so let's stop them. We have to pay through the nose for a season ticket – so let's kill off the corporate profiteers. And the same goes for state-owned bankers who think they're going to get a bonus…
The interesting thing is, none of these policies, taken in isolation, is a bad idea – in terms of their popular appeal, that is (from a policy point of view, they're mostly awful). They're certainly meat and drink to the party faithful. But exactly the same was true of the Tories' pledges back in 2005, when Michael Howard took on Tony Blair. More police. Cleaner hospitals. Lower taxes. Better discipline in schools. Controls on immigration. Greater public accountability. Most voters – and especially most Tory voters – would have said yes to all of the above, and enthusiastically so.
The problem came when you took them as a whole. As Lord Ashcroft's famed electoral post-mortem, Smell the Coffee, found, people liked the policies – but hated the Tories. Partly, that was because the party's brand was still contaminated from 1997 (thanks to Tony Blair and Alastair Campbell's world-class job of demonising the Major government). But partly it was because, when you looked at the manifesto as a whole, it gave off an image of the Tories as small-minded, authoritarian, hostile to modernity and, well, just plain nasty. In the end, the public decided that Howard was a good Opposition leader, expert at highlighting areas of public concern and devising popular, populist responses. But a prime minister? Sorry, but no.
And that, in short, is where Ed Miliband finds himself. Each of his policies, each of his interventions, gives him a short-term boost. But taken together, they amount to a drastic shift in the role of the state – one that is more intrusive both in the workings of the market and in how we live our daily lives.
The idea, perhaps, has been to come up with enough popular policies to outweigh Red Ed's biggest electoral disadvantage – namely, that voters still think he's just a bit weird. But as in 2005, it adds up to an electoral offer that only a party loyalist could love. Michael Howard asked voters: are you thinking what we're thinking? And the answer he got was the same that Red Ed is set to get in 2015: a resounding no.
Document TELUK00020140504ea54002jp
