{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2064"}
____
  
NEWS
David Cameron cools on pledge to cut net migration to tens of thousands by May 2015
By Christopher Hope Senior Political Correspondent   
437 words
18 May 2014
20:12
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
David Cameron declines five times in Sky News interview to say that he wanted to achieve this by 2015, preferring to insist that the Conservatives were “working towards” the target.
David Cameron has apparently cooled on his party’s pledge to cut net migration to tens of thousands of people by next May’s general election.
The Prime Minister was repeatedly asked in a television interview if he was sticking to his commitment to cut the number coming to the UK to fewer than 100,000.
However he declined five times specifically to say that he wanted to achieve this by 2015, preferring to insist that the Conservatives were “working towards” the target.
Interviewed on Sky News’ Murnaghan programme, Mr Cameron said: “We are working towards it, we are doing everything we can to deliver on it and we should continue to do that.”
Asked again if the figure was still a target for the general election, Mr Cameron said: “I want to see net migration down to the tens of thousands not only because it is right for the British economy because we should be training our own people for these jobs.
“But also if you look back to the 1980s when net migration was in the tens of thousands, we were an open economy then.
“But do you know what, immigration wasn’t a big political issue because it was properly under control and that’s what I want to achieve again.”
The pledge to cut net migration to fewer than 100,000 was made in the Conservative manifesto in May 2010.
However the Liberal Democrats resisted including the specific target in the Government’s Coalition agreement which set out what ministers would do.
The comments represent an apparent shift from last week when Mr Cameron told MPs in the Commons that the May 2015 target was “perfectly feasible”.
He continued: “We have brought net migration into the UK down by a fifth under this Government – not as much as I’d like.”
Net migration - the number coming to the UK for at least a year, less the numbers leaving - rose 58,000 to 212,000 in the year to September 2013.
Mr Cameron said that Britain had taken in people from the stricken Eurozone.
Speaking a day after Mr Cameron, Anna Soubry, a Government minister, admitted that the target looked set to be missed. Miss Soubry – a defence minister – said: “At the moment we don’t seem to be on course.”
Document TELUK00020140518ea5i003ml
