{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1096"}
____
  
News
PM: We have undersold our work for women
Christopher Hope   
535 words
7 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
6
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
DAVID CAMERON has told his MPs they need to be more boastful of the work done by the Government to promote women's policies.
The Prime Minister's call came as new figures showed the gender pay gap had fallen since 2010.
Mr Cameron said last night that the Government was guilty of "underselling" its policies which are aimed at women.
Nicky Morgan, the women's minister, said that Government figures showed the gender pay gap had fallen and been "almost eliminated for full time workers under 40".
Other achievements included legislating for the Married Couple's Allowance, as well as an increase in the number of female Tory MPs. She said that 30 per cent of the party's candidates at the 2015 general election were women. She also told the MPs that the number of women on FTSE100 boards had increased from 12.5 per cent to 20.7 per cent.
Mr Cameron has asked Conservative grassroots supporters to back the Government's economic policies.
In an email to the Tory party's 134,000 supporters last night, the Prime Minister said he was "asking you to back the plan that is turning our country around".
In the 260–word message, Mr Cameron wrote: "The Conservatives are the ones with the long–term economic plan that is working.
"If we want to continue this Great British revival, and keep on turning our country around, we've got to keep working through this plan. That's why today, I'm asking you to back the plan that is turning our country around."
The message was timed to be sent out one year from next May's general election. Mr Cameron said: "For each of those 365 days, the Conservatives have one clear message: we are the team that is turning Britain around."
Mr Cameron said the Government had a "serious, long–term economic plan" to cut the deficit, reduce income tax, cut immigration and cap welfare.
He said that the Conservatives would demonstrate that this "plan is working for families across our country". He said: "From the ashes of the Great Recession we are building a Great British revival. But make no mistake: all this is at stake a year from now. Labour's only plans are for more spending, more borrowing, more debt."
Ed Miliband has said he has "more intellectual self–confidence" than David Cameron. The Labour leader suggested that he has a better and clearer understanding of Britain's needs than the Prime Minister. In an interview with the London Evening Standard, Mr Miliband, who like Mr Cameron, attended Oxford and took a degree in politics, philosophy and economics, said: "I'm not the guy who says, 'Oh I just want to be prime minister because it is a place to reach'. I actually have strong beliefs about how to change the country. This is an incredibly powerful weapon.
"I look at David Cameron across the Dispatch Box and I think to myself, I'm the one with the intellectual self–confi–dence because I actually know what I believe and I don't need Lynton Crosby to tell me."
Document DT00000020140507ea5700060
