{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3012"}
____
  
Features
The attempts of a few won't stop us from taking part in democracy
Nigel Farage   
820 words
9 May 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
36,37
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
Features | Another Voice
Ukip has never been a party which encourages discrimination of any kind, even so-called positive discrimination. We think that people should be promoted on merit rather than operate all-women shortlists or other patronising formulae. And our membership has responded accordingly, with women filling 20 per cent of our MEP lists, predominantly at the top of the ballot.
But after the disgraceful accusations of being racist hurled at us - just because a tiny percentage of members of Ukip have written idiotic and sometimes offensive things on Twitter - I decided that enough was enough.
So at this week's final event of my Common Sense 2 tour, rather than be the main speaker I was happy to be a supporting act to a selection of our candidates for the local and European elections. They all shot down the myths that Ukip is a party for grumpy old white men.
From our small businesses spokesman and MEP candidate Amjad Bashir - a Muslim of Pakistani origin - to the ebullient Winston McKenzie and our communities spokeswoman Suzanne Evans, it was a night of destroying the false images of Ukip that have been put about during the course of this election campaign.
Of course, the left-wing rent-a-mob was outside, and it was bizarre to see a bunch of white middle-class public-sector workers calling our Asian and Afro-Caribbean members "racists" as they walked in to the hall in Westminster. And some protesters even came into the hall - not to listen or debate but just to heckle. As one of our speakers, Paula McQueen, told them: "Don't you dare call me a racist when as a black Jew who is 60 years old I have experienced racism."
I think this is Ukip's Clause IV moment. It was our chance to demonstrate that we are a party which welcomes people of all colours, religions and sexual orientation, and that wanting controlled immigration based on need and merit is not a racist issue. And, quite frankly, if any of our supporters have a problem with that, then they are backing the wrong party.
If it wasn't for Nick Clegg challenging me to those live debates I wonder how much policy would actually have been debated in the run-up to these European elections. It's only once every five years that we really get an opportunity to voice our opinions on what I think is the biggest issue affecting our everyday lives. What is more important than how our lives are governed and by whom?
Regardless of the wishes of the others, Ukip has been taking the message to the voters. I have loved my tour around the UK, and it's given me the chance to see some beautiful towns and cities. From the industrial towns of the north, surrounded by the peaks and dales, to the heritage city of Bath with its Regency houses to the gentle countryside and the oldest pub in Wales on the outskirts of Barry.
There have been a few blips - including one moron deciding to throw an egg at me, and the protesters in Swansea stopping me from taking part in a walkabout to meet members of the public. But the evening events have been packed out, with people wanting to find out about Ukip. We're the fastest-growing party in the country, and the attempts of a few haven't stopped the many from taking part in the democratic process, which is woven into the fabric of our liberal democracy.
Working too hard can be good for your health
Ed Miliband has decided he wants to be the guardian of good health for the nation, despite the fact that he looks like the kind of chap who was often "off games" at school thanks to a note from his mum.
Despite the smoking and drinking, I do try to maintain a moderately healthy lifestyle. I like fresh fish - preferably those that I have caught at sea and filleted myself - and never eat ready meals or packaged meat from the supermarket. I avoid sugar as much as I can, and only occasionally indulge in a Galaxy Minstrel or five. This combined with regular country walks and sea fishing has kept me fairly fit, plane crashes aside.
But my usual regime has had to be put on hold over the past few weeks as the elections draw closer. Instead, I have been undergoing the latest Farage health and fitness drive, which I am not convinced the health stewards will approve of.
It consists of working 18 hours a day including hours of media interviews and public meetings, non-stop travel, not eating properly and surviving on little but adrenalin, alcohol and cigarettes. And I've never felt better.
Twitter: @Nigel_Farage
Document IND0000020140509ea590001t
