{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2459"}
____
  
FINANCE
Migrant entrepreneurs driving job creation across Britain, study shows; Migrant entrepreneurs are behind one in seven UK companies, according to the first ever nationwide analysis of such business leaders in the UK.
By Rebecca Burn-Callander Enterprise Editor   
559 words
4 March 2014
18:53
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nearly half a million people from 155 countries have settled in the UK and launched businesses, the report by the Centre for Entrepreneurs and company data business, Duedil, has found. There are currently 456,073 migrant entrepreneurs in the UK running active companies, with some running more than one venture.
The majority of migrant entrepreneurs hail from Ireland, with 48,854 founders currently running businesses in the UK. In second place is India, with 32,593, and third is Germany, with 30,755. American and Chinese entrepreneurs are also behind a significant number of UK-based businesses. Almost every country across the globe is represented by at least a handful of founders or company directors.
London benefits disproportionately from foreign-born entrepreneurs, with 188,000 migrant-led businesses – 20 times the number running companies in Birmingham, the second most popular location.
According to recent data from the Office for National Statistics, while only 10.4pc of those born in this country go on to start businesses, entrepreneurial activity stands at 17.2pc for migrants.
The report also revealed that migrant entrepreneurs start their businesses much younger than their indigenous counterparts, at 44 years old compared with 52.
Born in Punjab, Surinder Arora arrived in the UK in 1972 aged 13, unable to speak any English. Now 55, he is one of the UK's most successful hoteliers, operating 16 hotels under the Arora, Hilton, Radisson and Sofitel brands.
“In some parts of the world things are done the old way," he said. “It’s all about who you know, not what you know. Those countries and economies get left behind. In the UK, things are so much more positive. There is a level playing field – I was lucky my parents came here."
Migrant Entrepreneurs: Building our businesses, creating our jobs showed that migrant-founded companies are responsible for creating 14pc of all jobs among companies turning over between £1m and £200m – the small-to-medium sized enterprise (SME) sector.
Matt Smith, Director of the Centre for Entrepreneurs, said of the report: “The contribution of migrant entrepreneurs is, to be frank, breathtaking. It is now the responsibility of politicians of all parties to celebrate migrant entrepreneurs’ contributions and restate their commitment to maintaining pro-entrepreneurship immigration policies".
According to a YouGov poll conducted for this report, just 44pc of Brits believe migrant entrepreneurs make a positive contribution to the UK. Half support the government’s efforts to attract new migrant entrepreneurs, while 68pc would like to see a reduction in net immigration.
Serial entrepreneur Luke Johnson, who is chairman of the Centre for Entrepreneurs, said: “The current tone of hostility towards immigration – even within mainstream political debate – could prove damaging for future job creation in the UK, especially in high-growth entrepreneurial sectors. Instead, we should appreciate that migrant entrepreneurs have overcome significant challenges to develop enterprises in the UK. In many respects, the odds have been stacked against them. Yet they still thrive and triumph."
Duedil sourced migrant-led company data for the report from Companies House. YouGov’s sample size was 2,280 British adults from across the UK.
Document TELUK00020140304ea34005xz
