{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1073"}
____
  
NEWS
General election 2015 - the strategists: Lynton Crosby, Conservatives
By Peter Dominiczak   
494 words
7 May 2014
13:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Lynton Crosby, also known as the “Wizard of Oz”, is lauded by his allies and described by his opponents as an “evil genius” who engages in “political dark arts”
In Australia, Lynton Crosby masterminded four consecutive national election victories for John Howard, the former prime minister.
In 2005, he travelled to the UK to run Michael Howard’s general election campaign for the Conservatives. The campaign was seen as a flop, with the Tories negative tactics over immigration widely criticised.
However, Mr Crosby then did the unthinkable and managed to guide Boris Johnson to the London mayoralty in 2008.
While running the campaign, Mr Crosby is said to have become concerned about Mr Johnson’s lack of focus and reportedly told him: "If you let us down, we will cut your f*****g knees off."
Mr Johnson has been effusive in his praise for Mr Crosby’s work on his two election campaigns.
He has said: “In 2012, after four years of deep, hard recession, he had to sell an old Etonian, Bullingdon Tory to eight million Londoners who are going through a tough time. That was no mean feat of political sorcery ... Seriously, I can't praise him highly enough."
Mr Crosby is known as a master of "dog-whistle politics", defined as the ability "to make potential supporters sit up and take notice while avoiding offending those to whom the message would not appeal".
In 2012, he was appointed by the Conservatives to lead the general election campaign on a £200,000 salary.
He has brought much-needed discipline to the Conservative HQ and inspires fierce loyalty from his staff.
The Labour Party has attempted to attack him over his lobbying links but has so far failed to score any major victories.
His appointment has created a growing sense of optimism in the Tory Party. Mr Crosby’s appointment currently looks to be one of David Cameron’s most shrewd decisions in recent years.
