{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2101"}
____
  
With Mr Sajid Javid’s good sense, the Tories can win
By Telegraph View   
627 words
18 May 2014
08:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Conservatives must capitalise on the economic recovery - and the new Culture Secretary knows how
Next week’s European elections may well be the most anticipated and discussed in history. The rise of Ukip has added a fascinating frisson to a contest to which many voters usually pay little attention, and the performance of the party could have a profound effect upon the next general election. It has been predicted by some that Ukip will come first, dragging the centre ground of British politics dramatically to the Right. That Nigel Farage’s party can continue to dominate the polls in spite of myriad accusations of bigotry is a remarkable testament to the public’s disaffection with politics-as-usual.
However, things could turn out rather differently than expected. Our latest poll shows that the Tories have overtaken Ukip to enter second place in a hypothetical European election contest. This is a big turnaround from just one month ago, when the Tories were placed a distant third and Labour and Ukip were battling for first. The change is probably a recognition of the Government’s improving fortunes. The economy is growing fast, unemployment is declining, and immigration from Romania and Bulgaria has actually fallen since labour market restrictions were lifted, contrary to Ukip’s predictions. The good news is reflected, too, in general election polling. Our survey gives the Tories 31.4 per cent vs Labour’s 30.7 per cent. Hardly a landslide margin, but part of a trend of public sentiment moving steadily in David Cameron’s favour.
Of course, the Conservatives cannot afford to be complacent. One of the reasons why the Ukip rebellion has happened is that a disconnect loomed between the party leadership and traditional Tory voters frustrated by recession and the slow pace of change. To win in 2015, Mr Cameron has to win back his base and convince floating voters that the Conservatives will make a real, material difference to them and their families.
One man who seems to understand this is Sajid Javid, the new Culture Secretary. He is a welcome antidote to the Westminster insider image – a comprehensive school boy, the son of a bus driver of British-Pakistani descent, who made his fortune in the private sector. And he speaks a lot of common sense. In an interview with The Sunday Telegraph, he addresses the thorny issue of immigration, arguing that immigrants must learn English and “respect our way of life”. He also admits frankly that there is no control over numbers coming in from the EU and that the best way to tackle this is through renegotiation of our relationship with Brussels ahead of an in/out referendum.
Mr Javid adds that the failure to redraw parliamentary boundaries will make it harder for the Tories to win next year’s general election. This means that the Conservatives have to build a substantial lead over Labour if there is to be any hope of commanding a Commons majority: they cannot afford to throw away the opportunities afforded them by this economic recovery or the signs of growing popular goodwill. If people sense that taxes are going down and that they have more money in their pockets, or that the Government is determined to control our borders better, they will give their votes to Mr Cameron.
Day after day, it becomes clearer that the Labour Party is simply not a fit alternative. Whatever happens to Ukip next week, the real contest in 2015 is going to be between Conservative realists such as Mr Javid and economically irresponsible Left-wingers like Mr Miliband. It is a contest that we cannot afford to see the Tories lose.
Document TELUK00020140518ea5i000rt
