{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2195"}
____
  
Guardian Leader Pages
Saturday: Reply: Letters and emails: Tracking lacking
Guardian readers   
329 words
8 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
33
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Seumas Milne concludes Crimeans must have the chance to choose their own future (Comment, 6 March). Fair point. However, we know from Chechnya how brutally Putin can deal with dissatisfied minorities. The west would be criminally negligent if we allowed Crimea to become Russian without rock-solid safeguards for the region's Tatars and Ukrainians.
John Bond
Oxford
* Your report (Minister's speech turns spotlight on nationality of PM's staff, 7 March) could also have pointed out that Cameron employs an Aussie immigrant as his puppet master. Then there is the Canadian immigrant running the Bank of England and the New Zealand immigrant in charge of RBS. Away from politics, we have in the Premier League perhaps Arsenal immigrants against Chelsea immigrants. Let's use the word in all cases where it applies and we might understand it a bit better.
David Wotherspoon
Downholland, Lancashire
* How is it that any one with an iPad or smartphone can track hundreds of thousands of ships throughout the world using a free "app", and the Justice ministry can't follow 20,000 offenders (Report, 6 March)?
Richard Bull
Woodbridge, Suffolk
1/15 Razmig Keucheyan makes some good points (Comment, 7 March) about capitalism's response to ecological crises, but for the social consequences you can't do better than Margaret Atwood in her Oryx and Crake trilogy. It's also a hugely enjoyable read.
Norman Housley
Leicester
* Carol Ann Duffy's poem Mrs Schofield's GCSE (G2, 4 April) brought to mind what is surely a still more telling response to the mismatch between poetry and the requirements of an exam, FH Townsend's parody of Wordsworth: O cuckoo, shall I call thee bird/ Or but a wandering voice?/ State the alternative preferred/ With reasons for your choice
Peter Burden
Coventry
* I never knew Mike Parker (Letters, 7 March) but he sounded like a decent type.
Michael Cunningham
Wolverhampton
Document GRDN000020140308ea38000gk
