{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1324"}
____
  
News
Poor English lets migrant crooks off the hook
Paul Jeeves   
341 words
1 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
9
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
MIGRANT criminals are escaping community sentences, like unpaid gardening work, by claiming their English is too poor to understand health and safety instructions.
The practice was exposed yesterday when Romanian, Simon Calin, avoided justice because he was unable to follow basic advice, sparking fury among campaigners opposed to mass UK immigration.
It is standard procedure for probation service staff to tell offenders to wear protective gloves and to hold equipment properly to avoid injury.
But Calin, 37, who admitted stealing 54 bottles of whisky from a supermarket, was let off a community sentence when his lawyer told the court his English was so bad, he could not follow basic advice.
The crook claimed the theft was his "first mistake" in nine days since arriving in the UK - 24 hours after borders opened to Romanian migrants.
He went to a Tesco store in Barrow, Cumbria, loaded his trolley with the Famous Grouse worth £1,108 and placed bags and paper on top in a bid to hide them.
But the married father was seen on CCTV piling the haul into a car - and arrested.
Furness Magistrates' Court was told the probation service had assessed Calin for litter picking, fence painting or gardening, but had decided his English was too poor.
Instead he was given an eight-week curfew and ordered to pay £145 into court.
Tory MP Philip Davies of the Campaign Against Political Correctness, branded the ruling "ludicrous".
He said: "Everything that is wrong with the immigration and justice system of our country is fully indicated here in one simple case."
Prospective Ukip MP David Simister added: "This is beyond outrageous."
Calin is one of thousands of migrants from Romania and Bulgaria who flooded into the UK after border restrictions on the impoverished nations were lifted early in January.
A Ministry of Justice spokesman said fluency in English did not exclude people from carrying out unpaid work, and that sentencing in individual cases was "a matter for the independent judiciary".
Document THEEXP0020140301ea310004i
