{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"830"}
____
  
News
David Cameron cannot admit the Coalition was a mistake, but he knows it must be put out of its misery
By Norman Tebbit   
1,268 words
26 February 2014
15:18
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
I really wish that I could understand David Cameron rather better.
Benedict Brogan, whose contacts with the rival camps of the Prime Minister and his deputy are far better than mine, says that Mr Cameron is now sick of Nick Clegg, frustrated by the his inability to do more than mark time until the election of 2015, and determined that whatever its outcome he will not enter into another LibDemCon coalition.
Some of us told him not to do it in 2010. Some of us opposed the crazy idea of fixed-term parliaments. Now it seems he is a living embodiment of the old adage, marry in haste and repent at leisure.
My advice to him is simple enough. Ask the Cabinet to agree to put before Parliament now some of the legislation that he wants, but knows that his Lib Dem partners would oppose. Take a vote on it. If the majority endorse his proposals but the Lib Dems refuse, tell them that he will go ahead anyway and they can choose whether to vote for it, resign or be sacked.
That would set the battle lines for either a Lib Dem surrender or a vote of confidence, and if needs be, an early election.
Of course, that would all require clear-headed planning, which has not always been in evidence in recent years. I was depressed this week to receive, like all my colleagues, a letter from the Prime Minister headed "Our long-term economic plan and why it is so important", enclosing a pocket-sized folding card listing five key items.
I groaned as I read the first, headed "Reducing the deficit", which explained that reducing the deficit would "deal with our debts".No. It would not. Our debts will be increasing until we run a budget surplus and apply it to paying off our debts. Alright, I know that George Osborne knows that full well, but why cannot the Prime Minister say it?
Then at number four we find, "Capping welfare and reducing immigration". Well, not if his partners have any say!To do that we need to repeal the Human Rights Act, denounce the Human Rights Convention, create an effective control system at our air and seaports and either radically change the European Treaties or head for the Brexit.
I cannot help wondering if Mr Cameron still listens to the siren voices who tell him that in this country elections are always won on the "centre ground". Were Thatcher's victories won on the "centre ground"?
As the party chairman in 1987 I can assure him that they were not. Above all in preparation for her massive victory with 13,8 million votes in 1987, we had turned around public opinion six months earlier with the concept of The Next Steps Forward. That set out the key actions by each government department which would achieve the government's objectives in the next parliament.
Of course the Prime Minister cannot own up that the coalition was a mistake. Of course it needs to be put out of its misery. Of course he needs to set out his priorities and how without the encumbrance of the Lib Dems he would go about achieving them.
If he would do that, he could win a majority standing on the common, not middle, ground.
—
There were plenty of interesting posts on my last week's blog but one stands out like the proverbial sore thumb from all the others. It came from FuzlydeQuietzapple. Zmid a flood of rubbish, there it was: "Blair directed British foreign policy very well." The corpses of the British soldiers who died in Iraq and Afghanistan in Blair's wars must turn in their graves as Blair counts his money.It puts into perspective all the other foam-flecked ravings from Fuzly.
Turning aside from the lunatic fringe, I thought that the earliest posts from readers were a bit less than serious, but later on some good debates emerged. I also took encouragement from Mars, richard smith and crickedneck, each of whom said that for the first time they supported my view. General support came too from coliemum, GhengisKhan, Foxall, Winston Smith, markmyword49, Sguest, horacefor pope, gentlemenabedinengland, stickywicket, josephandrews, thesageofstalbans, LordLondon, skyblade, chris_xxx, reaguns, and pragmatist. However I was concerned that so many including reductioadabsurdem, Brimstone 52, Lady Magdalene and averagebritain felt that the situation was beyond any solution. I was therefore somewhat encourage to read widggget's support for open primaries and, as woosie suggested, control of postal voting. I believe we should go back to what worked. Postal votes for those unable by disability to get to vote or likely to be away from home because of their work, and no one else.
A good many of you,not least knoweuro, BrianOtridge, Pip, thought I should defect to Ukip, and WatTylersGhost questioned how I could "claim to want exit yet remain a Conservative". He misses the point. I support Brexit because I am a Conservative. He should be asking people how they can claim to be Conservatives and not support Brexit.
Of course there were those who disagreed, criticised or questioned my views. There was rogerhicks who felt that the old system had not served us very well, but I think he was looking at too short a timescale. I was thinking of the years from the Napoleonic Wars through the two Great Wars. Then ohforheavensake was overcome by political correctness at my remarks about the potential appointment of airline captains other than on merit and I was grateful for the robust comments of splotchly and AlecM about that. Naturally we had a lot of his usual nonsense from abritabroad and his priceless doctrine that "the law is only credible if it is common to all men". So much for Magna Carta, the great 19th century reform acts and indeed the 1972 Act. And he went on to sneer at the idea that Britain stood alone in 1940. Well just who did he think was fighting alongside us in The Battle of Britain, apart from refugee pilots from Poland, Czechoslovakia. France and from the Empire?
There was also what I think he thought was a clever post from non food, defending the European Parliament from my criticisms of Our Masters in Brussels. He was dealt with in style by alanbutler79 and I need add no more to that.
What still concerns me however is that readers have still not grasped the essence of my message. Both Labour and Conservative Party memberships are in freefall. If all those deploring where the geat parties have gone wrong were to get out there, join up and take control from the bottom up, which is what my friends and I did in the late Sixties, they could put things right. It is harder work that sitting at a computer, but it is the way forward. If you don't take it then you are consenting to what is being done by those who did.
Lastly I should mention CharlesHEwing's substantial post on the Electoral Commission and its "chair" who is overdue to be firmly sat on, and assure zahradelasierra that I am sorry I did not comment on his recent post, but I simply did not get to read it!
So thank you (almost) all for your comments and especially to those like Delboy 36 who sent good wishes to my wife who is currently having a pretty difficult time.
Document TELUK00020140226ea2q004va
