{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2275"}
____
  
Features
Heart and hips in the heights
Dominic Maxwell   
383 words
21 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
11
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
This Latin remix of West Side Story has fun written all over it, says Dominic Maxwell
Theatre In the HeightsSouthwark Playhouse, SE1
*****
This New York musical turns a South London fringe theatre into a riot of Latin soul, hip-hop, impassioned show tunes and vibrant dancing. In the Heights won the Tony award for best musical when it appeared on Broadway in 2008. Now making its British debut, this Latin American remix of West Side Story and Rent boasts enough energy and verve to make you surrender gladly to an undeniably sappy story. This is a show with heart and hips alike.
We are in the north Manhattan neighbourhood of Washington Heights, among a largely Dominican immigrant community struggling to get by as rents rise and gentrification looms. Quiara Alegría Hudes's book gives us tentative romance, a forbidden romance, a lottery windfall, a yearning for home and a close sense of community. Nothing, in theory, we haven't seen before.
Yet Lin-Manuel Miranda's 20-odd witty, impassioned songs keep this narrative vivid and lively. And Luke Sheppard's energised production delivers the true ensemble feel that this tale demands. David Bedella brings gravitas as a proud, old-school, cab firm owner, Victoria Hamilton Barritt is delectably catty as the hairdresser, Daniela; Sam Mackay delivers slick raps and endearing self-doubt as the corner-store owner, Usnavi, but then pretty much everyone impresses in this mostly young and sinewy cast of 17.
Most of all, what a joy to sit so close to such slinky, joyous choreography by Drew McOnie. Yes, here and there it's constrained by the space — sometimes the sound mix is muddy too — but more often it is simply ravishing. Takis's set, with its graffiti and its scaffolded upstage area, where the seven-piece band play, evokes inner-city heat and confinement.
And after a busy but slightly overlong first half, the more reflective second half ends as a touching affirmation that home is where the heart is. To judge by the scale of this polished, propulsive production, In the Heights has an eye on life beyond the fringe. To judge by the spell it casts, it deserves one.
Box office: 020 7407 0234, to June 7
Document T000000020140521ea5l000cy
