{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1095"}
____
  
News
Crack dealer deported, after eight–year delay
Padraic Flanagan   
412 words
7 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
11
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A CONVICTED Palestinian drug dealer is finally being thrown out of Britain after using the Human Rights Act to remain in the country for an eight–year crime spree.
Mahmoud Jaber, 31, had been peddling heroin and crack cocaine to fund a lavish lifestyle, serving three jail terms and racking up a string of convictions during his stay in Britain, a judge was told.
Despite being informed he would be deported as long ago as 2006, Jaber – whose father lives in the UK – used article eight of the Human Rights Act to appeal successfully against his removal, arguing he had the right to family life.
Since his appeal, Jaber has been convicted of a series of drug trafficking offences, complaining that he was "emotionally scarred into taking drugs" because he was born in a Palestinian refugee camp in the West Bank.
After a number of legal battles and appeals, an immigration judge ruled that Jaber, of Accrington, Lancs, had an "appalling history" and ordered that he be returned to his home country. It is thought that Jaber's case will have cost the taxpayer tens of thousands of pounds. The saga began when Jaber moved to Accrington to join his father in February 1992. He was granted indefinite leave to remain in 1998 and attempted to get British citizenship, but in 2003 was convicted of a series of offences including resisting police and possessing Class A drugs.
The following year he was jailed for four years for dealing crack cocaine and heroin. In April 2006 Jaber was told he would be deported but in May the following year he lodged an appeal under article eight and won the right to stay.
In 2008 he was repeatedly brought back into court on drugs charges. Then in October, 2010, at Burnley Crown Court, Jaber was convicted of intent to supply heroin and crack cocaine and manufacturing crack and was jailed for six years. In 2011, he was warned he faced deportation but in 2012 he again appealed. Last year he was convicted of money laundering and jailed for an extra 21 months.
His deportation appeal was heard in Bradford, West Yorks, in October. The panel concluded that his offending was "too serious to outweigh his claims to remain".
Jaber finally appealed to the Upper Immigration Tribunal in Manchester.
Rejecting his appeal, Judge Richard Chalkley said: "Given the appellant's appalling history … the appeal fails."
Document DT00000020140507ea570006r
