{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"44"}
____
  
News
UK school that teaches English as 2nd language
Paul Jeeves   
603 words
25 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
7
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
A SCHOOL with pupils from 55 countries sparked controversy yesterday by announcing that every child will be taught English as a foreign language.
City of Leeds secondary school has been swamped by a multiethnic intake and is struggling to teach children speaking 50 separate tongues.
It says even the remaining 15 per cent of British-born pupils have little more than a rudimentary grasp of the English language required for the GCSE syllabus.
Problems have been exacerbated by a recent huge influx of Roma children who now make up the largest proportion of the 314 students aged 11 to 16.
More than eight out of 10 pupils have English as a confirmed second language, with the majority speaking Czech, Romanian, Urdu, Polish, German or Russian.
In 2011 pupils at the school came from 40 nations and spoke 24 different languages. Most were of Pakistani origin but Ofsted says the number of Roma and traveller children flooding into the school in recent months has dramatically changed the demographic.
Many are of Czech extraction but there have been arrivals from new EU member states Bulgaria and Romania. There are also pupils from Africa, China, elsewhere in Europe, the Middle East and Asia.
This has forced the unprecedented step of teachers introducing classes for all in English as a second language for at least 50 minutes a week.
Last night Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: "I am absolutely appalled we are allowing this to happen. It is just increasing division in our society.
"If I was a parent at this school I would be knocking on the head's door demanding change. We will go on making the point that an open door on immigration is more likely to lead to this sort of thing and it will be an election issue."
But head teacher Georgiana Sale defended the move, saying: "Many of our pupils are not only new to English but they are not literate in their own language. In some cases we are the first people to put a pen in their hand.
"Around half of our children are new to the country within four years. It is generally thought it takes five years to properly learn a language and that is when you have total immersion in it.
"A lot of our children don't have that because it is not spoken at home. Imagine being expected to get a good grade in GCSE geography but having to sit the exam in French."
Ms Sale added: "We have now employed staff who speak Czech, Romanian, Russian and German to help the children settle into the school and learn English."
Chris McGovern, chairman of the Campaign for Real Education, said: "Whilst it is very important that non-English speakers are properly looked after, this should not be at the expense of those for whom English is the mother tongue.
"I am sure parents of these native-English-speaking children will be alarmed that they are being discriminated against."
Last year little more than a quarter of City of Leeds School pupils achieved the national benchmark of five good GCSEs including English and maths.
OPINION: PAGE 12
YEs: 0901 792 5302 NO: 0901 792 5303 Yes text DXTUEYEs to 86611 No text DXTUENO to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight. q Should a British school treat English as foreign language?
Document THEEXP0020140325ea3p0004y
