{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2638"}
____
  
Guardian Newsprint Supplement
Reality check How many of the politicians' soundbites are actually true?: As the dust settles, we examine the truth behind the statements and claims
1,270 words
20 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
16
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
* Is Britain the fastest-growing major advanced economy?
This year Britain's economic output will be back to where it was before the financial crisis, but GDP per head will not return to its previous peak until 2017 because the population has grown. Forecasts for UK growth range from 2.2% to 3.3%. The OBR's estimate of 2.7% is in line with the consensus (but below the Bank of England's 3.4% forecast). This means Britain is on track to outperform Germany (1.8%), Japan (1.4%) and all other G7 countries this year - except the US. Consensus Economics, which surveys 240 forecasters, predicts that the US economy will grow by 2.8% in 2014. But the chancellor missed a trick: he could have pointed out that Britain is likely to outdo Brazil and Russia (forecast to expand by 2.2% and 2.3% respectively) - "unthinkable" three years ago, says Ian Stewart, chief economist at Deloitte. Julia Kollewe
* Will a clampdown on tax avoidance schemes net pounds 5bn for the Treasury?
Revenue & Customs (HMRC) has been cracking down on film partnerships and other schemes that use legal loopholes to cut tax bills. Some of Britain's richest bankers, footballers and pop stars have invested in schemes sheltering billions in tax. The chancellor said making them pay tax upfront would net pounds 5bn. Bill Dodwell, of Deloitte, said the figure was realistic, pointing to "tens of thousands of cases". However, PwC believes the money may have to be repaid if HMRC loses court cases - with interest. It said the estimate of pounds 5bn is based on "a high" success rate of 80%. JK
* Do we have a record number of people in work?
George Osborne has been more careful with numbers after being caught out before. There are a record number in work - 30.19 million - and the number of women working is also at an all-time high. UK employment rate for those 16 and over has risen to 59.1%, just ahead of the US at 58.8%. But many women in the UK have part-time or temporary jobs, or are self-employed, because they cannot find full-time work. There has been a big increase in self-employment, while employee numbers have fallen. Frances O'Grady, TUC general secretary, said: "The economy is generating jobs but too many are insecure and poorly paid." Young people are not benefiting, with youth unemployment at 19.8% - almost three times the UK's overall jobless rate. JK
* The rich contribute the most to deficit reduction and income inequality is at a 28-year low
These claims probably raised an eyebrow or two, but both turned out to be true. The top decile are losing the most in percentage terms (about 2%) from measures since June 2010 - mainly due to previous changes to the top rate of income tax, said Chris Goulden, at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation (JRF). The next biggest losers are the bottom two deciles (losing about 1%).
Middle-income groups are the only gainers (0.5%). Income inequality is the lowest since 1986, the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics show. The richest fifth of households had disposable incomes that were five times those of the poorest fifth (pounds 60,800 a year and pounds 11,500 respectively), showing a fall in income inequality compared with 2010-11 when the ratio was 6 to 1. Goulden said everyone was worse off but the poorest had been protected - until now. Forecasts for poverty and inequality (by the Institute for Fiscal Studies and Warwick University for JRF) show both are expected to increase by 2020, despite an improved job market. This is mainly due to the effect of benefit cuts playing out in the longer term. JK
* Can pensioners be trusted not to fritter pension savings?
From next year pensioners will be able to take money out of pension pots more easily: as well as the existing quarter of the value tax free, the rest will be taxed at the marginal rate of income tax rather than the existing rate of 55%.
The chancellor said he rejected "the patronising view that pensioners can't be trusted with their own pension pots". However, the National Association of Pension Funds expressed dismay, noting that this government introduced automatic enrolment into pensions because of concern about how few people plan adequately for old age.
"People often underestimate how long they will live and overestimate how long their pot will last," said Joanne Segars, NAPF chief executive. "There is a recognised problem with the lack of financial literacy in the UK."
Personal finance providers were more optimistic. Laith Khalaf, at Hargreaves Landsdowne, predicted the remaining taxes paid on lump sums would encourage many to keep their money in pensions, but also forecast that people would be willing to save more for retirement if they were free to use large sums when needed. "They'll have that freedom, they'll have that responsibilty, which is a good thing if they can use it wisely," said Khalaf.
Much could hinge on another of the chancellor's promises: that everybody reaching retirement would have free financial advice. However, there has been a 25% drop in the number of financial advisers in the last few years, warned EY Financial Services. Juliette Jowit
* How much will green levies raise?
Osborne justified giving pounds 1bn in compensation to the UK's most energy-intensive industries - such as chemical plants and cement makers - by saying that green taxes would account for more than a third of their energy bills by the end of the decade. His claim is not wide of the mark but it doesn't quite stand up either. An annual report by the Department of Energy and Climate Change says levies add 1% to 14% to such companies' energy bills, meaning they account for 12% of their energy bills. By 2020, it forecasts levies adding 6%-37%, which would make green levies responsible for 27% of the companies' energy bills.
So Osborne has used the upper end of a forecast and also appears to have exaggerated the percentage big energy users will be paying for green levies in the future - the true figure appears to be 27%, not 33% or more. Adam Vaughan
* . . . Those budget budget measures
Some of the biggest headline grabbers of recent months have also transpired to be some of the cheapest. The chancellor extended the government's controversial policy for letting married couples share their tax-free allowances, increasing the amount eligible for the allowance, and promising to continue doing so in future. But no one - married or otherwise - should break out the bubbly too fast: in its first year, the policy will only cost pounds 25m: just over pounds 1 each for every married person in the UK. Other cut-price announcements included new financial advice for pensions at pounds 10m, childcare reforms for just an additional pounds 25, and a promise to restrict migrants' access to benefits. This "dog-whistle" policy for a government feeling pressure over immigration from Ukip and broader public opinion might help the coalition shore up its vote but it will not do much for the public coffers: it is predicted to save just pounds 40m in its first year and pounds 80m in its second. While pounds 80m may seem a lot, the total public spending budget is about pounds 700bn. James Ball
Document GRDN000020140319ea3k0007f
