{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2577"}
____
  
News
'We're the party of the everyday grafters'
Simon Johnson   
679 words
17 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
9
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Scottish Conservative Conference
SCOTLAND'S working classes should consider voting Conservative because they share the same values, Ruth Davidson argued yesterday as she attempted to reinvigorate her party's fortunes by extending its appeal.
The Scottish Tory leader used her keynote spring conference speech to argue that her party is on the side of "the everyday grafters of Scotland".
Despite her party's lack of recent electoral success north of the Border, she said the Tories "stand four–square with the people of Scotland" on a series of key issues from the Union to welfare and immigration.
Ms Davidson, who is gay, joked that "it's hard to come out…as a Conservative" but appealed to voters to re–examine how closely their values align with her party's.
The Conservatives had a working class vote in Scotland in the 1950s but the party's sharp electoral decline saw them win only one seat in the last general election.
Ms Davidson has pledged to reverse that downward spiral and yesterday argued that her party was on the side of a "strong and growing working class".
"And when I say a working class, I mean anyone who gets up, goes to a job and earns a wage to support themselves and their families – the everyday grafters of Scotland," she told representatives at the Edinburgh International Conference Centre. "Those hard–working people who deserve a Scottish government that values them and their efforts, who deserve a government that believes in letting them keep as much as possible of what they have earned."
She rejected claims that the Tories are irrelevant in modern Scotland, arguing most Scots agree with her party's opposition to independence and the welfare reforms being implemented at Westminster. Scots also approve of Conservative policy on low taxes, cutting immigration and an EU referendum, Ms Davidson said.
She argued the SNP is in the "minority" on all these issues and concluded: "People are starting to notice that we are on the right side of the argument."
The Scottish Tory leader said her party's share of the vote has increased in 11 consecutive council and parliamentary by–elections, adding it was the first time that had happened since 1974.
Addressing voters directly, she said "you're a Conservative" if they believed in sound finances and personal freedom, choice and responsibility.
But Ms Davidson told representatives there must be reform to Scotland's education system on a scale "not seen in our lifetime", with an end to the "postcode lottery which locks thousands into failing schools". She said her party wanted to end the "monopoly of mediocrity" trapping too many youngsters from poor backgrounds into "lives of low expectations".
This means giving parents more power to select their children's school, more rigorous exams for the academically inclined, better vocational training for those who are not and bad teachers being forced to leave the profession, she said.
Controversially, she also announced plans to reintroduce prescription charges, but promised the proceeds would be used to fund an extra 1,000 nurses and midwives.
The Scottish Tory leader concluded with an impassioned plea to save the Union and a pledge that "we are 100 per cent committed – from the Prime Minister down" to devolving more powers if there is a No vote in September.
Highlighting the First Minister's refusal to accept the Chancellor's rejection of a currency union with an independent Scotland, she said: "The last few months have taught us that Alex Salmond is utterly incapable of accepting the consequences of his own actions.
"If he was caught spraying graffiti, he'd blame the wall."
Alex Neil, the Scottish Health Minister, said: "This speech was lost in its own contradictions. The Tories claim they want the power to cut tax but the only policy they have is to reintroduce a health tax on 600,000 people.
"Support for the Tories has fallen a long way in Scotland and with policies like this it will fall further still."
Document DT00000020140317ea3h000au
