{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2502"}
____
  
TRAVEL
Tight connection time at Gatwick; Ask the Experts: Nick Trend, our consumer travel expert, advises a reader who is changing planes from BA to EasyJet at Gatwick Airport; Ask the experts
By Nick Trend   
409 words
5 March 2014
10:27
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
J. Heise writes:
I’m flying with British Airways from Orlando, Florida to London Gatwick, connecting to EasyJet to Edinburgh. I understand that both airlines fly out of the North Terminal at Gatwick and I have 90 minutes between flights. Is that enough time to make the connection? Can I check my golf clubs all the way through to Edinburgh or do I have to claim them from BA at LGW and recheck them with EasyJet?
Nick Trend, consumer expert, replies:
I think you are cutting it extremely fine, even though both airlines do indeed use the same terminal. Because you are flying on two separate airlines, with two separate bookings, neither airline has a responsibility to make sure you connect, and you won’t be able to check yourself, or your luggage on a “through journey". So when you arrive at Gatwick, you will have to pass through UK immigration, collect your luggage, go out into the main terminal, check it in with EasyJet and pass through security into departures. EasyJet check-in desks close 40 minutes before the scheduled departure time of all flights – and it is strict on this timing; in fact it recommends a two-hour advance check in. You are then supposed to be at the departure gate at least 30 minutes before departure. You might be lucky, land early or on time, and hit a quiet moment at immigration, but it will be tight. If you miss it, you will have to buy a new ticket on a later flight. Since BA also flies from Gatwick to Edinburgh, you would have been better off booking a through ticket on the same airline.
Our Q&A service allows you can pick the brains of our experts at home and abroad. Email your query to asktheexperts@telegraph.co.uk . We won’t be able to answer them all, but we will do our best.
About Nick Trend
Nick Trend trained at the Consumers’ Association and has been an editor and writer for the Telegraph Travel section since 1995.
Click here to find out about our other experts 
Follow @TelegraphTravel
Download the free Telegraph Travel app, featuring expert guides to destinations including Paris, Rome, New York and Amsterdam
Document TELUK00020140305ea35003bm
