{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"2886"}
____
  
Observer Business Pages
The press was impressed: but Clegg v Farage isn't left v right
458 words
30 March 2014
The Observer
OB
49
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
The question of who won, or lost, the first Clegg-Farage encounter didn't seem to be in doubt on the morning after. An instant poll for the Sun called it 57% to 36% for Nigel. Tory voters split 70% to 26%. Telegraph readers went for Farage by well over 80%. Pundits, asked to proffer an opinion, mostly bowed before this wisdom or (Quentin Letts in the Mail) declared a pox on both small-party houses. A few (Polly Toynbee in the Guardian) prophesied doom and destruction.
The traditional Tory press wriggled on the spot. It has been rallying to Cameron's banner lately, spurred on by what it sees as a budget boost. It has even begun taking the matey Farage image apart. But how do you argue with debate results as overwhelming as this? Especially when your readers seem to be arguing with you.
Pretty simply, in fact. This LBC-run debate wasn't some microcosm of a general election contest, more a far narrower taster of European elections pending. Only truly motivated voters, concerned about Europe, immigration et al, need apply themselves over an hour's gritty argument. So the sample of those who watched wasn't a true sample of voters for May 2015. There'll be many lost causes then, no doubt. But not lost before the starting gun is even fired on a quite different track.
■ Sometimes, amid all the hype and hubbub, simple figures offer a useful reality check - as in this year's Pew Centre findings on the State of the American Media. How much money - plain old-fashioned revenue - flowed in with the news last year? $63.2bn (pounds 38bn), says Pew. Some $38.6bn of that still went into newspaper coffers, as compared with $9.8bn into local TV news, $5.2bn into cable TV, $2.1bn into network TV - and so on, down to the odd half-a-billion on news magazines. You can write the obituaries of print, and its allied revenue streams, easily enough. But don't forget to keep counting the cash as you do.
■ TV will puff any pending movie or night at the theatre. It's what modern chatshows are all about. But it won't - while Film 2014 is in tragic abeyance and after tonight's swansong for the wan, monthly Review Show - tell you whether what's puffed is any good. That's left to radio and the press. You'd suppose a BBC bent on boosting arts programming would want to nurture a consistent, critical edge to its coverage. Yet this, it seems, is the only opinion extra arts spending can't buy.
Document OB00000020140329ea3u0000i
