{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"3594"}
____
  
Features
KRIS MARSHALL 'WORKING WITH FIT WOMEN? IT'S A CROSS I HAVE TO BEAR'
Emma Jones   
867 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; National
18,19
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
The actor, 40, on working with hot ladies, filming in Paradise and how My Family got him noticed in some very strange places
2002
Keira Knightley and me getting married in Doctor Zhivago. I worked with Keira INLOVE Actually too. In that I was a waiter at her wedding, here I'm marrying her. A huge wedding theme with us two, but I always knew she'd be a star. This was a brilliant job as it's so iconic. I'm wearing a wig - we shot the end first and my character has bad alopecia, so I had to have these bald patches shaved into my hair. After that I just shaved my head, but it looked even worse. It took months for it to grow back. I had to wear a hat for ages. I was in Portugal a few months later in 30º heat, in a woolly hat.
2001
Someone grabbed a rug and staged an impromptu photo shoot when we were rehearsing the first series of My Family. I was 27 when I started playing Nick, who was supposed to be 19. It was like a real family. I get recognised for this role all over the world, especially Africa. They go crazy for it. I was stopped by an immigration guard and thought, 'What have I done?' But he just said, 'I loved you as Nick.' I was chuffed! Very surreal having border control in Nairobi complimenting your work.
2002
Heath Ledger and I bonded while filming The Four Feathers in the middle of the Australian desert. Heath (centre) had the villa behind me so we used to play poker and hang out a lot. Rupert Penry-Jones, too - we were all like-minded guys. It was cool. We were great friends and I was devastated when he passed away. When I see pictures of us together I think back to when people thought he was a pretty boy with no talent. Then his career went mad. So he reminds me people are quick to judge. It was great to have that time.
NB: Death In Paradise, BBC1, Tuesday, 9pm
2007 I was a gooseberry while doing the play there were only three of us.
And it's where Billie Piper and Laurence Fox met. Third wheel, much? I'm joking, we all had a great time together. We travelled round the country performing it and all hired a cottage and stayed together. It's great now they're married with kids. We look boozy, but this was at the start of the night. We didn't get that lashed as we had to do a matinée the next day. You want to get hammered after a performance, but you usually can't.
2003
In no way did I think Love Actually would become such a cult classic. Pretty much every British actor ever is in it, but I never realised it would be so huge. This was a brilliant day filming. Richard Curtis was never precious about his script. And this scene is so improvised. Everything where they're asking me to say things in my accent, we just made it all up on the day. The classic line 'And he's got a big kn*b!' was just a one-off line I threw in. Elisha Cuthbert was obviously in 24 and January Jones is in Mad Men. This pub is actually in Shepperton, we just turned it into Milwaukee. They were great, we all had a lot of fun. Just don't feel sorry for me hanging out with all these fit women, it's a cross I have to bear.
2014
Filming Death In Paradise in the Caribbean is the luckiest job in TV. But it's unbearably hot. I wear a vest, a shirt and a jacket and it's usually above 40º, so trying to remember lines with sweat dripping down your back isn't easy. But I feel bad complaining - we have production meetings in the sea, it's hilarious. The worst thing is the centipedes, some are over a foot long. I saw an enormous one once, so I put my boots on and jumped on it four times to kill it! It was dramatic.
2012
My wife Hannah and I got my wife Hannah and I got married quite quickly then had a proper party later on. We didn't want an official photographer or anything fancy, just the hotel near where we both grew up, our best mates and our family. Then we got the snow, which was amazing! But of course some woman who was out shopping took these pictures and the next thing you know they're online everywhere! Being a dad is the best thing in the world too. I don't like spending too much time away from my son, Luca who is 18 months. Now we have a child the romance is certainly harder, but I work on it. I'm very downto-earth, but the one perk to being well-known? Doing one job then getting six months off.
Document SMIRR00020140223ea2n00078
