{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3540"}
____
  
NEWS
Grant Shapps warns Tory rebels to fall in line for the election ahead
1,595 words
20 April 2014
08:15
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Tories must do more to make sure families feel better off before next year's general election, the Conservative chairman tells Tim Ross
“I’m a friendly, affable bloke, but there are limits,” warns Grant Shapps.
The Conservative chairman has just fired one of his deputies, Michael Fabricant, for rebelling against the government’s plans for the High Speed 2 rail project and a series of comments on Twitter which were deemed “unbecoming” of a party vice-chairman.
“It was probably the friendliest sacking you’ll ever see,” the Mr Shapps says. “But in the end I wasn’t prepared to have somebody as part of my team who is in Parliament working against the government’s own policy.”
As the official responsible for overseeing the Conservative campaign, and recruiting activists to the cause, Mr Shapps is not for taking prisoners and Tory rebels should beware.
His neck is on the line as much as anyone’s if Ed Miliband wins power at next year’s general election.
But Mr Shapps has a more immediate battle on his hands. In one month’s time, voters across the UK will elect Members of the European Parliament, along with councillors in 161 English local authorities.
A poor showing for the party on May 22 could cost Mr Shapps his job well before the general election contest even begins.
Most commentators expect the European elections to be grim for the Conservatives, and for Right-wingers in the party to go into a tailspin in the aftermath of a heavy defeat.
In the week after Mrs Miller’s resignation over expenses, the chairman of a bruised party is in no mood to compromise.
The Telegraph窶冱 ICM poll discloses the scale of defections that the Tories face – one third of voters who backed the Conservatives in 2010 now plan to vote for Nigel Farage’s party next month. Why is Ukip so popular?
“I’m not here to commentate on polls,” Mr Shapps responds. “My job as party chairman and a member of the Cabinet is to let people know what the election is about and what is at stake. This election is about Britain’s future relationship with Europe. We have to win it on the arguments.”
But surely it is essential to understand why Conservative voters are deserting the party in favour of Ukip, or does he no longer care about winning these people back?
“I’m just not engaging in the speculative side of this,” comes the blunt reply.
What about Mr Farage, whose pint-swigging appeal has turned Britain into a four-party country?
“I leave Farage’s message to him.”
The refusal to discuss how to beat Ukip, which even those close to David Cameron privately admit is the Tories’ biggest challenge, seems wilful, even perverse, given the current state of the polls.
Eventually, Mr Shapps reveals a small glimpse of his plan to neutralise the Ukip offer of curbing immigration and cutting Britain’s ties with Brussels.
“If you care about some of the things Nigel Farage says he cares about, the way to get them is to vote Conservative,” he says. If you can’t beat them join them.
Some MPs believe the party’s chances would be improved by Boris Johnson running for Parliament at next year’s election, and ultimately replacing Mr Cameron as leader.
Even the Prime Minister envies the Mayor of London’s unique ability to “defy political gravity”, which means that no amount of trouble in his private life seems capable of denting his wide public appeal.
“It’s entirely up to Boris what he does. He is a big boy, he can make up his own mind,” Mr Shapps says.
However, the Party chair is clear that the Mayor would get no special favours if he chose to stand for Parliament in 2015.
“These seats come and go and he’d have to win one. He’d have to be on the candidates list and he’d have to apply for a seat.
“I think Boris is great,” he adds, quickly. “It would be great to have him back in Parliament.”
Are there not already too many “posh white boys” running the Conservative Party?
“This obsession from exactly which bit of society we all came from is an obsession only with the press and Labour,” Mr Shapps claims.
“Actually, people are more interested in where people are going to, not where they came from.”
Nonetheless, image is important in politics, and senior Tories including Michael Gove, the Education Secretary, have noted critically Mr Cameron’s inner circle is dominated by Old Etonians and Oxbridge graduates from similarly gilded backgrounds.
Mr Shapps turns back – a fairly long way back – to the memory of Baroness Thatcher, the grocer’s daughter, and Sir John Major, a Brixton lad who struggled at school, to show that “we all come from different backgrounds”.
“I went to a state school. This idea that we are all only from one background - some people are, and good luck to them – but I don’t think we should hold it against people because they went to a posh school.”
In Sajid Javid, who replaced Maria Miller a Culture Secretary, the party can now boast Britain’s “first ever male Asian in Cabinet”. Does this mean it’s “job done” for broadening the Tory image?
“Not job done at all, but it’s progress, isn’t it?” Mr Shapps says.
The trip to Nando’s, which was his choice of venue, could be viewed as part of the careful image that Mr Shapps has sought to cultivate as a Tory in the Major and Thatcher tradition, an ordinary boy made good.
Not for this Tory, the Michelin-starred dining beloved of the Westminster elite. His order of half a flame-grilled chicken, with corn and rice, washed down with two large colas will have been replicated by thousands of office workers and tourists in Nando’s outlets around Britain.
State-educated, he set up his own printing and design company more than 20 years ago, which is still running successfully. The business made him rich and he now enjoys flying his own private plane.
But his story has been far from easy. He survived cancer and a car crash that left him in a coma for a week. Mr Shapps is perhaps better placed than some of his colleagues to empathise with the struggles of ordinary families and small businesses trying to keep body and soul together.
These “hardworking people” are the voters who the Tories want to recruit in the 13 months between now and the general election. Their best hope of doing so is to ensure that families feel the benefit of the economic recovery in their daily lives.
Unemployment continues to fall, and figures last week marked an “important moment”, Mr Shapps says, when wages finally began to rise faster than the price of household goods.
Ed Miliband’s current plan for a Labour victory is based on an assumption that Britons are suffering a “cost of living crisis” and will not feel better off come polling day in May 2015.
On this, at least, Mr Shapps seems to agree. He is about to say the that the general election will be “a referendum” on the Conservatives’ economic plan, but stops himself, apparently fearing it could prove too true.
“I’m not suggesting people lie awake at night thinking about the economy but what we all lie awake at night thinking about is security for our family. People want to know that their job is secure.
“The biggest challenge is making sure everyone feels the benefit of that. Making sure that essentially you and your family get to see the benefit of some of the really difficult decisions that have been made, and frankly the sacrifices that many families in this country had to face.”
With only a year to go until the next general election, do people feel better off yet?
“I think we still have some way to go,” he says. “Labour took us to the biggest bust in a hundred years and the truth is it’s taken a long time – with no help from them – to get this economy back on track.”
As chairman of the party, Shapps has good reason to be treating next month’s European and council elections deadly seriously.
If the Conservatives lose crucial seats in the European Parliament, and hundreds of councillors across England – who would be the “foot soldiers” canvassing and leafleting at the general election - he stands to pay the price.
The Prime Minister is due to reshuffle his Cabinet for a final time in the summer and some in Westminster think Mr Shapps will be a casualty.
“The job of the chairman is to have big broad shoulders, impenetrably thick skin and to get on with the job,” he says.
Some ministers are notorious for dodging interviews with John Humphrys or Jeremy Paxman, when one of their policies is taking some flak. That’s not an option for Mr Shapps.
“No one can ever accuse me of ducking the difficult interviews,” he says, clearly recalling his daily tours of the television studios to defend Maria Miller over her expenses claims.
“I enjoy it,” he insists. “It’s privilege to do. I’m always happy to go out and make the arguments even when they’re tricky.
“I hope that’s what I bring to the job.”
Document TELUK00020140420ea4k000up
