{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1015"}
____
  
Business
What the papers said
443 words
19 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
38
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Need to know Your 5-minute digest
THE SUNDAY TIMES
Pfizer is mulling a lastminute increase in its offer for AstraZeneca. Bankers think £53 a share might be enough to bring Astra to the table, with the Americans tipped to increase the cash element of its bid.
Pfizer is not the only US group with an eye on Britain's lower corporate tax rate.
Walgreens, the drugstore giant, is examining a £10.5 billion bid for Alliance Boots, in which it holds a 45 per cent stake.
Elsewhere, Zoopla is poised for a stock flotation that will value the property website at about £1 billion. The company is set to unveil its plans this week.
THE OBSERVER
MPs are to investigate Serco after the outsourcing company was forced to disclose an internal report revealing that it failed to properly investigate a claim of repeated sexual assaults against a female resident at an immigration detention centre. Keith Vaz, chairman of the home affairs select committee, said he would be summoning Serco executives to explain their actions.
Co-op members have voted to accept a controversial plan by Lord Myners, left, to overhaul the 150-year-old organisation, which has been hit by crises.
SUNDAY TELEGRAPH ?
Marks & Spencer will move to appease investors upset by the retailer's performance by hinting that it is to boost shareholder returns and focus on improving profit margins. The chain is expected this week to report a decline of nearly 8 per cent in its headline annual pre-tax profits.
SSE is braced for calls to cut prices this week when it is expected to reveal that its profits surged by 9 per cent to £1.5 billion last year. Britain's second-largest energy supplier announced in March that it would freeze prices until 2016.
6. PizzaExpress, owned by Cinven, has attracted interest from a number of large private equity groups, with bids starting at £1 billion.
MAIL ON SUNDAY Energy bills are set to rise after Ofgem said that it would proceed with plans to shake up the energy market, which will end up helping Scottish wind farms at the expense of power stations in England. The changes could raise prices by as much as £20 a year on average, according to critics of the industry.
Adventure Forest Group, the company behind Go Ape treetop safaris, has reported rising sales and profits, and claims that the green shoots of recovery are at last boosting business.
The founders of Silversurfers.com, a website that features the interests of over-50s, intend to raise £1 million through a fundraising to expand the business.
Document T000000020140519ea5j00072
