{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1278"}
____
  
Europe: David Cameron can’t match Nigel Farage’s simple message; What does not appear to be on offer is the return of the sovereignty that the UK ceded under the European Communities Act in 1972
By Telegraph View   
534 words
28 February 2014
20:59
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
There must be times when David Cameron envies Nigel Farage. The simplicity of the Ukip leader’s message obviates any need for subtlety or nuance. His position is easy to articulate: he wants Britain to leave the EU – no ifs nor buts. Mr Cameron does not want to leave, but he must none the less give the impression that the UK will only stay in if the institution is radically reformed to meet British concerns about the way it is run. He needs to do this both to win back Tories who have defected to Ukip, and to appease many of his backbenchers who want out of the EU.
This week’s events have made Mr Farage’s task far easier than the Prime Minister’s. The visit to London on Thursday of Angela Merkel was not a fatal blow to Mr Cameron’s hopes of achieving some sort of renegotiated package. But it gave us a much clearer idea of what might be achievable – with the support of the big players in the EU – and what is fanciful.
The first thing that is apparent is that while a deal of some sort is certainly attainable, it will necessarily embrace the entire institution, and not be for the UK alone. As for what it might contain, Mrs Merkel said that, while the free movement of people is sacrosanct, its implementation should be reformed to prevent the abuse of welfare systems. The Dutch, meanwhile, have produced a number of ideas for reinforcing the notion of “subsidiarity", whereby more decisions are taken by nation states and limited powers of veto are given to national parliaments through a “red card" system should one third of them object to a particular proposal. These are practical measures that could be the foundation for a better-run Europe, in which the wings of the Brussels bureaucracy are clipped.
What does not appear to be on offer, however, is the return of the sovereignty that the UK ceded under the European Communities Act in 1972. And the danger for Mr Cameron is that he has sometimes given the impression not just that this is the case, but that we will somehow be able to run our affairs on a different basis to the rest of the EU. The risk is that he will raise expectations that will inevitably be dashed.
None of this will concern Mr Farage, who at Ukip’s spring conference in Torquay yesterday made immigration his central campaigning issue for the European parliament elections, under the slogan “Love Britain". Again, his message was clear: you cannot control your own borders and remain a member of the EU, a fact exemplified by the recent leap in net migration. Ukip is aiming to top the poll in May – an outcome that would cause panic at Westminster. Mr Cameron’s ability to stop it happening does not look any greater at the end of the week than it did at the start.
Document TELUK00020140301ea2s000mc
