{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2208"}
____
  
News
'The working class feel betrayed. That's where we'll get our votes'
Alice Thomson   
1,995 words
8 March 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
12,13
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip The remarkable rise of Ukip is based on the party's appeal to a wide range of disaffected voters, Alice Thomson and Rachel Sylvester report
David Cameron compares his battle with the UK Independence Party at the European Elections to taking part in a pub quiz. Nigel Farage, he complains, "gets to choose his favourite subject to be the joker round on which he can get double points". There is no doubt in his mind that Ukip could come first this May.
As the mainstream parties prepare to be trounced when Britain goes to the polls in ten weeks' time, Mr Farage's party has become the joker in the Westminster pack, the most successful insurgent challenge to the political establishment since the war.
This is a rag-bag collection of individuals, dismissed as fruitcakes and fools, mavericks and mischief-makers. It has no real economic policy and its leader recently disowned its entire manifesto for the previous general election. Of the 21 Ukip MEPs elected to the European Parliament since 1999, two have gone to jail and seven have either defected or resigned from the party, a 40 per cent attrition rate. Yet it is now widely expected that Ukip will beat the Conservatives into third place in the European elections and it could even topple Labour from the top slot. Its local government powerbase is also expanding rapidly. At last year's polls, the party won 147 county council seats. This time, it is standing 2,500 candidates in councils up and down the country. It no longer seems impossible that Ukip might soon have an MP. The party has come second in the past six parliamentary by-elections and, at between 12 and 18 per cent, it is regularly ahead of the Liberal Democrats in the national polls.
While the mainstream parties are haemorrhaging activists, Ukip's grassroots base is growing: it now has 35,000 members. Even the youth wing, Young Independence, is thriving, with 1,700 members, branches on university campus across the country and a black-tie Winter Ball. Mr Farage has been accepted into London's smartest drawing rooms; at one recent dinner party he entertained Jemima Khan and Lord Mandelson with his stories of Brussels excess.
The party, founded 21 years ago in a dusty room at the LSE by a history professor, believes it has come of age. Mr Farage told his spring conference: "We are on the march." Stewart Wheeler, the spread-betting millionaire and party Treasurer, says: "We are attacking any seat we think we can win. Twenty years ago in Canada, the Reform Party had no seats, then they got one seat in a by-election and then they won at the election. It shows it can be done."
Mr Cameron is swerving in Ukip's direction at every opportunity on immigration and Europe and Nick Clegg has challenged Mr Farage to a leader's debate. Ukip is the one to watch but the appeal of "Nigel's barmy army" has been greatly misunderstood.
The widely held assumption is that Ukip is a party for disgruntled Bufton-Tufton Tories who hate Brussels and foreigners. In fact the majority of Ukip voters are blue collar workers who are more worried about wages than Europe. According to a YouGov poll for The Times, 52 per cent of Mr Farage's supporters are from the C2DE social groups, compared with 46 per cent for Labour, 43 per cent for the Tories, and 32 per cent for the Lib Dems. "Ukip is the most working class party," says Matthew Goodwin of Nottingham University, whose book Revolt on the Right is out this week. "Its voters are economically disadvantaged, with few skills. These are people who feel left behind. What Ukip tells us is that there are very deep social divisions in Britain. It represents the common man against the political elite."
Mr Cameron is "the best recruiting serjeant for Ukip", he says. "He represents the set of values that these voters hate."
Paul Sykes, the millionaire Yorkshire businessman who has promised to bankroll Ukip's European election campaign, believes Brussels is the ultimate out-of-touch establishment. "All the suits have done very well out of the EU, it's the working man who has suffered," he says.
"Working class voters are feeling betrayed. I'm hoping that's where we are going to get the majority of our votes."
Paul Nuttall, Ukip's deputy leader, confirms that the party intends to target Labour seats. "There's a move amongst working class people towards Ukip. They like what we stand for and what we talk about. We've moved away from being a single issue party and with the collapse of the Lib Dems people are looking for an anti-politics choice."
According to Dave Rowlands, chairman of Ukip in South East Wales: "In the Welsh valleys the response is amazing. We are no longer the nutters. I get chased down the street with people asking questions. The immigrants haven't taken bankers', politicians' or media jobs, but working class jobs. Labour has forgotten us, the grafters at the bottom, Ukip hasn't."
In Scotland, David Coburn, a gay Glaswegian air-freight entrepreneur, hopes to become Ukip's first Scottish elected politician in May. He explains: "It's all very well for the middle classes, the lawyers and doctors to insist it isn't a problem but for ordinary working men and women, uncontrolled immigration depresses their wages and it places a burden on the NHS and social services."
It is easy to criticise Mr Farage for lacking policy. The appeal of Ukip, however, has nothing to do with ideology, or ideas, it's about culture.
After the Eastleigh by-election, the Liberal Democrats conducted a focus group with voters who had switched from their party to Ukip. All listed problems with Britain: the cost of housing, traffic, "new-fangled" computers. At the end, the moderator turned to the group and asked what they thought was the best thing about this country. "There was a deathly silence," according to one of those present. "Then one guy leaned forward and said, 'the past'."
According to the YouGov polling for The Times, Ukip voters are far more pessimistic than others about the prospects for the economy, their neighbourhoods and their families; 80 per cent think there is little chance of today's young adults prospering over the next ten years and 56 per cent think Britain's "best years are behind us".
These voters do not expect Ukip to be running the health service or dealing with the deficit. They want to express a far more general sense of anxiety and anger. Mr Farage's description of Britain as "unrecognisable", with English rarely spoken on a commuter train, is a deliberate attempt to tap into this mood.
Andrew Cooper, who was until recently director of strategy at No 10, says: "The defining attitude of Ukip voters is, 'I don't recognise the country I live in any more'. It's about antipathy to the pace of social change. It's not about a specific issue, it's about a feeling."
When Lord Ashcroft, the former Tory chairman, did research among Ukip voters, it was an overwhelming sense of "dissatisfaction" that came through. "Schools, they say, can't hold nativity plays or harvest festivals any more; you can't fly a flag of St George any more; you can't call Christmas Christmas any more ... you can't even smack your children." The mainstream parties were "so in thrall to the prevailing culture of political correctness that they have ceased to represent the silent majority", these people felt.
Neil Hamilton, the former Tory MP who was embroiled in the cash-for-questions affair, and is now Ukip's deputy chairman, claims that 40 per cent of the people who intend to support Ukip say they would stay at home, rather than voting for another party. "Now the divide isn't between left and right but between Ukip and the rest," he says. "This is a peasants' revolt. Ukip has brought people back into politics."
He and his wife, Christine, were wooed by Mr Farage over a "four-bottle lunch" at Shepherd's, a traditional Westminster haunt that has since closed down.
Mrs Hamilton, a star of reality TV shows and pantomimes, is not bothered by the occasional eccentric comment. "Of course I don't clean behind my fridge, and of course I'm not a slut — that was a joke. All parties have sexist pigs in them." The appeal, she says, is that "Ukip is a grassroots party, it comes from the bottom up".
Mr Farage adopted the local "pavement politics" approach once deployed so successfully by the Lib Dems when they were the main recipients of "protest votes". Ukip candidates are encouraged to go canvassing with a pet. "The British love animals so of course you take the dog," says one insider. "It's comforting and British." They have also been instructed to discuss the weather.
The party's messages are carefully honed for particular communities.
In Somerset, Ukip has been out front in calling for dredging of local rivers. In the Chilterns, it is winning support by opposing the HS2 rail network. In London, the mayoral candidate Lawrence Webb promised 15 minutes free parking across the capital and a clampdown on fines which he describes as "an extortion racket". In the countryside Ukip talks about hunting and hay. Around 16 per cent of Countryside Alliance members say they are now backing Mr Farage. "Ukip are clever," says Tim Bonner, head of campaigns.
"There is a perception that the Government has focused too much on suburban and urban issues. Ukip has some bizarre policies but people are looking for an alternative."
There has been some inconsistency as a result of this localised approach. At the recent Wythenshaw and Sale East by-election, Ukip's campaign literature promised to "protect your jobs and benefits" — even though its head of policy, Tim Akers, had complained only five months before about the "soaring benefits bill".
Among Ukip supporters, immigration is a unifying issue. "We have always been a welcoming nation but we can't be drowned by millions of people sweeping in," says Peter Brown from Bristol.
Most also have their own pet concern. Suzanne Evans, the national communities and women spokesman, was a Conservative councilor but defected to Ukip. "I have always been a great campaigner over female genital mutilation and the Tories didn't take it seriously," she explains. "Nigel Farage has."
Stephen Wood, chairman of Ukip in Bristol, is a retired police officer and now a bailiff and private investigator. "The police force is being decimated yet policemen from Europe can come and arrest someone here for the smallest misdemeanour," he says. "I am a private detective and the amount of red tape is ludicrous."
A former supporter explains: "The party is a list of slogans rather than a manifesto. They were pro guns, now they don't mention that, they are suddenly pro-dredging. They will be pro-hunting and pro-the badger cull now but only in the West Country of course. They will fling themselves on any bandwagon and cling on until it crashes."
A friend of Mr Farage said: "Nigel's very clever at working out local trigger points. It's not about Europe any more, it's a protest movement, with people using Ukip to show what's bothering them. It feels like dry grass burning, you light a small patch you want to burn and suddenly the whole field's on fire. Nigel says, 'keep going, you can't throw cold water on everything now. Let it burn'."
'Ukip has some bizarre policies but people are looking for an alternative' Tim Bonner, Ukip head of campaigns
Document T000000020140309ea380002g
