{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3041"}
____
  
NEWS
Bridget Jones takeover: number of singletons growing 10 times as fast as population
By John Bingham Social Affairs Editor   
661 words
8 May 2014
08:04
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Number of people living alone in the UK doubles in a generation, study concludes
The speed at which the singleton lifestyle bemoaned by Bridget Jones is taking hold in Britain is exposed in new research showing that the number people living alone is growing 10 times as fast as the overall population.
Estimates drawn from Government studies suggest that the number of single households in the UK has more than doubled in the last 40 years and now stands at almost nine million, according to one measure.
The study commissioned by Liverpool Victoria, the insurer, also concludes that young people will spend 50 per cent longer living alone than members of their parents’ generation can expect.
A typical Briton currently in their 20s is now likely to live alone for an average of
15 years during their lifetime, instead of the 10 years those currently approaching retirement might experience.
The shift is the result of a combination of people marrying later and living longer as well as being more likely to divorce.
Together the trends amount to a transformation in the shape of British households within a generation as working age people increasingly embrace the single lifestyle rather than traditional family life.
Yet the research also suggests that those living lone each pay an average of around £1,800 more on housing, utilities and other household expenses than those who are part of a couple.
The estimates compiled by analysts using a combination of projections from the Government Actuary’s Department and data from the Office for National Statistics suggest that the number of single households has leapt from just 3.8 million in 1974 to 8.7 million now, a rise of 129 per cent.
During that time the overall population has grown by 13 per cent – a rapid increase by historical standards but much less marked than the growth in people living outside traditional families.
It suggests that while mass immigration and the recent surging birth rate have compounded pressure on Britain’s housing supply, transforming lifestyles have had a more dramatic effect.
Although life expectancy has significantly improved in the last 40 years, leading to rapid growth in the elderly population, the surge in single households cannot be explained by an increase in widows.
The most recent census showed that although the number of pensioners has grown by 10 per cent in a decade the number of widows and widowers actually fell in that time.
The growing number of people in their 20s and 30s opting to live alone have been nicknamed the Bridget Jones generation after the character in the books by Helen Fielding, later adapted into films starring Renee Zellweger.
The 2011 census showed that in some areas popular with young professionals, particularly parts of London, single people are now the dominant social group.
Richard Rowney, managing director for life and pensions at LV said: “Living alone no longer has a stigma attached to it, far from it, people are choosing to remain independent – and from a younger age.
“This is due to a combination of lifestyle changes such as people wanting to concentrate on their careers, marrying later – as well as higher divorce rates and the fact that we are living longer.”
Polling by the firm suggests that while couples have an average of £6,000 in savings to fall back on the event of hardship, those who live alone typically have just £2,000.
Almost a quarter of single people surveyed said their savings would run out within a fortnight.
Mr Rowney said: “People’s living arrangements are changing and more people are choosing to hold onto their independence for longer and live alone.
“Whilst the freedom of living alone has many advantages, it is important to realise the financial cost of independence. A worrying number of people do not have a backup plan.”
Document TELUK00020140508ea58000xi
