{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3412"}
____
  
News
Of course the BBC hates you, Nigel. That's why they keep having you on all the time
Michael Deacon   
522 words
16 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
6
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Sketch
The Ukip leader seems baffled by the corporation's cunning ploy to flood us with Farage
NIGEL FARAGE did not sound happy with the BBC. Martha Kearney, of World at One, asked him about Sanya–Jeet Thandi, whom Mr Farage once lauded as Ukip's "rising star". This week she quit the party, accusing it of "racist populism".
"What's surprising," said Mr Farage darkly, "is that one 21–year old leaves, and it's a big story for the BBC. One person says something disobliging, and you decide it's a major national news story." This wasn't the only reason the BBC had incurred his displeasure. "Nobody wants to discuss immigration," he declared, "least of all the BBC".
Something in his tone hinted that he suspected the BBC of anti–Ukip bias.
Critics might argue that, if the BBC does oppose Ukip, it has an unusual way of going about it. A broadcaster that truly opposed a growing political party, they might contend, would deny it coverage wherever possible, rather than, for example, giving it relentless publicity.
(Mr Farage has been a guest on Question Time 15 times in the past five years.) A broadcaster that didn't want to discuss immigration, these critics might add, probably wouldn't keep inviting Mr Farage to discuss immigration.
Such critics, however, would be naïve.
Because that is the BBC's secret plan.
The corporation has cunningly decided that the way to undermine Ukip… is to give airtime to Ukip.
In recent weeks, the BBC's campaign to silence Ukip has intensified dramatically. On the orders of shadowy executives, BBC producers have mercilessly rung up Mr Farage at all hours, hissing such threats as, "Please will you come and be interviewed on our programme, Mr Farage?" and "We can offer you the prime slot straight after the news".
Having forced their helpless victim into a studio and ordered him to inform the electorate about his party, producers report back to their superiors. "Ha, ha, ha," cackle the superiors. "For the sixth time today, we've got Nigel Farage telling our millions of viewers and listeners of the dangers of immigration! This will shut down the debate for good!"
"Yes, boss," nod the producers with dog–like servility. "What else would you like us to do to ensure that the topic of immigration never crosses the public's minds, boss?"
The superiors ponder the question. Then a leer of satisfaction appears. "I know," they say, slowly. "Invite Nigel Farage to appear on all your programmes again… tomorrow!"
"Yes, boss!" blurt the producers, with a salute, before scurrying off to resume their onslaught. On World at One, Ms Kearney noted that, since border restrictions were lifted, the number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in Britain had actually declined. "The floodgates have opened," persisted Mr Farage. "But when floodgates open, you expect floods to come through, don't you?" asked Ms Kearney.
The floodgates must be faulty. That's cheap foreign labour for you.
Document DT00000020140516ea5g000dv
