{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3632"}
____
  
Features
Fletch is back..and Gauld would wipe floor with Ozil
585 words
24 February 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
41
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
£50 LETTER
A LOT of Scotland fans seem to already be talking down our chances of qualifying for Euro 2016.
Not me. While Germany are obviously tough opposition the likes of Ireland, Poland, Georgia and Gibraltar should hold no fears for Gordon Strachan's resurgent side.
And with Darren Fletcher back, pictured, and Dundee United's world-class talents on the verge of getting into the national set-up, I think Scotland have every chance.
That wee Ryan Gauld would wipe the floor with Mesut Ozil.
MIKE SIMPSON By email
IT would be intersesting going to an away game in Gibraltar under an independent Scotland.
We might not have the Pound (even though it does actually part-belong to Scotland, it's not solely England's) — yet some wee island in the middle of the Mediterranean is allowed to use Sterling?
What do you say to that David Cameron? Probably not very much.
JEN BROWN Dundee
CAN'T wait for the Tartan Army trips for the Euro 2016 qualifiers.
With the exception of Gibralatar, it should be a right good swally fest.
Oh, and the football should be all right, as well.
Come on Strachan and his boys. You can do it.
RICKY THOMSON Glasgow
I THINK it is good that we have debates on sensitive issues, but I fail to see the point when it is so loaded on one side or the other.
There was no balance to Channel 5's The Big British Immigration Row.
I am no fan of that Katie Hopkins, but at least she tried to put the other side of the story.
DAVE WALSH Motherwell
ANY sort of immigration debate should have been held on Sky or the BBC.
Channel 5 are only interested in outrage and scaremongering. It was a pointless exercise.
IAN MUIR Aberdeen
THE only thing that was achieved by the show was an increase in the feelings between people living here and the flood of immigrants.
KEVIN WALKER Dundee
KATIE HOPKINS may not be everyone's favourite person, but she was badly outnumbered in a "debate" that was always going to be try to make her look bad. But she stuck to her guns.
MICHAEL HUNT Cumbernauld
I WAS totally disgusted that the TV debate featuring Katie Hopkins was so one-sided.
The vast majority of the audience were of foreign origin. Katie was the only panellist who stuck up for the majority of British people.
LES KOZAK By email
WHAT a sterling job Katie Hopkins, pictured, did on the TV debate shown last week.
The show was a farce. It was badly presented and poorly controlled.
It wasn't a debate, just a slanging match.
With Katie as the only pro-indigenous Briton versus a 50 per cent-plus immigrant audience, she was hardly given the chance to say her piece. No wonder she got heated about it.
Why should we let ourselves be walked over by foreigners?
We are in danger of losing our cultural heritage if we become a minority.
TREVOR ROWE By email
CHANNEL 5 should be ashamed of itself. That was no debate. They should have guaranteed a 50/50 split in the audience.
KELLY HORTON Perth
KATIE HOPKINS was a disgrace to political debate.
How can anyone give credence or reward to this loud-mouthed and intolerant woman? Immigration and the economy are far more important issues than getting headlines or courting controversy.
IAN BRAMWELL By email
Document THESUN0020140224ea2o000gb
