{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"434"}
____
  
Rachel Smith: 'I won’t be inviting the Osbornes to visit’; Rachel Smith, wife of Business Secretary Vince Cable, on his Coalition partners and why she wouldn’t want him to be party leader
By Cristina Odone   
1,316 words
11 March 2014
11:45
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The politician’s wife has evolved from the days when she smiled and stood quietly beside her errant husband in photo opportunities. Today, the Westminster wife is as likely to defy convention as to conform to it. Vicky Pryce faced jail rather than stay silent about her spouse’s indiscretions; Sally Bercow courts publicity even at the expense of the Speaker’s office.
Rachel Smith, who is married to Vince Cable, the Lib Dem Business Secretary, refuses to play the game altogether. “Mrs Vince", as she is known by her husband’s constituents, won’t be guarded in her words, or grand in her manner.
“Come in, come in," she opens the door to her home in Twickenham, Middlesex, “shall we go into the kitchen and have a cup of tea?" Indian and Indonesian artefacts jostle with family photographs in a cosy sitting room. She leads me through to the sunlit kitchen. “I was a bit nervous about what to wear…" she admits. The photographer is not coming today, but Mrs Smith finds “dressing up a bit of a chore". She has chosen a shapeless shift over patterned tights and ankle boots. The result does not look like an outfit approved by central office, but suits a woman who spends weekends on her family farm in Hampshire.
We sit at a small round table. Mrs Vince’s fine blue eyes twinkle across at me. “Being a political wife has its drawbacks," she allows, but she found the Lib Dem Party conference in York at the weekend “invigorating" and Nick Clegg’s speech “superb" for “relishing our quirky Britishness".
She pre-empts questions about her husband’s alleged bid to oust the Lib Dem leader. “When people mutter about Vince being leader, I ask: 'Has it occurred to you that the opprobrium Nick currently suffers will be our lot? I’m not wild about that!’ I’m quite a big fan of Nick’s. He was an anthropologist and did the same course as me at Cambridge. We both have a Dutch connection (my ex was half-Dutch). Nick is personally so resilient. I admire that."
She hopes that Clegg will be as “electrifying" when he takes on Nigel Farage, in the televised debate scheduled for next month, as he proved in the party leaders’ debate during the 2010 general election. “Ukip? They belong to that land of lost content, people, like Peter Hitchens, who just cringe from the world the way it is now. I think in politics on the whole you have to be upbeat. You’ve got to have a positive message. If you are forever going on about immigration it’s so negative. So yes, I hope Nick goes for him."
Despite her admiration for the party leader, she and her husband hardly see the Cleggs. It’s not for want of trying, she assures me. “I have tried to ask them back but they are so busy!" She has never met the Milibands but says she did invite the Osbornes to visit – “but I don’t know what happened to the invitation because I certainly sent it but I think it got lost. Anyway, I didn’t get a reply.
“I invited them because Vince said to me right at the beginning, during the Government’s honeymoon period: 'I’ve done an awful thing.’ " – she laughs merrily at the memory – “ 'I asked, would the Osbornes like to come to the farm,’ he said. So I wrote a card but I never received an answer. I’ve seen them since and I thought, should I ask: 'Did you ever get my card?’ but then I thought no.
“We did meet them recently at a concert given by the Prince of Wales in aid of the Philharmonia Orchestra. They were so cool, just the same in their private personae as in their public one. And I thought, no, I won’t invite them to the farm."
Socialising with the Osbornes, however, does not rank as the worst compromise in her new life. More difficult still is living with media intrusion. “The worst was being door-stepped during the Murdoch phone-hacking trial. That was unpleasant: for several days Vince got out of the house via the garage at the back. One day a journalist asked: 'How are you doing?’ and I said: 'Haven’t you seen the helicopter?’ "
No wonder she admits to feeling “sympathy, yes sympathy" for politicians’ wives who rebel. “I feel for Sally Bercow. She obviously does need to be herself and to be out there in the public domain, but I remember Sandra Howard saying: 'As a wife you don’t make a campaign, but you can very easily, inadvertently break a campaign.’
“As for Vicky [Pryce], dear Vicky… I saw the sheer anger she felt with him [her then husband Chris Huhne] for going off with that lady: I had such fellow feeling for her!"
The “fellow feeling" stems from Rachel Smith’s painful experience with her first husband, who deserted her for another woman after 30 years of marriage and three children, leaving Smith to manage the family farm alone. But, she says, referring to Pryce’s grand revenge: “I wouldn’t have done that." Instead, Mrs Smith threw a jam pot at the other woman’s door, and then “did my best not to get in the way of the children’s relationship with their father.
“I think Vicky would now almost admit it was wrong. Almost, because it is not in her nature to do so. But I’m so glad she is back doing what she’s good at – economics. Even though she’s against the Mansion Tax. I try not to connect this with her 'dwelling’… have you seen that house?" (The Huhnes’ home in Clapham, south-west London, is worth an estimated £2.3 million.)
In 2001, four years after her divorce, Rachel Smith met Vince Cable when he was guest speaker at a meeting of the New Forest branch of the United Nations Association. Then solely MP for Twickenham, Vince had lost his first wife, Olympia, to breast cancer four months earlier. Their love story surprised even her. “I never thought I was marrying a future minister. That was not on the cards back then."
The Coalition caught them unawares, too. “We woke up in the morning thinking: 'That’s it, four years of a Conservative government,’ and then, later in the day, Vince was a minister." The Coalition has proved “very hard" for the Lib Dems, she says, shaking her head. “I don’t envy Nick that problem."
Her smile returns quickly. “I’m not hugely ambitious as a person. What I think I am rather good at is playing second fiddle – that was true of my first marriage as well."
Vince’s own first marriage is much in evidence in this house – the same in which he and first wife Olympia raised their three children. Photos of Olympia, a beautiful Goan whom he met in York, sit beside a photo of Rachel and Vince on their wedding day. Much of the décor of the house remains the same as when Olympia was alive. But Mrs Vince assures me she does not mind.
“We thought of moving, but this is his constituency and it didn’t make much sense." She does try to spend as much time as possible back in the New Forest, on the dairy farm now managed by her son. “Life feels more real there, " she says. Mrs Vince, one can’t help think, is one of the rare inhabitants of the Westminster village who would not shrink at the prospect.
Document TELUK00020140311ea3b0030k
