{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3268"}
____
  
News
Ed gets a kick out of cage fight that ends in a draw
Ann Treneman   
578 words
15 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
23
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The consensus, before PMQs, was that it was a bad day to be Ed Miliband. Indeed, I can reveal that even Ed rather wished he wasn't Ed. For I happen to know what he and his wife Justine said over breakfast.
"I fear it's going to be a good news day," said Ed, glumly, as he tried to eat breakfast (Red Special K, for obvious reasons) though, with teeth like his, finding room for the spoon is always a challenge.
"Oh no," said Justine, looking supportive as is her wont. "But don't forget, all silver linings have a cloud." Mid-morning and Ed was comfort eating (red velvet cake). Irritatingly, the economy had picked a Wednesday to start booming. Plus immigration was down. More teeth-gnashing (in his case, a dangerous pastime, comparable to sword swallowing). Even worse, his new anti-weirdness guru, David Axelrod, aka The Axeman, was in town from America. This would be the first PMQs he would see.
Just as he was about to give up hope, he took a call from Justine. "I have only one word for you," she said. "Drugs."
Fast-forward to noon. Who says the drugs don't work? Ed began by welcoming the good news on unemployment but immediately asked about what the PM was doing to keep the "high-skilled Jobs" in the Pfizer takeover of AstraZeneca.
"In terms of that," shouted the prime minister, "this government has been absolutely clear that the right thing to do is to get stuck in!" There were giggles. Somewhere in Westminster, I knew that The Axeman would be puzzled. What kind of country is this, he would be thinking, where the prime minister thinks "Get stuck in" is a slogan? Ed asked about the high-skilled Jobs again. Dave got angrier, shouting that he was "getting stuck in" while Ed, shamefully, had no stickiness.
Now Ed unveiled his cruellest taunt, accusing Dave of being "inappropriate". More frowning from The Axeman, who, being American, does not know that in this country being called inappropriate is much worse than most actual crimes.
Dave began a strange peroration, where he asked himself a question and then answered it. "Do we want more investment?" he demanded of himself. "Yes, we do!" he chanted back. (Though, surely, as The Axeman knows, "Yes we can!" is a slogan but "Yes we do!" is a boast.) Dave finished by shouting: "I say: get stuck in!" The Axeman continued to watch the strange ritual that is PMQs — cage fighting with words, tribalism in suits, exaggarated politeness accompanied by ego-shredding insults. The final flummox came when Kerry McCarthy, a Labour MP who prides herself on being cool, which is, of course, in itself not so cool, asked if the PM would condemn the tax affairs of Gary Barlow (of Take That fame) as morally wrong.
Dave said he condemned all tax-avoiding schemes, adding that the government was taking action to say: "We want your money back for good." Dave beamed, for he had been clever. "Back for Good" was a Take That song. Not only was it funny, it was punny! Dave was getting stuck in!
The rest of PMQs whizzed by. Ed sat, suffused in a warm glow — though he had not won the bout, he had not lost either. Justine, and drugs, had saved the day.
Document T000000020140515ea5f00068
