{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3743"}
____
  
NEWS
David Cameron: I can't promise to cut VAT
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
607 words
21 May 2014
17:27
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Prime Minister rules out cuts to VAT after next election, as he teases Boris Johnson on the campaign trail in Newark
David Cameron has said he cannot promise to cut VAT after the next election due to the condition of the public finances.
The Prime Minister was urged to reduce the tax by a market trader, who said the tax is preventing his business from expanding.
VAT was cut from 17.5 per cent to 15 per cent as a stimulus measure by Labour after the financial crash, but raised to 20 per cent by the Coalition in order to reduce the deficit.
Mr Cameron was challenged by Steve Buxton, who runs a picture framing business, on a campaign visit to Newark ahead of next month’s by-election.
Mr Cameron said: “I'm afraid we had to put up VAT to help repair the deficit we were left by the last Government.
“We haven't dealt with the deficit yet. It is down by a third it will be down a half next year, but I'm afraid we've had to take difficult decisions both on tax and on spending to make sure we live within our means.
Asked if the tax would be cut if Mr Cameron is returned to Government, he said: “I can't make that promise. We'll set out all our promises in our manifesto. I can't make that promise because we really had to deal with the mess we were left with by Labour.”
Mr Buxton said he normally voted Conservative but is likely to support Roger Helmer, the Ukip candidate, in next month’s election.
However, he said he could give his vote to any party that promises to cut VAT. “It was a shock when it went up, and it’s eating into my profits. It’s a big chunk of your wage.”
Labour initially promised to reverse the hike, but the pledge has been downplayed recently and did not appear in the party’s most recent policy pamphlet.
VAT brings £100 billion a year for the Exchequer, and that is due to rise to £127 billion by 2018. Cutting VAT back to 17.5 per cent would cost around £13 billion a year.
The Prime Minister was joined in Newark by Boris Johnson, the Mayor of London, as they campaigned for the Conservative candidate Robert Jenrick, in the byelection that followed the resignation of Patrick Mercer. The Conservative majority is 16,152.
As they toured the market, Mr Cameron bought some Rocky Road cake and shared it with the man who may succeed him. “Boris, that's a gift you know you want it,” Mr Cameron said. “We will break bread.”
Mr Johnson shot back: “You know the prime minister bakes his own bread. Dave, what are your tips? Dave, why don't you share some of your baking tips?"
Later, Mr Cameron fondled the hair at the back of Mr Johnson’s head, saying: “He’s had a haircut. He’s looking very good.” Mr Johnson added: “I’m always well turned out.”
Brian Voby, 75, a retired coalminer, challenged Mr Cameron over the long waits for ambulance services and cuts to police numbers in the town. He said he was switching from Labour to Ukip due to its pledge to cut immigration. “I don’t believe a word you say,” he told Mr Cameron. “This is the only time we ever see any policemen. Crime has gone horrendous. Ukip are the only party saying what the people want.”
Document TELUK00020140521ea5l004mu
