{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"136"}
____
  
Features
Research findings 'Just the start of the Journey'
362 words
3 April 2014
The Times
T
1; National
3
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Project 28-40 is the biggest piece of research ever commissioned by Opportunity Now and marks a significant event in a year of change for the gender and diversity campaign. Helena Morrissey was announced as the new chair when the 2013 list of Top 50 Employers was announced a year ago, and six top executives from government and private industry have joined the board.
The survey's findings underline the importance of the priorities set by the campaign: a better gender balance for leadership progression; unbiased recognition and reward for all; and agile work cultures that are fit for the future.
Each of the priorities is broken down into eight steps, including building a business case, making leaders accountable, creating inclusive cultures and, finally, measuring the impacts and using them to accelerate change.
Kathryn Nawrockyi, Opportunity Now director, says: "The findings are just the start of the journey. This report will be the first of many which will look at the results in detail, sector by sector, and at the responses of different demographics — and then make specific recommendations."
It will be up to employers to implement the recommendations and to create modern working practices and more highly-engaged employees. The commercial benefits have been highlighted by the Women and Work Commission, which found that unleashing women's full potential could be worth £23 billion a year to the Exchequer.
Previous research by Opportunity Now has included looking at the importance of leadership in inspiring staff, changing company culture and at the lack of women on the boards of the majority of organisations.
New appointments to the board of Opportunity Now during the year included Sarah Rapson, director general, UK visas and immigration at the Home Office and Kirsti Massie, partner at White & Case, the law firm.
They were joined by two executives, Stephen Dainton, of Credit Suisse Securities, and Jim Burrell, of Enterprise Rent-A-Car, and also by Sam Jones, founder of Gender Gap, and Jonathan Slater, director general, transformation and corporate strategy at the Ministry of Defence.
TONY DAWE Editor: Mark Barber 020-7782 5742 Cover image: Getty Images
Document T000000020140403ea43000dc
