{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3600"}
____
  
Features
A cop show with a truly fresh twist
1,370 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
14,15
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
dsd Matt Rudd ¦ House of Cards Netflix, on download ¦ True Detective Sky Atlantic, Sat ¦ Line of Duty BBC2, Wed ¦ Inside No 9 BBC2, Wed ¦ Superstar Dogs | C4, Mon-Fri ¦ The Big British Immigration Debate | C5, Mon Valentine's Day was ruined this year. Instead of sharing spaghetti and intimacy with a restaurant full of other couples, people were forced to stay at home cultivating macular degeneration because Netflix chose February 14 to release the entire second series of House of Cards. This is, supposedly, the new viewing model. Kevin Spacey likes to reassure the codgers that there's really nothing new about it at all. It's just like reading a novel, he says. You wouldn't wait for the next chapter of The Da Vinci Code, would you? Don't answer that.
Was it worth the not-waiting, though? Not quite. The first series — or season, as we have to call it, although it isn't — was slick, poetic and unremittingly cold. Where The Thick of It's Westminster is a house of fools, House of Cards showed Washington DC as a nest of vipers made crueller by its veneer of charm and decorum. If you watched it on an iPad, it was unputdownable, new television's equivalent of a page-turner. But season two was more of the same, and because we have now become accustomed to the Machiavellian depravity of the central characters, it felt like a step back.
As with any habit, you need to increase the dosage to stay hooked, so the scale of the depravity increased. Spacey's Underwood, now vice president, killed somebody in the first episode. This wasn't his first opportunistic murder, but it was the first that was Bobby-in-the-shower ridiculous. Robin Wright's Claire Underwood, a study of ruthless emotional detachment in season one, became less emotionally detached and therefore less subtle. Both remained mesmerising, but the plot got sillier.
You may not have ruined your Valentine's Day, so I'll keep this review relatively spoiler-free. The guinea-pig-stroking superhacker and the Chinese billionaire sadomasochist were a great shame. And by the 19th time Francis "FU" Underwood had done the opposite of what he said he'd do, surely someone else might have noticed before it was, once again, too late? I watched it to the end, wishing seasons were shorter, bladders were bigger, needing to know how it would conclude. Of course, a third season has already been commissioned, so we know how this one concludes. You can't lose Frank Underwood. His rise will continue, and we will continue to wait, perhaps indefinitely, for his fall. Which is a shame. As he himself might say, you need to kill the golden goose before it stops laying eggs.
There was better television on the actual television. We might even have another programme to add to the golden-age-of-American-television list. HBO's True Detective, starring a newly thin Matthew McConaughey and a newly not-thin Woody Harrelson as former detectives involved in a two-decades-old murder case, managed to be unlike any cop show before it. Who would have thought there was still more to this genre, now the Scandinavians have bagsied jumpers and Asperger's syndrome? McConaughey, the former himbo now universally feted as someone who can suddenly act (see Oscars), plays an off-the-rails boozer and philosopher (nothing new there).
Harrelson does the midlife-crisis family man with a paunch (ditto). The murder is set in Louisiana and has occult overtones, and the victim is a prostitute (ditto, ditto, ditto). The novelty comes with the narrative structure: two former detectives giving separate accounts of a murder investigation long since solved to two current detectives reinvestigating it. It soon becomes clear that neither narrator is reliable. Time and self-interest obscure the facts, and the viewer, for once, is confronted with something far more taxing than a typical whodunit.
And because our two Hollywood A-listers turn in such consummately, convincingly relaxed performances, the pressure to get to the end, to turn the page, to find out who-dun-it, is gone. The drama exists in every scene, intensified by the Louisiana landscape and the surreal script. Plot is by the by.
As anyone who has accidentally watched The Musketeers will tell you, we're not having a golden age of television on this side of the Atlantic, but the second series of Line of Duty is rather good. Police investigating other police for corruption and cover-ups is apposite, but you can't have six hours of drama based on whether or not someone called someone else a pleb. Nobody would believe it. So this series is about whether a policewoman was involved in the murders of a protected witness and three other police officers.
British crime dramas are at a disadvantage because we're simply not as violent as our American cousins. Either you do red tape, procedural issues and speeding tickets, which might be dull, or you do guns, kidnapping and explosions, which might seem gratuitously sensational. This did a bit of both, which was, well, different. First off, two officers were killed executionstyle and the witness was set on fire... only to survive... only to be nobbled by a man dressed as a female nurse sneaking into intensive care (cliché klaxon). Then a detective gets thrown from a fifth-storey window. Then there are lots of interviews and people saying "for the benefit of the tape". So it's a very British take on guns and explosions.
Holding it all together is Keeley Hawes, playing the apparently harmless, victimised officer who may or may not be the villain of the piece. Two episodes in, it could go either way, but my bet is she's the Keyser Söze of the show. If only it was on Netflix, I could have found out by now.
If they could only write faster, Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith could have a golden age all to themselves. After Psychoville, they have knocked out Inside No 9, a series of short stories each set in a different No 9 and steeped in their trademark dark humour. The third No 9 is a flat occupied by Shearsmith's Tom, a primary-school teacher, and Gerri, an actress played by the actress Gemma Arterton. Once you've got over the idea that someone as tall as Gerri would go out with someone as short as Tom, it's all perfectly plausible.
A tramp returns a wallet to Tom, Tom lets the tramp come in for a drink and the tramp takes over his life.
Gerri moves out. Tom becomes a tramp. The tramp becomes Tom. Like the best of Roald Dahl, we've been led, incrementally, plausibly, from a normal state of affairs to the unbelievably bizarre. I won't tell you how it ends because it's still on iPlayer. Binge away.
Channel 4 is taking on Pointless, the defending champion of daytime television, with Superstar Dogs, in which "superstar dogs" negotiate obstacle courses and fetch balls from swimming pools. The genius of the format, as far as I can tell from the first programme, is that they haven't used proper dogs. These are mutts, the kind that are allowed to sleep on the bed and might cock a leg, rather than fetch a ball. Their enthusiasm is not in doubt, but their ability is highly questionable. The result is television more gripping than any of the fancy dramas above. Will the labradoodle refuse to jump in the pool for a second time? Will the spaniel that did jump make it back before its ears drag it under? And how long will it be before one of them mauls John Barrowman? As for The Big British Immigration Row, why would anyone migrate to a country where Katie Hopkins's views are televised? If you really want to stop people coming in, stick her on the border and ask her to smile. c AA Gill is away THE CRITICS
The drama exists in every scene of HBO's latest, True Detective
Document ST00000020140223ea2n00058
