{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2025"}
____
  
News
Migrants 'should learn English to get benefits'
Richard Ford   
428 words
29 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Workers from the European Union with poor English should only be given unemployment benefits if they are on courses to improve their language skills, a report published today says.
The paper from the left-of-centre Institute for Public Policy Research calls on the government to subsidise English language classes for immigrants. It also wants everyone to register with local councils to allow them to plan education and housing for a rising population. The think-tank, which has close links to the Labour party, also wants an immigrant's home country to pay the first six months of social security benefits if their citizen remains jobless. It calls for a series of changes to the free movement of people within the EU to make the system more acceptable to the British public.
Alex Glennie, a senior researcher at the think-tank, said the free movement of workers had been a great achievement but that supporters had too often dismissed the concerns of the public.
"In fact, there is scope for reforming how free movement works to make it work more fairly for all. Such reforms, which are modest and sensible, would strengthen free movement, not weaken it," Ms Glennie said.
The IPPR report said EU workers with poor English could be required to prove they were learning the language before receiving such benefits as jobseeker's allowance. Such a move would show they were willing to integrate into the British way of life.
It said the powers of the Gangmasters Licensing Authority, which tackles exploitation in the agriculture, horticulture and food and drink processing industries, should be expanded to cover the care and construction sectors.
Rules that allow some agency workers to be hired as temporary employees on lower rates of pay than full-time staff should be scrapped and child benefit to migrants' children living overseas paid only at the rate of the home country.
The report said all people living in the UK, including EU and other overseas nationals, should register with their town hall to provide officials with a better idea of population trends.
"This could be done through the inclusion of additional questions about nationality and the length of residence on forms that households are already required to complete when registering to pay council tax ", the report says.
Everyone would be expected to register within three months of arriving. Registration already occurs in other parts of Europe. In Norway, EU migrants wanting to stay more than three months have to register with the police.
Document T000000020140429ea4t00063
