{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1586"}
____
  
NEWS
Immigration figures to drop 20,000 as Home Office 'massages' numbers
By Peter Dominiczak Assistant Political Editor   
493 words
27 March 2014
15:48
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Home office is pushing through changes to the short-term visa regime that will reduce immigration figures by nearly 20,000 a year without actually lowering the number of foreign workers in the UK.
Theresa May, the Home Secretary, is pushing through a change to the visa system that will allow the Government to claim that there are nearly 20,000 fewer immigrants in the UK.
In a move that risks being described as an attempt to massage immigration statistics, Home Office officials are considering plans to shorten visas by as little as one day to avoid having to describe them as migrants.
Currently, foreign workers brought to Britain by companies to plug skills gaps on short-term visas lasting 12 months count towards the annual net immigration total.
The Home Office will now reduce the maximum stay for Intra-Company Transfer (ICT) short-term visas to under 12 months – meaning they will no longer count towards the annual net migration total, according to The Financial Times.
It comes as the Government continues to face pressure over David Cameron and Mrs May’s pledge to reduce net migration to the “tens of thousands” by 2015.
In February, figures showed that net migration had increased by a third to 212,000 in the last year.
The surge was partly driven by a huge increase in the number of Romanian and Bulgarian citizens coming to Britain, which jumped 166 per cent from 9,000 to 24,000 year-on-year.
The Office for National Statistics said estimates for the 12 months to the end of September revealed a net flow of 212,000 migrants to Britain, compared with 154,000 the previous year.
According to the Home Office, it wants to impose new curbs on the ICT visas over fears that they are being abused by companies.
Neil Carberry, director for employment and skills at the CBI, told The Financial Times: “We are in a pretty dangerous place if we are redesigning the tiers of the immigration system in order to meet a political target.
“This would once again undermine the image of the UK as a place where we welcome highly skilled people.”
In recent weeks Mr Cameron has insisted that the Government will still meet the net migration target ahead of next year’s general election.
Labour accused Mrs May of trying to "fix" the net migration figures.
David Hanson, the shadow immigration minister, said: "This is a desperate attempt to fiddle figures from an increasingly desperate Home Secretary.
"David Cameron promised his Government would cut net migration to the tens of thousands and he has failed. Now Theresa May wants to fix the figures brazenly, trying to take the British public for fools. If the Home Secretary thinks cheating the public is the way forward, it's this Government that's the fool."
Document TELUK00020140327ea3r001e1
