{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1083"}
____
  
News
Nigella is set to fly to US again after 'drug-taking ban'
John Chapman   
590 words
7 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
24
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
CELEBRITY chef Nigella Lawson is on the road again, putting aside fears that a courtroom drug-taking confession could restrict her foreign travel. The 54-year-old Domestic Goddess looked happy and relaxed as she arrived in New Zealand to promote chocolates.
Last month she was allegedly prevented from flying from London to Los Angeles where she has previously filmed cooking talent show The Taste.
She was initially granted a "special direction" visa to work in New Zealand but days later officials there admitted it was not needed.
It would now appear there are no problems if she wishes to travel to the US in the coming months.
The food journalist arrived at Auckland airport on Saturday before heading to Wellington train station yesterday to start filming a TV advert for Whittaker's chocolate.
She joked to fellow passengers: "So this is about as far away from England as you can get, isn't it?" A fellow traveller said: "She looked great, especially after such a long flight, and was pretty chatty and upbeat.
"She was really unassuming and went through the airport like any other passenger."
Nigella has been the face of the chocolate company since 2012.
The brand's spokesman said of her visit: "We hope people will respect the fact that we didn't abandon our relationship with her just because of something she did in her past, especially given the tough time she has had recently."
Last month, it was alleged that she was prevented from flying from London to Los Angeles where she had filmed The Taste.
US authorities refused to discuss the reasons for her not boarding the plane.
But it was speculated that the ban was due to her admission in court last year, during the trial of two assistants, that she had used cocaine and cannabis on occasions but was not a habitual user. Initially, immigration authorities in New Zealand said that, as she was not allowed to enter the US, she would require special permission to work in New Zealand. But this was overturned because it was not "100 per cent" confirmed that Nigella was excluded from travelling to the US.
However, her future at The Taste is uncertain. American TV network ABC is still undecided on whether it will commission a third season.
The second season came to an end in February with 3.2 million viewers. Nigella's marriage breakdown and subsequent divorce from art gallery owner Charles Saatchi made headline news last year.
She later described the break-up as like having "a layer of skin removed".
Multi-millionaire Saatchi, 70, made a series of declarations about their 10-year marriage including the allegation - denied by Nigella - that she was "off her head" on drugs during their time together.
In an increasingly vicious court case, where they both gave evidence, Nigella accused him of "intimate terrorism" behind the closed doors of the home they shared in west London.
She has since hinted she has stories to tell about Saatchi who was pictured clutching her by the throat outside Scott's restaurant in Mayfair last year.In December, she told the trial of her former personal assistants Elisabetta and Francesca Grillo that she had used cocaine seven times and had smoked cannabis.
The sisters were acquitted of fraudulent spending on credit cards given to them by the chef and her ex-husband.
'She looked great after the long flight and was chatty and upbeat'
Document THEEXP0020140507ea5700042
