{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2605"}
____
  
FINANCE
A Budget to support the strongest growth in seven years; Chief executive of specialist recruiter Hays reveals hopes for a Budget that will support SMEs and boost STEM education
By Alistair Cox chief executive, Hays   
614 words
18 March 2014
11:37
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
When the Chancellor delivers his Budget on Wednesday, he must do all he can to reassure businesses up and down the country that the tools are in place to support a long-term economic recovery.
As John Cridland at the CBI quite rightly identified, we’re in the early phases of a "vital, but not inevitable" rebalancing of the UK’s economic position. More than ever, it is critical that there is nothing in this Budget to rock the boat and frighten business confidence.
It’s this increased confidence that is helping drive the best economic growth in seven years. Years of economic pessimism have finally been replaced by a cautious optimism that needs to be stimulated, not hamstrung, in the Budget.
The renewed market optimism is shared by Hays’ clients and candidates across 20 specialisms. We have witnessed growth across both temporary and permanent placements for the first time in two years, while all the evidence suggests that the recovery is broad-based and cross-sector.
While the Chancellor has already highlighted the need to boost UK exports, in order to maintain momentum he must support the country’s army of SMEs, address the skills shortage and invest in our education system.
SMEs are the lifeblood of our economy – keep supporting them
Despite a popular fixation on the performance of multinationals, SMEs remain the bedrock of the UK’s economy and continue to drive the recovery. SMEs make up 99.9 per cent of all new enterprises and their success is crucial to job creation and economic development.
In order to support them, the Chancellor needs to introduce greater cuts to National Insurance contributions for employers. Further reducing this "tax on jobs" is one way to help businesses looking to invest in growing their workforces. Minimising the financial risks that SMEs take when hiring new staff will also create opportunities for thousands of people currently looking for employment.
Recognise the chronic STEM skills shortage
There are still over 2m people unemployed in the UK - despite the fact there are over 1m unfilled vacancies. The Chancellor must urgently consider long-term threats to recovery, notably the pressing shortage of science, technology, engineering and maths skills (STEM) that is holding the UK back.
In the short-term the Government should consider refocusing the immigration regulations to attract international professionals with these much-needed skills. Skilled migrants are net contributors to the Treasury and fill roles that would otherwise remain vacant. Their work also often leads to the creation of more jobs for the local labour force.
The long-term view - invest in education
With a view to the long-term, the Chancellor must invest in education. Welcome steps have already been made to promote apprenticeships. However, there needs to be closer collaboration between government and the business community to improve the UK’s pool of "homegrown" talent and address the STEM skills shortage.
We would encourage the Government to consider reviewing degree pricing structures to make science and engineering degrees more affordable. This will give young people a financial incentive to choose these courses.
For the first time in years Britain’s economic position is genuinely encouraging. The positive market sentiment needs to be harnessed by a Bbudget that encourages growth, instils business confidence and supports SMEs. In the long-term, the Government must act decisively to redress the skills gap and ensure the UK’s workforce has the talent it needs to attract investment for years to come.
Document TELUK00020140318ea3i002xu
