{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2023"}
____
  
News
Cameron: I'll quit No 10 if I can't get Europe referendum
Sam Coates   
514 words
29 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron has claimed that he would not become prime minister in a future coalition if he could not guarantee an in-out referendum on Europe in that parliament.
The prime minister said he "would not be part of" a future government without a firm commitment to a vote as he sought to convince sceptical activists that he would not renege on his pledge.
Hundreds of Conservative activists who had been taking part in an "ask the prime minister" conference call repeatedly pressed him over how he could deliver pledges on Europe.
His task of renegotiating Britain's relationship with Europe could get considerably harder if next month's European elections lead to a surge of parties with views similar to those of Ukip.
Populist anti-EU, anti-austerity or anti-immigrant parties could win as much as 31 per cent of the vote across the continent on May 22, up from 25 per cent in 2009, according to the latest EU-wide polling and seat projections compiled by Vote Watch Europe and analysed by Open Europe.
This could mean 218 of the 751 seats in the European parliament being held by MEPs unwilling to help Mr Cameron's efforts, up from 164. This matters because the European parliament will have a veto over about half of the items on Mr Cameron's putative reform agenda because of changes introduced by the Lisbon treaty.
The number of seats held by parties identified by Open Europe as "critical reformers" — parties such as the Conservatives that believe the EU needs fundamental reform if it is to survive — is expected to go down from 53 to 39 seats.
Open Europe projections also indicate that the share of MEPs explicitly dedicated to free market policies could fall from 242 to 206.
Pawel Swidlicki, of Open Europe, said: "The effect of a potential anti-EU surge shouldn't be overstated, but a more polarised, commission-hugging European parliament would further complicate the political landscape, and may prove one of the biggest obstacles to David Cameron's reform agenda."
Germany is pushing for a radical treaty change that would give more power to eurozone institutions to repair the damage done by the crisis in the single currency.
However, if turnout is about 43 per cent, the same as in 2009, Open Europe estimates that only 25.6 per cent of eligible voters would actively be voting in favour of status quo or more integration.
"For the European parliament to pursue an explicitly integrationist agenda on such a thin public mandate would not be democratically honest — and would most likely serve to fuel the anti-EU vote even further," Open Europe said.
? A cross-party campaign branding Ukip as racist will be launched this week. Led by Barbara Roche, the former Labour immigration minister, and supported by the Migration Matters Trust, co-sponsored by Nadim Zahawi, a Tory MP, and Lord Dholakia, a Liberal Democrat, the campaign aims to "expose" the racism of the party.
Document T000000020140429ea4t000ag
