{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"530"}
____
  
EU migrants barred from claiming child benefit for 3 months
By Steven Swinford Senior Political Correspondent   
515 words
8 April 2014
23:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
EU migrants will have to be in Britain for at least three months before they can claim child benefit and child tax credit, ministers announce
Migrants will be barred from claiming child benefit and child tax credit until they have been in Britain for at least three months, ministers have announced.
At present, EU migrants can start claiming welfare payments almost as soon as they arrive in Britain, leading to concerns about "benefit tourism".
From July, however, they will have to prove that they have been living in Britain for three months before they are able to claim.
Ministers will also "call time" on the routine use of interpreters by migrants claiming benefits, which costs the taxpayer £3 million a year.
Under the reforms migrants will also have to prove that they can speak good English or face being stripped of jobseeker's allowance.
The changes are likely to bring Britain into further conflict with the European Commission, which is already suing Britain for requiring EU migrants to pass a test it claims is unlawful before they can claim benefits.
Nicky Morgan, Economic Secretary to the Treasury, said: "The government is building a system that is fair and consistent, one that supports those who want to work hard.
"These changes send a strong message that our welfare system is not open to abuse and will deter those who think that they can move to the UK primarily to claim benefits.
"Making work pay is part of long term plan to ensure that Britain's growing economy and dynamic jobs market deliver for those who work hard and play by the rules."
The Conservatives are aware that their success in deterring "benefit tourists" will be critical to their election hopes. The Prime Minister has led calls for the reforms after pressure from his Eurosceptic backbenchers.
The UK Independence Party, which is surging in opinion polls, is hoping to capitalise on the public concern about immigrants.
Th new curbs will restrict migrants from claiming child benefit, which is worth £20.30 a week for the first child and £13.40 for each additional one.
The benefits are much more generous than those in eastern European countries such as Poland, Romania and Bulgaria.
The move comes after similar restrictions were placed on migrants trying to claim jobseeker's allowance earlier this year.
Ministers will also stop benefits claimants from having routine access to interpreters, which at present costs the taxpayer £3 million a year.
The Department for Work and Pensions handles 400,000 interpretation queries every year and provides services for over 140 languages.
From the end of this month, migrants with a poor standard of English will be screened by Jobcentre Plus and required to take part in local training to improve their language skills and their chance of getting a job.
The language training will be funded by the taxpayer. After six months claimants will take a language test and face being stripped of their benefits if they fail tests.
Document TELUK00020140408ea480070y
