{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2484"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Lego Labour is several building blocks short of an election victory
MARY RIDDELL   
1,272 words
5 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
24
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ed Miliband has to rebuild his party's internationalist spirit and widen its appeal
Lego has a lot to teach politicians. A decade ago, the company was dying, with sales plummeting by 26 per cent a year. Now the Danish firm is the world's most profitable toymaker, with pre–tax profits of £900 million and a hit movie to its name.
In the Legoland of Westminster, some of the rebuilding projects are going less well. By calling for another Coalition, Nick Clegg is hoping to be merely a minifigure in someone else's superstructure. David Cameron keeps almost finishing his Lego castle, only to find that his Eurosceptic backbenchers have pulled up the drawbridge – or just smashed the whole thing apart.
Only two leaders have succeeded in reconstructing their parties, brick by plastic brick. Ed Miliband, having reassembled a flattened Opposition, has just won a hefty endorsement for a proposed overhaul to Labour's links with the unions. Nigel Farage, meanwhile, has had his own epochal moment, with the broadcasting regulator Ofcom ordering television channels to accord Ukip "major party status" in the run–up to the European Parliament elections in May.
At first glance, the destinies of the two reconstructors could not be more different. Where the latest Populus polling shows Ed Miliband on course for a Commons majority in 2015, with 37.1 per cent of the vote, Mr Farage will be lucky to get a single Westminster seat. While Mr Miliband is a social democrat hoping to appeal to all creeds, cultures and classes, Mr Farage deplores the fact that trains are full of foreigners speaking funny languages.
But for all their differences, the two leaders – and their parties – have much in common. For example, far from being a disgruntled shire Tory, the typical Ukip voter is a working–class man from the West Midlands who left school at 16. Hence the Tories' idea of rebranding themselves as the "workers' party" – and the mirth at Saturday's special Labour conference over the "Bullingdon Bolsheviks" of Downing Street.
Yet Labour may soon find the smirk wiped off its face. Despite a possible victory in prospect at the European elections, Mr Farage is unlikely to garner enough backing to take any parliamentary seats from Mr Miliband. Ukip could, however, split the working–class vote and enable the Tories to win in vital marginal constituencies on the east coast and elsewhere.
The similarities between Labour and Ukip do not stop with their quest for the same voters. In addition, both will fight close–focus campaigns on a narrow terrain. For sure, the isthmus of Englishness colonised by Mr Farage is a foreign land to the Labour leader – and the vast majority of citizens. George Orwell's essay, England Your England, would have to be rehashed to encompass Mr Farage's vision of the modern nation state, complete with "the clatter of clogs (and the rustle of full–face burqas) in the Lancashire mill towns; the to–and–fro of the lorries on the Great North Road (Slovakian, and brimful of cheap Continental diesel); the queues outside the labour exchanges (all caused by Bulgarian bartenders)". Where Orwell wrote of "old maids biking to Holy Communion", hardline Ukip devotees see a country overrun with European migrants worshipping at the altar of the British benefits system.
This poisonous parody could scarcely be more different in tone from Labour's One Nation pitch. And yet Mr Miliband is also trying to tell a patriotic story. The control freakery of New Labour has given way to the communitarian thinking of the Blue Labour gurus, whose enthusiasm for more conservative values does not stop at heritage, hearth and home. Within the Labour hierarchy there is a (so far unarticulated) yearning for Euroscepticism and toughness on immigration, which Mr Miliband does not share.
He has, however, resolved to fight the election on relatively confined ground, confident that he has had great success in luring the Tories on to that terrain, and into wars far from their choosing. His "issue frame" and chosen theme from now until 2015 will be inequality and its "proxy", cost of living.
Although Mr Miliband is said to be adamant that he will not "shrink the offer" in 2015 by campaigning on a slim package of measures designed expressly to give Labour a narrow win, some critics might consider the prospectus he favours to be less than expansive. While fully acknowledging the importance of welfare, immigration and a developed foreign policy, Mr Miliband will focus most tightly on who owns the recovery, and how the spoils of growth might be more fairly shared.
He acknowledges that he cannot keep everyone happy. If he has big ideas, then his critics want a "retail offer", and vice versa. While pursuing both courses, he is likely to concentrate on the economy and on those areas that directly affect people's lives, such as the merger of health and social care that Sir John Oldham proposed in a report published yesterday.
Although the election will be slugged out, as ever, between Tories and Labour, a deciding factor may be whether voters prefer Mr Farage's man–of–the–people matiness or the pointy–headed populism of Camp Miliband.
It is not hard to discern the winner in this tussle for the flag. History may smile on Mr Farage, as Europe tacks to the Right, but the limelight does not flatter his party. His pledge to weed out candidates with "skeletons" in their cupboards is not reassuring. Despite removing the whip from Godfrey Bloom for jokingly describing female activists as "sluts", Mr Farage's own sense of humour remains ossified.
Defending the comedian Paul Eastwood, who spoke at the Ukip conference dinner, on the grounds that gags should not be censored, makes sense only to those who think that crude insults to foreigners and Muslims are funny.
The only joke is Mr Farage's increasingly toxic party, whose navel–gazing and nastiness may, sooner rather than later, prove repellent to most voters. Yet more benign forms of introspection can also be dangerous, especially in volatile times. It will not have escaped Mr Miliband's notice that his last two major events – his Hugo Young lecture on public services and last weekend's special conference on the union link – were eclipsed by the floods and the crisis in Ukraine respectively.
While it is risible for senior Tories to suggest that Mr Miliband's effete stance on Syria might have been taken by Vladimir Putin as a come–on to invade parts of Ukraine, it is true that the Opposition has been slow to speak out on issues ranging from climate change to international law.
Labour won its great victories, in 1945, 1964 and 1997, because it told a national story. In all three cases, the party also had a wider message about how Britain could seize the peace, or navigate its way in Europe and a globalised world. While Ukip may be the ingrowing toenail on the body politic, its insularity bears one lesson for Mr Miliband. Inequality is surely the right message for Labour, but redressing imbalances must go far beyond the domestic. With the balance of power shifting to the Pacific, the Middle East in flux and our ties with Europe fraying, Mr Miliband's party must also look outwards and rebuild its internationalist spirit. Any less ambitious course could leave him several Lego bricks short of building an election victory.
Comment on Mary Riddell's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140305ea350009l
