{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"452"}
____
  
News
The Tories shouldn't be aping Ukip by talking about 'metropolitan elites'
By Graeme Archer   
984 words
11 March 2014
17:10
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The famed German antipathy to humour took a knock yesterday, when Angela Merkel made a joke about Britain at David Cameron's expense. The two leaders were in Hanover for a trade fair, when the German Chancellor giggled that Britain's commitment to countrywide high-speed broadband lagged significantly behind that of Germany's. Ho-ho!
Perhaps the humour is lost in translation. In any case, it's more effective thanthan No 10's recent attempts at political communication. This has become so embarrassing – when even German politicians make jokes at our expense, it's time to take this seriously – that it would have been better to save time and send speeches such as that from James Brokenshire, minister in the Home Office, straight to "junk".
Mr Brokenshire made the insightful remark that he holds the "metropolitan elite" responsible for immigration, by hiring foreign workers. The metropolitan elite who farm soft fruit in East Anglia, that would be, or the metropolitan elite pensioners who use the taxi service in Plymouth to take them from to the supermarket and back. The metropolitan elite who drink coffee in Costa (other chains are available.)
There is a not-very-difficult but important point to make about the impact of mass immigration on wages. But there's a price to pay for not allowing the economy to grow, too. Why the rubbish about "metropolitan elites"?
Code, of course; Mr Brokenshire was on Ukip maneouvres. Without healing the Right, Labour will win by default; this is as close to a deductive proof as is available in political discourse. Mr Farage had recently spoken of his discomfort at sharing a train carriage with people who didn't speak English to one another. Mr Brokenshire was effectively saying "We know what you mean, Nigel; all these foreigners! Blame rich people in SW1 and we can man the poujadist revolt together!"
That's one response. The other is to dismiss Mr Farage's anecdotes as "simple" racism, as many people have done (and when Ukip decorate their gathering with sub-1970s comedians ranting on about Polish people, an understandable reaction.)
I don't think either response is entirely accurate in its predicating diagnosis; relatedly, for a Conservative to use either narrative structure is calamitously ineffective. It's not Ukip-the-party that matters, but Ukip-the-idea.
It most certainly is not racist for a Conservative to notice, and lament, the disappearance of much that we relied upon for a sense of community, not least a common language. I noticed Nigel Farage's train-remarks because I've written myself a couple of times at the way I feel when I'm the only person on a bus to be thinking in English. A Left-wing friend did indeed tell me that to notice this, to feel any touch of discomfort at it, was to be racist. This is nonsense.
But neither would it serve were I to have responded to that accusation by shouting "You're just trying to shut down the debate! Shut up, you metropolitan out-of-touch elite liberal!" Shouting about elites, Mr Brokenshire, isn't an effective method in marshalling the Right.
It is true that immigration was left unmanaged and happened too fast while Labour were in power; the safe politician clich ("a strain on schools & hospitals") is true, too, though it neatly avoids the personal. Two final truths: any cohort of incomers will contain those we'd wish to avoid; our economy has a future to the extent only by which it can grow, and that growth requires more people than we currently produce.
The bus/train/town centre experience matters, only to the extent that it makes you think. It's totally normal to notice the abundance of new languages, and psychologically necessary for a Conservative to feel a twinge of regret for the state which has gone. The ethical failure occurs only if that is where your reasoning ends.
It becomes a failure if you can't look at the faces of the individuals whose presence you initially perceive as a threat. If you won't name people like Robertas in your columns, or ask him to tell you about Kaunas, but talk only of abstract "change". If you treat the Sklep on your High Street as though it were covered with Doctor Who's perception filter, shimmering just out your line of sight, instead of a new business with stuff in it you might want to buy. If you look at Maria's name tag in Costa, and think only "Why are our schools failing?", instead of also "Good God, what this young woman has done in order to make a living."
These new people are a gift. An entire cohort of Eastern European youth has decided it wants to live in Britain. It's not racist to notice this, to regret the past we've lost, or some other consequences (wage bills, housing, schools) of their presence. But they're here. It becomes nasty if you blame their presence on abstract, non-existent "elites", and becomes still worse if you treat them as a lumpen "other."
As usual, we need integration, not segregation. With Robertas, the guy from the gym who trains me, I've been applying the ancient British habit of asking him to have a cup of tea with me. He's no longer "the other"; just a guy from Walthamstow who works at my gym. And has a preference for very dark tea with far too much sugar.
I recommend it to Mr Farage, the next time he's sat on the train, wondering about those odd-sounding people around him. They don't sound half as alien to me as some of his fellow Ukip travellers, if I'm honest.
Document TELUK00020140324ea3b004dh
