{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"946"}
﻿Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
A fitting end
325 words
20 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
19
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
The fact that Abu Hamza will now end his life in an American jail, having been convicted of conspiring to aid terrorist organisations such as al-Qaeda, should be welcomed by all. This man was, as prosecutors in New York said, not just a preacher of hate, but a trainer of terrorists - a man who aided and abetted those whose wish is to destroy everything this nation holds most dear.
Yet Hamza's story also illustrates the ways in which the West all too often ties itself in knots in dealing with those who wish it nothing but harm. Hamza was able to abuse the UK's immigration system to remain here. He and his family became beneficiaries of our welfare system. He was given a platform at the Finsbury Park mosque to spread his wicked message, because elements within the Government believed he was in some way useful (a move which helped lead our scornful allies to nickname our capital "Londonistan").
And even when he was finally imprisoned, and set to be deported to America to face justice for his crimes, he used every trick in the book - including appeals to British and European courts - to slow the process down, and cost the taxpayer many tens of thousands of pounds more in legal bills.
Of course, it is precisely our devotion to the rules that makes our justice system, well, just. It can be exploited, and even frustrated, but ultimately it is far preferable to the grim justice Hamza would have visited on his enemies if he and his cohorts had been given the chance. The judges who extradited him agreed that America, like Britain, is a nation ruled by law - and under that law he will die in jail, stripped of the UK citizenship he should never have obtained. It will be a fitting ending for a vile and wicked man.
Document DT00000020140520ea5k0009h
