{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1017"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion; Leading articles
Playing House
683 words
19 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
20
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The solutions to Britain's heated housing market need to be formulated in Downing Street rather than Threadneedle Street
George Osborne recently urged the Bank of England to use all the tools at its disposal to prevent overheating of the housing market. Yesterday, Mark Carney — the man the chancellor appointed as the Bank's governor — passed responsibility for house price inflation back from Threadneedle Street to Downing Street.
Mr Carney could not have been clearer in his remarks to Sky News. Britain's housing market was, he said, the number one threat to financial stability. While the Bank does have adequate powers to ensure mortgage providers are lending sustainably, Mr Carney identified a lack of new building as the underlying explanation for the 9 per cent increase in house prices that has occurred over the past year.
In worrying about the inadequate supply of new housing, Mr Carney was only echoing what this newspaper and market experts have been saying for some time. Such a starkly expressed intervention from the Bank's governor may be more of a wake-up call for ministers, however. The nation's housing market is not only a threat to economic stability, as Mr Carney stated. It is also a threat to social justice and personal mobility. Many families are both in debt and inadequately housed while many unemployed people can't afford to move to parts of the country where there is work. The most prosperous corner of Britain is in danger of becoming the preserve of very high earners, fortunate inheritors and immigrants prepared to live in close to Dickensian conditions.
Last week there was some good news from the sector. In the past year new housing starts rose to 133,650 — a 31 per cent increase on the previous 12 months. But it's not nearly enough. Savills, the real estate company, reports today that population growth has outstripped house building by 19 per cent in the past decade. Britain needs to be building an estimated 230,000 new homes every year simply to keep pace with demand. We need 300,000 newbuilds every year if prices are to begin to return to sensible levels. Mr Carney noted that his native Canada, with half the population of Britain, was building twice as many new homes. Across the Channel, France is also building twice as many new houses. It can be done.
With one year until the general election, the housing crisis is set to move to the centre of the political stage and all party manifestos should be judged on their response to this huge challenge. Deregulation of the planning sector is vital and far too many entirely sensible projects are held up by petty nimbyism. Yet addressing this will only deliver some of the new construction that is so vital. Public investment in roads and facilities is also essential to ensure that new developments are not opposed by local communities worried about pressures on schools, hospitals and transport.
The coalition's £200 million commitment to support a 15,000 home development in Ebbsfleet could be a model for much bigger garden city projects in future. Unless the Treasury underwrites the building of affordable homes, the taxpayer will only be forced to pick up the pieces in the years to come. It is not a strategic use of public money for taxpayers to continue to spend approximately 20 times as much on housing benefit as on supporting new construction.
More immediately, Mr Osborne would be wise to listen to two of his Conservative predecessors as chancellor, Lords Lawson and Lamont. Both men have suggested that the Help to Buy scheme be reformed. At present the scheme can be used to buy homes up to the value of £600,000. Capping the limit at half that amount would still help people struggling to save for a deposit in most of Britain's regions. At the same time, a £300,000 cap would stop the injection of even more money into the already hot property markets of London and the southeast.
Document T000000020140519ea5j00006
