{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3199"}
____
  
News
Until David Cameron champions parliamentary recall, voters will keep running to Ukip
By Tim Wigmore   
673 words
10 April 2014
13:46
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Brace yourselves for the Ukip campaign leaflets featuring Maria Miller's face. Mrs Miller's trouble with expenses is just the tonic Nigel Farage's party needs before next month's European elections. It will be worth hundreds of thousands of pounds in campaign funds.
Clearly, the Prime Minister has been damaged by a week of dithering.An ITV news / Comres poll shows that 63 per centthink that David Cameron has handled the Maria Miller saga badly. Unsurprisingly,Ukip supporters are more likely than anyone else to agree: 77 per cent hold that view.The political classes have brought Ukip on themselves. As much as Europe and immigration, Ukippers are furious that politicians don't resemble them:73 per cent think that never having had a "real" job outside the worlds of national politics, think tanks, journalism or local government before becoming an MP is "unsuitable in a leading politician".
How does this bring us back to expenses? Ukip is a primal scream against the political class; that same political class needs to reform to win back the voters' trust. The Government once expressed urgency about the need to do so. Nick Clegg promisedthe "biggest shake-up of our democracy" since the Great Reform Act in 1832. The claim was always hogwash – what on earth could the deputy PM have done that would have been more important than establishing universal suffrage? – but at least Mr Clegg seemed to recognise that the mushy Westminster status quo wasn't an option. His aims were to replace first-past-the-post with the alternative vote and introduce an elected House of Lords. We know what happened next.
But an idea much closer to the public's heart has also been abandoned.Seventy-nine per cent of the electorate support being empoweredto sack MPs guilty of "serious wrongdoing" through recall elections.In theory the three parties agree – their 2010 manifestos all said that voters should be able to recall their MPs. Page 27 of the Coalition Agreement boasts that "We will bring forward early legislation tointroduce a power of recall". Four years on, the public is still waiting. Mr Clegg's revised solution – to give recall powers to standards committees – is a fudge. As the latest expenses scandal reminds us, there is nothing that the public loathes more than politicians policing themselves.
With a little less inertia, the Maria Miller affair would have been far less damaging to the Prime Minister. He could have said that, thanks to the Government's reforms, MPs could now be turfed out by their constituents. This would be terrible news for Mrs Miller. But she's not the only one whose seat could be at risk.Since the last election, Eric Joyce has twice been arrested on suspicion of assault in the House of Commons. He recently claimed 71,000 in expenses – and had nine further claims rejected – despite being having one of the lowest voting records in the House. Labour has stripped him of the parliamentary whip, but his constituents can do nothing but wait for him to see out this Parliament.
Thanks to the indecision over recall, the political class allow themselves to be caricatured asprioritisingthe interests of their most egregious members over those of the electorate. Voters deplore the smell, which is why so many are now plumping for purple. The field has been left clear for Nigel Farage to champion recalland attack Mr Cameron and Mr Clegg for failing to honour their Coalition Agreement promise.
Some MPs can be inclined to fatalism about Ukip, thinking that there is nothing they can do to attract Ukippers back. Yet if they liberated the public to ditch MPs they loathed, without having to wait a full five years – and there is still enough time to do so before the general election – they may be pleasantly surprised.
More by Tim Wigmore:
Why Nick Clegg needs Nigel Farage
Why don't more ethnic minorities vote?
Document TELUK00020140410ea4a002xl
