{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1277"}
____
  
FINANCE
Restoring power to Serco will take time, even for Rupert Soames; As he proved with his recent intervention over the Scottish independence row, Rupert Soames is not one of those chief executives who is afraid to raise his head above the parapet
By Telegraph staff   
505 words
28 February 2014
20:26
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Rupert Soames knows more than most about disaster zones, having spent the past 11 years pitching up at them with Aggreko’s temporary power equipment.
So, in many respects, he is ideally qualified for the top job at Serco, the outsourcing group that has been lurching from one calamity to another ever since it was fingered by the Ministry of Justice for overcharging on criminal tagging contracts.
A Serious Fraud Office inquiry, an exodus of senior staff – including former chief executive Chris Hyman – and two profits warnings in three months are just the highlights of the corporate earthquake that over the past year has seen £1.4bn go AWOL from the group’s market value. Well, at least until Friday, when the news that Soames was on his way restored £250m.
It’s easy to see why Serco’s investors were so delighted – and why Aggreko’s shares fell by more than 4pc. In his shift at Aggreko, he put the share price up 12 times, even allowing for a pretty sketchy past year, given his usual standards.
Amusing and with a choice turn of phrase – Friday’s offering, “CEOs are a bit like uranium. They have a definite half-life and if they stay around too long, they can decay into something quite toxic" was classic Soames – he has the right people skills for a 120,000-strong organisation that has been beaten up by politicians and is in desperate need of leadership.
As he proved with his recent intervention over the Scottish independence row, Soames is not one of those chief executives who is afraid to raise his head above the parapet. He thinks the idea of breaking up the United Kingdom is bonkers and he said so.
As befits the grandson of Sir Winston Churchill, he won’t be cowed by grandstanding politicians – an important trait for a company that relies on governments at home and abroad for 80pc of its work. Indeed, the Churchill heritage should open doors abroad.
Soames clearly thinks that Serco is a turnaround waiting to happen – and his timing looks cute. But there is also no underestimating the job that awaits him. Chairman Alastair Lyons bridles at the suggestion that the group is little more than a holding company for 800 contracts – but there’s no question that Serco has lost its reputation for trouble-free, cohesive service.
There’s also the small matter of around 15pc of the company’s revenue base coming up for grabs, with looming re-bids for the Northern Rail and Docklands Light Railway franchises in the UK and an immigration contract in Australia.
Soames got off to a flier on Friday. But he has seen enough disaster zones to know that restoring power takes time.
Document TELUK00020140301ea2s000gq
