{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3766"}
____
  
News
DYING TO GET TO BRITAIN
OLIVER HARVEY   
1,065 words
28 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
8,9
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
DESPITE YEARS OF PLEDGES, STILL THEY COME
Bloodshed as migrants strive for our shores
SUN SPECIAL INVESTIGATION
CLINGING on for dear life above the spare wheel of an HGV, a desperate would-be migrant risks his neck to reach Britain.
Our shocking photos show the man — believed to be an Afghan in his twenties — stowing away aboard a Polish lorry about to enter the French ferry port of Calais.
In daylight and in full view of British holidaymakers, the man emerged from a shallow ditch beside the busy N216 dual carriageway then crawled under the vehicle as it edged along.
Then he carefully hoisted himself on to the tyre and clung on as the UK-bound lorry picked up speed — his leg dangling perilously close to the road below.
We last saw the truck heading towards the French border crossing at the bustling terminal.
It is not known whether the man succeeded in his deathdefying quest to reach Britain.
But campaigners Calais Migrant Solidarity say six migrants have already been killed in Calais this year as a fresh influx fleeing bloodshed in the Middle East and Africa arrive in Europe.
Despite years of promised clampdowns at the ferry port — and promises by successive governments to fix the problem — the migrants are as determined as ever to reach our shores.
The Sangatte refugee camp — branded a magnet for migrants — closed in 2002. "The Jungle", a lawless tented camp of hundreds of migrants, was destroyed by French authorities in 2009.
With no French police in sight, Sun snapper Brad Wakefield captured the dramatic images of the stowaway in his death-trap hideaway. The man's terrified grimace is a damning testament to Europe's current failing immigration policy, where a man fleeing a wartorn land is prepared to risk death passing from Earth's fifth-richest nation, France, to the sixth - Britain.
At a squalid migrant tent city close to the carriageway, Iranian Esmail Seyedi — pictured above with Sun man Oliver — explained occupants' desperation to make the journey.
Esmail, 25, says he has twice entered the UK illegally in the back of lorries — and been deported each time. Now he is among more than 600 migrants in Calais from war-ravaged nations like Syria, Sudan, Eritrea and Somalia trying to get in.
He said: "There are jobs in the UK and there is humanity.
"In France there is nothing for us. We want to work, not claim benefits. We want to fit in with your way of life. People here will try jumping on lorries every day until we reach Britain."
Esmail's shanty town of 135 tents is a reminder of the Red Cross camp at nearby Sangatte where up to 2,000 immigrants once gathered. That was shut in 2002 after Britain accepted hundreds of migrants in a deal with the French government.
The number of asylum seekers living in Calais fell to just 100 by 2012. But numbers are said to have risen six-fold recently — and French charities say they are struggling to feed them all. Migrants huddle around camp fires at the rubbish-strewn main camp, on disused rail lines on the quayside. Hundreds of men share just three fetid toilets.
Occupants while away the hours between dashes for lorries with games of cricket, using discarded pieces of wood as bats.
Strolling past the camp, daytripper Deanne Rose and her family were shocked at the sight. The office manager, of Cannock, Staffs, said: "You see it on TV but it's shocking in reality. It was intimidating to walk past, but also very sad. I don't like seeing people living like that."
And the 42-year-old mum of two said Britain might not be the promised land of the migrants' dreams.
"We've got our own problems with our own people going to food banks," she added.
While Calais is the bottleneck of British illegal immigration, Italy has become the gateway for the hungry and desperate entering the EU.
So-called "boat people" are landing there at an even faster rate than during the 2011 Arab Spring turmoil, when 62,692 arrived in a year. More than 22,000 migrants have made it to Italy this year — about seven times as many as last year.
Some experts predict more than 100,000 arrivals this year. Many want to make Britain their home.
A couple of hours after the Afghan's escape attempt, mayhem on the N216 had started again. A group of some 28 migrants were seen weaving through the holiday traffic to reach the lorry tailback.
At least three bedraggled-looking men attempted to stow away inside what appeared to be stone-crushing machinery. This time cops — one armed with what looked like a rubber bullet gun — sped to the scene.
Yet we witnessed no arrests or checks on ID papers. The migrants were simply ordered off the truck and strolled away to try again later.
Indeed, the police were keener on inspecting my journalist ID.
When I suggested they appeared overwhelmed by the hundreds of migrants there, one officer snapped: "It's a British problem."
Calais deputy mayor Philippe Mignonet believes between ten and 30 people make it across the border from the town each day. He has called for greater co-operation between French and British authorities and more police in Calais.
Last week French Eurosceptic Nicolas Dupont-Aignan, 53, whose party is aligned to Ukip, stood at the camp and told The Sun: "This is shameful for Europe and France.
"It's a French problem. The British people decided to keep their borders. We didn't." Border Force — part of the Home Office — say they conduct physical searches and use dogs, heartbeat detectors and carbon dioxide probes to find people hiding in vehicles and freight. They recently spent £2million on state-of-the art scanning equipment.
A spokesman said: "Our borders are among the most secure in the world. Since last year we've stopped around 11,000 individual attempts to cross the Channel illegally.
"Those in genuine need of protection should claim asylum in the first safe country they reach. People just trying to evade our immigration controls need to know they are risking their lives and will get caught."
oliver.harvey@the-sun.co.uk
Trevor Kavanagh — Page Six
Six deaths at port this year
Document THESUN0020140428ea4s000az
