{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1678"}
____
  
Features
A barefoot honeymoon – with baby
Bryony Gordon   
1,416 words
19 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
7
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge opted not to take little George along on their week–long trip to the Maldives. Bryony Gordon thinks they were wrong
It was on the 10–hour flight to the Maldives that we started to wonder if it had been a good idea taking our 11–month–old baby with us on honeymoon. Another couple on board had left their young child at home, and we began to think we should have done the same.
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, sitting at the front of our British Airways plane, were without Prince George, presumably blissfully relaxed as they headed off on their week–long holiday at the Cheval Blanc resort. Back in cattle, we were dealing with a squirming, screaming baby who was hoisted out of her bassinet every time the plane hit turbulence, which was often. And we still had a sea plane to catch. Had I gone mad? If not, would I go mad? And would I need a holiday to get over our holiday?
"The Maldives is not a place to take a baby," one well–travelled friend told me. "It's a place to MAKE a baby." We had ignored her, because how bad could it really be? It wasn't as if we were heading to Chernobyl, or North Korea. It was the Maldives, a place of myriad desert islands, white sandy beaches and turquoise waters.
And all the clichés had convinced us that it was the perfect destination for our long–overdue honeymoon. Our long–overdue honeymoon that would be gatecrashed by our baby (we married when our daughter was just 12 weeks old, and felt it hardly the best time to jet off). The thought of leaving her behind had not been an option when we booked our trip all those months ago – we would miss her! She would miss us! – but it seemed terribly appealing as she disturbed the peace of every passenger on board, the Duke and Duchess included.
Getting off the plane at Male airport, into stifling heat, I wondered again if we hadn't made a terrible mistake. The queue for security snaked to the very end of the hall, the air conditioning was broken, and the cabin crew had been so preoccupied with their royal cargo that they had forgotten to give the rest of us immigration forms, meaning a frantic scramble at the airport as my husband attempted to write them on my back and our child tried to escape back out on to the runway. "This place is hell on earth!" he said, which is the first recorded instance of those words ever being said about the Maldives.
I felt a bit like crying, but the baby started instead and I thought it would be pretty pathetic to challenge her. We got through Arrivals, clammy, tear–stained, stinking and sleep–deprived from the overnight flight, and were met by representatives of Soneva Fushi, the resort we were staying in. At this point things started to get better. Much better.
They checked us in right then and there, in the middle of the Arrivals hall, whisking away our bags and taking us to the resort's private lounge. We were given cold towels – we were never very far from a cold towel from that moment on – watermelon juices, and for me and my husband, shoulder massages. The baby crawled around the clean, cool floor to her heart's content, before we were whisked away to the sea plane that would take us on our 30–minute journey to Baa Atoll. We flew over the Indian Ocean, gasping at the blue lagoons around islands, the baby mesmerised by the sound of the propeller engines. Before long we had landed at Soneva Fushi International airport – a pontoon floating a few hundred yards off the coast of the island. We were met by a Dhoni – more watermelon juice, more cold towels – and told to remove our shoes. We would not put them back on again for the whole week and a half we were there.
When Soneva Fushi opened 19 years ago, it was the first resort in the Maldives to embrace barefoot luxury. Run by Sonu Shivdasani, an old Etonian who counts David Cameron and Boris Johnson among his contemporaries, and his Swedish wife, Eva (Soneva is a melding of their names), it is a sort of Robinson Crusoe hideaway; the villas, with their thatched roofs, look like tree houses. We felt a bit like the Swiss Family Robinson in our open–aired bathroom, with its shower in the garden and a bath (big enough for all three of us) that overlooked a giant water feature.
Our Mr Friday – all the guests get one – told us that the toiletries had been made from lemongrass that had been grown on the island. They grow as much as they can at Soneva Fushi – no mean feat given that the soils are mostly sand – and everything is recycled or composted in an eco centre that is best avoided if you want to keep the contents of your stomach.
In a country that threatens to sink below the waves, it felt good to be staying somewhere that took its commitment to the environment seriously.
But for us, the real sell of Soneva Fushi wasn't its eco–credentials. It was how welcome it makes children feel. Given that the Maldives is the kind of place that couples go to get away from it all, we appreciated that. Our daughter was given her own cot, her own mosquito net, and her own set of beach toys, complete with bucket and spade. At breakfast, lunch and dinner, they would happily purée any fruit she wanted, and we didn't even have to provide bibs. She was welcome at all four of the resort's restaurants and sampled sorbets from the ice cream room (there is also a chocolate room, and a cheese room, but they were for Mum and Dad only). We were even given a tricycle to ferry her around the island.
At a kilometre long by half a kilometre wide, Soneva Fushi is big by Maldivian standards, which meant we never felt as if we were bothering any of the other guests, though given that most of them were repeat visitors (at some times during the year, 70 per cent of the guests have been before), we needn't have worried. Everyone, from the restaurant staff to the housekeeper to the couple in the villa next door, was friendly and charming beyond belief.
Our daughter didn't get bored, which was a worry given that friends had warned us there would be nothing to do but sit and read. There was a beach cinema where she cackled at Despicable Me while eating tomato pasta, and she spent hours floating in our villa's pool with her armbands on. Though there was a team of childminders available to look after her while we went snorkelling, after a few days we just wanted to stay with her, watching her delighted face as she sampled this strange new world – a school of fish swimming next to her, or dolphins swimming past while on an early evening cruise.
Then there was the Den, an activity centre for children that was crammed full of toys and games. Later this year, a new Den will open, complete with pool, slides, zip line, dressing–up corner and DJ room, for the teenagers. It might even be worth making a return trip.
On the flight home, our daughter slept soundly, dreaming perhaps of the wild rabbits that roamed the island, or the curry she had sampled for the first time the night before. And I knew then that the flight out had been worth it, and that it was William and Kate who had made the mistake, not us.
ITC Luxury Travel (01244 355527; itcluxurytravel.co.uk) is offering a sevennight stay at Soneva Fushi for the price of five nights, plus complimentary half board. Prices start at £2,789 per person based on two adults sharing a Crusoe Villa for seven nights on a half–board basis, including return economy–class flight with British Airways from London Gatwick and transfers. This represents a saving of up to £1,525 per person. The offer is valid for travel completed between May 12 and July 31, 2014 or September 1 and October 19.
Document DT00000020140419ea4j000fq
