{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3535"}
____
  
News; Opinion; Columns
Must try harder, SNP — our poorest kids are missing an education
JENNY HJUL   
1,154 words
20 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
27
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Scotland's education minister Mike Russell has been missing from this week's debate on attainment gaps in the nation's schools. He has also been largely absent from recent reports over the shambolic new exam system. If he made a speech at the SNP's conference last weekend it went unnoticed, as have any of his contributions in the Scottish parliament of late. According to the Holyrood website, his most recent appearance was before the education and culture committee on March 18. His most memorable intervention in public life this year was in January, when he attacked UK immigration policy.
From his silence we could assume that the minister has vanished, though his tweets suggest otherwise. We could also conclude that all is so well in the country's schools that his role is redundant. Nothing could be further from the truth. The disparities between the achievements of children from rich and poor backgrounds, revealed on Tuesday, shame Scotland and demand the urgent attention of all responsible, from the minister down.
Across Scotland, 20% of pupils from wealthy areas got three or more As at Higher level, while only 2.6% from the most disadvantaged communities managed the same, according to government figures obtained by the Scottish Tories under Freedom of Information laws.
Edinburgh had the biggest performance gap in 2013, with only 1.1% of children in the poorest areas gaining three As — equating to six pupils. This compares with 22.9% of the capital's wealthiest pupils — 290 children. In Dundee, just 1.8% of pupils in the poorest areas achieved three or more As at Higher grade in 2013, compared with 18.2% in the most affluent group. And in West Lothian, only 3.8% in the most deprived areas achieved three As compared with 29.1% in the wealthiest.
Accident of birth, and not ability, decides the fate of today's young in Scotland more now than it did in the post-war years, when bright children from impoverished families had access to the best schools. The poorest pupils in 2014 have virtually no chance of getting a place at the top universities and of escaping their roots and being socially mobile.
Confronted by unpalatable facts, the SNP normally blames Westminster, and claims that separating Scotland from the rest of the UK will give ministers the power to put things right. But this excuse will not do where schools are concerned.
Scotland's education system was devolved even before devolution, with distinct qualifications and, for many years, a distinct (in a good way) reputation. Since 2007 it has been subject to the policies and control of the nationalists, and is now more known for its failings than its successes. A comparison of UK exam results last year found that Scotland had not progressed at the same rate as England since devolution in 1999.
The LSE study Education in a Devolved Scotland also showed "deep levels of inequality in Scotland, particularly between pupils from different socio-economic groups".
The Scottish government has one answer to any criticism of its handling of education: Curriculum for Excellence. This "new approach to learning and teaching", the nationalists say, will address underachievement and raise standards in all schools. But the curriculum has been described as a shambles by teachers and branded a joke by S4 pupils about to sit the nationals, which replaced standard grades. Angry kids have attracted 10,000 followers so far to a Twitter account they set up ridiculing the Scottish Qualifications Authority.
About 50,000 15- and 16-year-olds, called the guinea pig generation, will sit the first national 5s after Easter and 10,000 will gain national 4s, based on assessments that have included putting on puppet shows, and will leave school without sitting an exam. Teachers have complained about a lack of preparation and having to complete course work themselves.
Alan McKenzie, acting general secretary of the Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association, said there were huge causes for concern over the exams and curriculum coursework, adding: "There have been basic mistakes on coursework so who knows what the exams will be like."
Some schools have postponed the introduction of revamped Highers and teachers have contacted newspapers anonymously to condemn the curriculum for damaging children. Any change takes time to bed in but parents and professionals fear the curriculum lacks ambition, doesn't stretch able pupils and will put Scottish youngsters at a disadvantage in the employment market.
There has been none of the structural reform here that is currently under way in England, removing schools from councils' stranglehold and, in the process, transforming some of the most hopeless into the most inspirational.
Opinion is divided over Michael Gove's revolution but at least teaching unions south of the border, meeting this weekend, are discussing performance-related pay, giving good heads more money and rewarding those teachers who get the most out of their pupils. The focus has shifted from serving the interests of the education establishment to the interests of children — a shift that is yet to happen in Scotland.
Academies and free schools from Hackney to York, from Hammersmith to Greater Manchester, liberate heads and teachers from the red tape of local authorities and give them autonomy over their classrooms. Here, we remain entrenched in a one-size-fits-all model that offers no choice, no flexibility and no scope to extract clever children from their hard-luck beginnings and set them on the path to prosperity.
Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Conservative leader, asked this week why "there's this resistance in Scotland" to looking at other countries to see what works better. No solution to Scotland's education problems should be discounted just because they are happening in Japan or Sweden or the United States — or England.
But the nationalists would sooner see kids on the scrapheap than borrow an idea from England. In their white paper on independence they state that the overall aim of education is to lift people out of poverty and help them into employment. To reach this goal they promise to deliver smaller class sizes and drive up standards by improving on the Curriculum for Excellence.
Is that it? They have had decades to produce a vision for education and seven years in government to implement it, but the system — their system — still condemns sections of the population before they are born.
Any talent in the SNP team that might have put real thought into getting education right has been diverted by the party's bid to break up Britain. Constitutional upheaval has been given priority over pressing domestic responsibilities, and Scotland's poorest children are paying the price.
Gillian Bowditch is away
WE ARE ENTRENCHED IN A ONE-SIZEFITS-ALL MODEL THAT OFFERS NO SCOPE TO EXTRACT CLEVER CHILDREN FROM THEIR HARD-LUCK BEGINNINGS
Document ST00000020140420ea4k000x2
