{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2048"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Patrick Wintour: Analysis Miliband's problems with the 'kippers
587 words
19 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
4
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Nick Clegg claimed yesterday that Westminster-based media were missing the big story of the European elections - the extent to which Ukip is eating into traditional Labour northern heartlands in the local and European elections.
There may be some wishful thinking in this analysis. Clegg at one time wanted the Liberal Democrats to become the challengers to Labour's northern heartlands, and instead he has seen his party pushed back, replaced by Nigel Farage's. Inquests will await the election results, but the Clegg theme chimes with some thinking in the shadow cabinet.
The question of whether Labour did enough to combat Ukip both by reassuring potential Labour voters on immigration and by portraying Farage and his acolytes as rightwing Thatcherites has been bubbling for weeks.
Both the Blue Labour wing - loosely supporters of Jon Cruddas - and some more traditional centre-right Labour figures have urged a stronger attack on Ukip. One shadow cabinet source pointed to a weekend YouGov poll showing that more than 60% of voters admitted they did not know anything about Ukip's policy on the economy, crime, NHS, defence or education. Those figures arguably show how far Farage has been let off the hook. Farage himself has made a virtue of refusing to discuss domestic policy.
There is a view that Ukip is almost immune to rational political attack, since it represents a resentment incapable of being shifted by reason. Clegg found himself caught out by this during his televised debates with Farage. Equally there is a view that any attack on Ukip has to be carefully calibrated or else it comes across as a patronising misreading of voters' legitimate anger. There is also a third, slightly cynical view. If Ukip performs at 5%-7% in the general election, that may help Labour since the bulk of the Ukip vote will be former Tories.
There is a big debate among pollsters and politicians about whether this holds true. Many potential Ukip voters hold traditionally leftwing views on tax and equality. There is also a wider issue that unchallenged, Ukip's presence drags the political agenda to the right, making it more difficult to get a hearing for Miliband's solutions to the ills it plays upon.
Miliband has honourably chosen to fight a relatively policy-rich campaign highlighting the issues he believes will resonate with core voters - 48-hour access to GPs, tighter regulation of private sector rents and zero-hours contracts, changes to the way in which social care is delivered, and help for the low paid. Equally, he has long rejected the David Cameron course of appeasing the Eurosceptics, saying he will not offer a definite in-out referendum on EU membership.
Labour strategists also point out that Miliband mounted an attack on Farage in a lengthy piece in the Daily Mirror at the outset of the campaign, adding it was always intended that immigration feature in the closing days of the campaign. A recurrent theme since he became leader has been to insist that the free movement of workers must not become a means to exploit the indigenous workforce.
But it is notable that the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, last night chose to go on the offensive claiming that it was Tory and Lib Dem commitment to the free labour market that led the two parties to ignore the impact of immigration and made it possible for Ukip to play on people's fears.
Patrick Wintour
Document GRDN000020140518ea5j0002x
