{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"2109"}
____
  
Business
'IF CLEGG GETS A MANSION TAX I'LL HAVE TO SELL'
Caroline Rees   
1,388 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
8
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MONEY FAME AND FORTUNE
Tom Conti's 'comfortable' life includes a house in Hampstead - which the Lib Dems' 'Stalinist' taxes would force him to sell, he tells Caroline Rees
How did your childhood affect your attitude to money?
My parents had women's hairdressing shops, so my upbringing with money was very practical. You only spent what you could afford. My father was an Italian immigrant and it was tough for immigrants because there were no benefits. But my parents' businesses did well and they were generous.
What was your first job?
A college chum and I sold encyclopedias, which was a great learning experience. We were sent into no-hope areas and told to say such things as "Is a washing machine more important than your children's education?" Sometimes the door was slammed in your face, quite rightly, then we finally got a signature from these people who could not afford this pointless encyclopedia. On the bus home we were both thinking that it was just wrong, so we went back and talked them out of it. It took us as long as it did to sell them the bloody thing.
So you didn't earn a penny?
No. Never employ me as a salesman.
What about your first acting pay cheque?
My first proper job was in rep in Glasgow in the early Sixties. The pay was £8 a week. The leading actors got £11 and with that they paid for their digs, food and a drink on a Saturday night. Amazing. The standard of plays wasn't good, really, and one very foggy night the fog came into the theatre. We could barely see the audience. I think there were about eight people out there.
Was there an obvious financial turning point in your career?
It could have been a play at the Traverse Theatre in Edinburgh in 1971. We were living in London by this time, so I said: "I can't come to Edinburgh for £14 a week." The producer said: "Well, Nigel Hawthorne said the same thing and he hasn't stopped working since."
So I did it and that's exactly what happened. From that, I got a play in London with Paul Scofield called Savages. Everybody came to see Paul, and I occasionally got glanced at. That led to a movie with Joseph Losey.
Then the big change came with the television series The Glittering Prizes because that introduced me to America. The fact it was shown there made it easier when a producer decided to take the play I was in, Whose Life is it Anyway?, to New York. He proved in court that I had the right to enter America - as "an alien of extraordinary ability".
God bless America is all I can say.
What's the difference in pay in America?
Huge. When the American producer Barney Rosenzweig came here he said: "For God's sake, how do you people manage? Nobody earns any money and everything costs a ----ing fortune." For a television movie in this country at that time you might have been paid five grand. There, you would be paid £250,000. I was astounded.
What has been your best-paid job?
A movie in 1986 called Miracles, a comedy about a divorced couple. I'm not going into how much I got, but a lot.
Did your fee go up after Shirley Valentine?
It had already gone up, but it was a little boost. It was obviously a good combination, Pauline [Collins] and me, so I would have thought any producer worth their salt would have said "Let's find something else and put them in it", but nobody came up with that idea. It's nice that it's still watched. And you get residuals on DVD sales. I get quite a lot from the Batman movie The Dark Knight Rises.
How lucrative were the Vauxhall advertisements you did in the Nineties?
It was a huge amount of money. Those were the last days of the golden age of advertising.
You're working in the West End now. Is theatre paid well enough?
For most actors, absolutely not. Most live in penury all their lives. A few of us have been extraordinarily lucky. If you're a leading actor on a percentage of the box office it can be quite good, but you've got to be good enough to bring people in. You're expected to earn it.
Has there been a time when you really worried about money?
You worry about money all the time because you fear that every job might be your last. At one point I was playing guitar in restaurants to pay the rent. It was miserable. It's easier to walk on to a stage and start King Lear than it is to walk out into a restaurant and start singing. One evening a man put his hands over his ears and I thought: "I agree with you, chum."
Have you ever done anything for the money that you regretted artistically?
Not for the money, though I've done things I've regretted. I did a new Arthur Miller play called The Ride Down Mt Morgan. I always arrange an out-loud reading with chums before I do a play, but I didn't with this. I thought, "He's Arthur Miller, for God's sake, and writes fabulous plays."
Halfway through the first rehearsal I got a terrible cold feeling down my back and thought, "There's something seriously wrong with this bloody play." But you couldn't go to Arthur and say, "You've really got to look at the second act." It lasted about three weeks.
What has been your best investment?
Buying my house in Hampstead 29 years ago was the only financially sensible thing I've done because it's the family's security. It has gone up in value about 15 times. If the Stalinist Mr Clegg ever got his desire for a mansion tax, we wouldn't be able to live here.
What do you think of the idea of a tax on high earners?
Insane and pointless. No one should pay more than 25pc of their income in tax - a flat rate for Amazon and everybody. Money has to circulate and at the moment it doesn't. If you let people have more of their own money, the country will start to work again.
What has been your biggest financial mistake?
I'm not a financial gambler, so I've never ventured anything and lost it.
Do you invest in shares?
No. I'm not hungry enough. I did buy a large allocation of Premium Bonds some years ago, and they were quite good. We used to win £50 a few times a month, then they halved the prize money.
Do you prefer to pay by cash or card?
Cash for small things, but mostly a debit card. I use my credit card sometimes because I've got a special NatWest Black one and I don't feel it's fair to take all the benefits - insurance, access to airport lounges - if I don't use it.
Are you a spender or a saver?
If things were different, I'd be a saver and enjoy the interest. I'm not a spender beyond what I can afford. That's my dad talking.
What has been your most extravagant purchase?
Apart from the house, a Bentley years ago, which was £32,000. I don't know why I spent that. You don't have to. I'm driving one now that is 30 years old. I buy old cars because I can fix them. I don't want to have to plug in a laptop to find out what's wrong with the damn car.
Does money make you happy?
No, but the absence of it would make me extremely sad. Money buys security and you start to live at a certain level. Life for us has been comfortable for a very long time and I wouldn't like that to change.
Tom Conti is appearing in 'Twelve Angry Men' at the Garrick Theatre, London
I still earn from Shirley Valentine DVD sales
Document STEL000020140518ea5i0004y
