{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3795"}
____
  
News
Tory plotters spare PM the knife - for now
Tim Shipman   
1,981 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Tim Shipman, our new Political Editor, reveals how party rebels have tweaked a simmering revolt: ousting Cameron is off, making him Eurosceptic is on
IN EARLY February a group of Conservative MPs gathered in one of the wood-panelled dining rooms overlooking the Thames in the House of Commons. The food was the usual combination of red meat and warming claret but the real subject on the menu was the fate of David Cameron.
If fine dining is still top of the list of favourite activities for many Tory MPs, second is plotting. Recently there has been plotting aplenty.
For six months or more, Tory MPs have contemplated the prospect of the European and local elections on May 22 with grim expectation, predicting humiliation by UKIP and a meltdown in party discipline thereafter.
For those who endure rather than enjoy Cameron's leadership it has always been his moment of maximum vulnerability. Like Rahm Emanuel, the former White House chief of staff who is now mayor of Chicago, they vowed they would "not let the crisis go to waste".
In the weeks either side of Christmas, small conclaves of two or three Conservative MPs held what one of the participants calls "regicidal conversations", engaging in "brutal war-gaming" about whether it would make sense to oust the prime minister if the voters punish him next month.
By February they had decided that "Get Cameron" was a game with no winners. One plotter said: "They concluded that moving against Cameron would not be regicide; it would be suicide. With a year to go until the general election no one will do any better."
So the Thatcherite No Turning Back group and the socially conservative Cornerstone group dined together in February with a new goal. Now that ousting Cameron was no longer in prospect, they were scheming to make him the leader they want him to be.
The results of that dinner — and others since — will shape the gruelling 13-month campaign that begins this week and culminates at the general election on May 7 next year.
The European election will be a test of leadership for Cameron, but also for Nick Clegg, Nigel Farage and Ed Miliband. How they perform and how their restless colleagues react will go a long way towards deciding the colour of the next government.
Voters will be choosing 73 MEPs and 4,216 councillors. For UKIP it is a chance to top the polls for the first time and solidify grassroots operations.
For Labour the European vote is a diversion from the serious business of gaining council seats and road-testing its general election message on the cost of living crisis in battlefield conditions. If it can capture Tory council seats in southern towns such as Crawley, Swindon and Milton Keynes, Miliband will quell doubts about him that linger even in his shadow cabinet.
For Nick Clegg, May 22 will be a grim fight for survival amid warnings that he could lose all his 12 MEPs and 300 or more councillors.
WHEN the prime minister decided to "roll the dice" 18 months ago and offer to renegotiate Britain's relationship with Brussels before an in/out referendum in 2017, he bought himself time and gave Tory Eurosceptics something to unite behind.
If he hoped to neuter UKIP and stop the carping from the Tory wings, he demonstrably failed. Today's YouGov poll for The Sunday Times puts UKIP out front in the race for MEPs on 31%, an emphatic 12 points ahead of the Tories.
Why then is there no knife between Cameron's shoulders? Although only 20 to 24 people attend the No Turning Back-Cornerstone dinners, the two groups include about 120 MPs, a third of the parliamentary Conservative party and more than enough to trigger a leadership challenge.
It is the economic upturn that has saved him, as a rebel conceded over lightly poached fillets of salmon at the Rex Whistler restaurant in the Tate Britain gallery, a short hop down the Embankment from the House of Commons.
"Cameron is seated on a stool with four legs," said this ally of Adam Afriyie, the backbencher who was accused last year of plotting against the prime minister.
"He needs to keep the party above 30% in the polls. He needs to lead Ed Miliband on the question of who would make the best prime minister. He needs us to stay ahead on the economy and he needs to personally poll better than the party."
Cameron is currently passing each of the four tests.
"The tide has turned in Osborne and Cameron's direction," says one MP present at the No Turning Back dinners.
"Third place in the Euros will be highly embarrassing but is it going to lead to a total meltdown? No. The economic upturn has convinced a lot of people to beat their swords into ploughshares.
"It's too late to start talking about changing leader. There is no obvious candidate to replace Cameron. It might be different if Boris were in parliament now but he isn't."
Aware of complaints of aloofness, Cameron has been inviting recalcitrant backbenchers to Downing Street. "You get a bit of a stroking and a pat on the head," one MP said. "The general effect is vaguely patronising but I suppose we should be encouraged that he is bothering at all. He did at least know my name."
For his part Cameron has been encouraged by the outbreak of common sense in the party. He has taken to telling visitors to Downing Street of his pleasant surprise when Stewart Jackson, the periodically rebellious Eurosceptic, announced that he would not be causing trouble.
But if George Osborne's economic strategy has saved Cameron from a leadership challenge this summer, the referendum pledge whetted backbenchers' appetite for more concessions on Europe. This shows no sign of being sated.
Senior figures such as Bernard Jenkin, Gerald Howarth and John Redwood are biting their tongues to avoid appearing disloyal during an election campaign. But the No Turning Back-Cornerstone table talk is about how to force Cameron to offer more red meat on Brussels.
One regular diner said: "After polling day you are going to get delegations of serious people visiting Cameron pushing for more red lines on Europe."
The Eurosceptics want parliament to be able to overturn existing Brussels laws and curb immigration from the EU. Howarth, Jenkin, Redwood and Bill Cash, chairman of the European scrutiny committee, have all told colleagues they will take this up with Cameron after polling day.
The historical model is not the execution of Charles I but the baronial revolts that led to Magna Carta. "The points we want to impress upon the prime minister are the same as those that were made to King John," the MP said. "We need a statement of the rights of Englishmen against the diktats of the European Commission. Cameron can't beat us so he should join us."
THEY will not be the only noises off. The European poll will cause jitters among Tory MPs in marginal seats who regard Eurosceptic ideologues with large majorities as selfindulgent dilettantes. "There will be much wailing and gnashing of teeth," one loyalist says. "It will be squeaky bum time in the northern marginals."
One MP fighting Labour in the north said: "We don't need more Eurosceptic games. The sooner Bernard Jenkin's razor slips while shaving, the better."
Cameron's problems are minor, however, compared with those facing his deputy. The Liberal Democrats are set to lose about 300 local councillors. From a peak of 4,743 in 2005, the party is likely to go into the general election next year with fewer than 2,300.
When candidate nominations for council seats closed on Thursday evening, the Lib Dems appeared unable to field a full slate. The political analyst Rob Hayward said: "In a number of places the Lib Dems have fewer candidates than UKIP — places like Salford, Doncaster, Tameside, North Tyneside and even Liverpool."
A Lib Dem minister warned that the party's grassroots infrastructure was collapsing. Away from its strongholds "we are disappearing like ice in the sun".
Clegg is facing warnings from his own MPs that wipeout could cost him his job. Vince Cable, the business secretary, has told friends his "time is running out" if he is to be leader. An MP who supports Clegg said: "Vince is capable of anything if things get bad."
For Miliband, success is assured in the local elections, but he has much still to prove.
"Ed just has to look like he can walk and chew gum at the same time and that will be progress," says one frustrated frontbencher. "We've been coasting. As long as we can show some progress in the south, people will be reassured."
Miliband may face pressure from within to offer a European referendum if Labour comes behind UKIP in the European elections, but he shows no sign of budging.
"It's the Tories who have the problem with Europe, not us," says a member of the shadow cabinet.
It is hard not to agree. Cameron will survive a European election debacle. What he may not survive is the implacable demands of the dining clubs.
As one attendee explains: "We on the right of the party know that Cameron really wants to stay in the EU and, come what may, we know he isn't going to get a proper deal.
"He is going to argue passionately for the UK to stay in on slightly better terms. If he does get over the [general election] finishing line in 2015, he's going to be leading a divided party that is going to be split down the middle."
An ally of Cameron's predicts he will be deposed by the Eurosceptics sooner or later after the general election. "They'll come for him unless we win a majority. Even if he wins and leads the 'stay-in' campaign during the referendum, the party will split and they'll come for him."
If he has to negotiate another power-sharing arrangement he will have to take a tougher line on Brussels to get a new coalition agreement past his backbenchers. One dormant rebel says: "If it's a Con-Lib government, Cameron won't be able to stroll into Committee Room 14 like he did last time around and say, 'We're going into coalition, chaps.' "We want a secret ballot to approve any deal and if he won't do what we want we'll vote it down and he'll have to go. People would say, 'We'll have a coalition, but not with you leading it, Dave'."
Knock 'em down but UKIP keeps coming, Editorial, page 18
EVEN IF HE WINS THE ELECTION, THE PARTY WILL SPLIT AND THEY'LL COME FOR HIM
State of the parties Yes 25% No 66% Are the UKIP posters racist? Labour Conservative UKIP Lib Dem Other 36% 31% 15% 9% 9% UKIP Labour Conservative Lib Dem Green 31% 28% 19% 9% 8% Which party would you vote for in the Euro elections?
Stay in 40% Leave 37% Don't know 18% I would not vote 5% How would you vote in a referendum on EU membership? Stay in 50% Leave 26% Don't know 19% I would not vote 5% How would you vote if David Cameron renegotiated our relationship with the EU? Yes 45% No 35% Not sure 20% Yes 27% No 50% Should Cameron seek to end the right of non-British EU citizens to live and work in the UK? Is NIGEL Farage racist? Yes 44% No 40% Is Farage hypicritical to employ his German wife as his secretary? Source: YouGov questioned 1,835 adults on April 24-25OLIVER BERG/DAN KITWOOD
Document ST00000020140427ea4r000yu
