{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1696"}
____
  
News
Police massage crime figures, warns Judge
Frances Gibb   
486 words
18 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A judge has accused police forces of "massaging" crime figures by preventing cases from going to court to save officers' time.
Judge Richard Bray, who stepped down last week from Northampton crown court after 30 years on the bench, used his official farewell event yesterday to launch a scathing attack on the criminal justice system.
"The figures have been massaged. Robbery is now classified as theft from a person; burglary is downgraded to criminal damage. Cautions and reprimands are used to save police time. But you ask the people who walk about the towns and cities at night if crime has gone down and they will give you a very different picture."
Judge Bray claimed that the government had forced him to pass sentences that were too lenient, and that initiatives such as suspended sentences had failed. "Sentencing is a skill only acquired after long experience and cannot be reduced to a tick in a box. We've had suspended sentences introduced, abolished then introduced again. All this tinkering about is more to do with money and votes rather than criminal justice, while the prison population has continued to rise. None of the government initiatives has worked. We've now got warnings, reprimands, cautions, conditional discharges that prevent people from appearing in court."
He said that the increasing constraints on judges meant they were becoming more like civil servants. "My guiding philosophy was always to do justice without fear or favour, without bias towards the prosecution or the defence," he said. "It is not up to the executive to tell the jurisdiction what to do, it is up to the executive to make sure they have enough spaces in prison.
"Judges should be able to make decisions without fear of influence from government. That seems potentially at risk. We are almost being treated as if we are civil servants and distributing power and influence on behalf of the government. We are described as stakeholders in the criminal justice system. Those who want to become judges have to sit exams and attend interviews where they have to spout political correctness like civil servants."
It is not the first time that Judge Bray has been critical of government bodies. In February this year his anger was directed at the Border Agency and Home Office when he described the UK border as a "leaking sieve".
His comments came after an illegal immigrant drug dealer was deported three times only to return each time to commit more crimes.
In 2010 he sentenced a car thief to jail using rhyming verse: "I have this to say to you; Right now you feel down; You have got months to do; Despite what you have done, Let us hope the locked door; Will make you more sure not to come back for more." Law report, page 67 Family judge's rallying cry, page 24
Document T000000020140418ea4i000cr
