{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2490"}
____
  
News
Sky spy tracks down the 'beds in sheds' migrants
Giles Sheldrick   
546 words
5 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Lancs
5
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
THESE are the disturbing new images that prove Britain's immigration crisis has spiralled out of control.
A spy–in–the–sky plane chartered by worried council chiefs shows the alarming rise in illegal back–garden lodgings known as beds–in–sheds.
Since the UK eased working restrictions for Romanian and Bulgarians on January 1, one London borough has witnessed a four–fold increase in the squalid accommodation.
The situation is now so bad in Harrow, north–west London, that experts fear there are 319 "suspicious" buildings rather than 75.
Harrow is already home to almost 5,000 Romanian migrants but panicked town hall bosses think an underground migrant community totals another 1,000.
Housing inspectors have unearthed hundreds of cases where desperate migrant families pay rogue landlords £50 each a week to share a grubby mattress in a freezing outbuilding.
Hidden
An airplane fitted with thermal imaging equipment flew above Harrow at night to get an insight into the problem.
These pictures show the borough lit up like a Christmas tree with uninsulated and hidden sheds emitting heat, which turns yellow on film.
Council leader Susan Hall said: "The pressures of migration in London, fuelled by recent waves of new arrivals from eastern Europe, are creating stresses on local authorities that we have not had to contend with before.
"What was thought to be a problem for the centre of big cities 18 months ago is now rippling out to the suburbs.
"The beds–in–sheds phenomenon means there is a hidden community springing up in the back gardens of our cities.
"In many cases, the people in this accommodation are at the bottom of a pyramid of exploitation."
The scourge of backyard sheds has been described as dragging London back to the 19th century Victorian slums.
Councils have found themselves hamstrung by the planning system as outbuildings rarely require permission.
Also, by law, inspectors must give 24 hours' notice before making a visit, allowing landlords plenty of time to hide evidence.
Rising rents and overcrowding means the problem has now reached epidemic proportions in the capital. Council bosses vowed to prosecute those exploiting the most vulnerable in a borough where more than 4,000 people are waiting for social housing.
MigrationWatch UK estimated 350,000 could arrive in the UK within seven years, potentially costing taxpayers £12billion by 2021. The latest available figures showed a net rise in migration to the UK of 212,000 between September 2012 and September last year.
Two months after the arrival of Romanians and Bulgarians started in earnest, Harrow has been forced to draft in hundreds of extra interpreters to cope with the demand for information on benefits, housing and schools.
Some migrants paid as little as £100 for one–way tickets on buses making the 1,600–mile trip across Europe.
Romanians have told how "pioneers" reported back to them after making "benefits and accommodation" fact–finding missions to Britain.
OPINION: PAGE 12
SPOTLIGHT ON SUBURBIA
Photographs taken from a spy plane show the extent of suspicious garden buildings which Harrow council believe could be illegal lodgings for migrants. The uninsulated sheds (circled) are radiating heat, which shows up as yellow on thermal imaging cameras
Document THEEXP0020140305ea350000e
