{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2821"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Missing the target
317 words
28 February 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
21
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
When David Cameron pledged to reduce net immigration to the "tens of thousands" over the lifetime of this parliament, we warned that he was creating a rod for his own back. So it has proved. The latest figures from the Office for National Statistics show the target receding fast. Net migration has risen to its highest level since 2011, driven by a surge of arrivals from Romania and Bulgaria and from countries hit by recession, such as Spain.
By picking net immigration as a target, Mr Cameron was always likely to be thwarted by two factors beyond his control: namely emigration and the movement of people within the EU. While the former seems to have stabilised, the latter has risen dramatically. The Government has been able to bear down on non–EU migration (though it has had cause to regret the impact this has had on talented, entrepreneurial arrivals from China and India), but it is not in a position to stop people moving within Europe.
Mr Cameron will have been encouraged, therefore, by comments from Angela Merkel on her visit to London yesterday. While the German Chancellor dampened expectations regarding the wider prospect of EU reform, she did say her country shared Britain's concerns about free movement: yes, it was a fundamental principle of membership, but it was not intended to enable people to shop around for the best welfare opportunities. No country, she said, could withstand such an onslaught.
In other words, Britain is not alone in seeing this as a problem, not least for hard–pressed public services. While the figures suggest it is jobs rather than benefits that are attracting migrants here, it is encouraging that other EU leaders are beginning to address this issue – for it will be better resolved via hard–headed pragmatism than by setting unachievable targets.
Document DT00000020140228ea2s0004d
