{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"936"}
____
  
Features
20 YEARS OF CHUNNEL VISION
Benedict Brogan   
1,424 words
3 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
29
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Reporting from a highly protected spot 15 miles from the shores of both Britain and France, Benedict Brogan explores the impact of the Channel Tunnel on our relationship with Europe
The only place where it is possible to have one foot in England and the other in France is in a concrete tunnel that is dry, dark, and mostly quiet. Modest plastic signs on each side say "mid point" and "point median", and the grey walls are covered in the graffiti of the workers who built it. "Vive l'Ecosse libre!" "Deutschland uber alles" and "David Cameron" stand out, although no politician has ever come this far, and for good reason.
The land border between Britain and France is seldom visited, and there is no commemorative plaque or engraving. One of the most protected spots in Europe – it is not open to the public – is deep beneath the Channel, about 15 miles from either shore. Every few minutes a train thunders past in one of the running tunnels either side. The roar echoes through the foot–thick steel access doors set every 300 yards or so. Then it is quiet again. The Channel Tunnel, which marks its 20th anniversary on Tuesday, is remarkable yet mundane, our permanent connection to Europe via 30 miles of jaw–dropping achievement that nobody ever sees.
Plenty of people use it, of course. Record numbers in fact – 20 million a year, more than 300 million so far, and growing. But aside from a glimpse of the entrance as their train enters the tunnel, and the flicker of emergency lights through the window, there is nothing to see, certainly nothing that gives an idea of the ambition of the thing.
Even the passenger terminals at either end, the vast one at Coquelles, and the small one at Cheriton wedged between the Kent escarpment and the motorway, do little to convey the epic effort of punching through the dense, watertight blue marl between the two coasts. Yes, there is the odd clue – the armed guards, the movement sensors, the funny little remotecontrolled access carts, the sign that says "Beware of adders" (adders?) – but for the most part it is dingy concrete, unremarkable sheds and lots of electric cabling. For so many of us, lorry drivers to business travellers to families going on holiday, it has become just another service, like water out of the tap, to be assumed rather than admired.
The fact that it is taken for granted, however, is a testament to how easily we have adjusted to the idea of being linked to the Continent after a splendid isolation that had lasted since the last ice age.
A few miles into the access tunnel there is a reminder of how the dream of an under–sea route is centuries–old: one short section is the tunnel begun under Edward Heath and halted by Harold Wilson in 1974, the date visible on the iron casements; behind them is the Victorian tunnel started in the 1870s, and sealed off. Once, the idea that a tunnel might be used by an invasion force put paid to the idea: Churchill ordered the Royal Navy to look out for muddy water as sign that the German were burrowing towards us.
It turned out differently of course.
The traffic is the other way. About 85 per cent of the cars using the drive–on, drive–off shuttle service are Brits invading Europe, confirmation of our taste for foreign adventure. It is the Continentals who are insular. The capital–tocapital Eurostar service now commands 90 per cent of the traffic between London, Paris and Brussels, to such an extent that the company is accused of complacently milking its monopoly. The French paid for it – their private investors put up most of the cash – but despite predictions to the contrary, it turned out to be the island–dwellers who came to love the tunnel most.
Those of us who were at the opening ceremony in Calais in 1994 remember the formalities, the sight of the Queen riding in her Rolls–Royce with the sphinx–like François Mitterrand beside her, but most particularly the way the then French president used the occasion to have a dig at Britain's backwards rail system. He had raced up to the tunnel on France's high–speed train network, the 186mph TGV, while the Queen had been left to clatter through south London on ancient British Rail track. Visitors who had sped through France, he observed, would have plenty of time to appreciate the beauty of the English countryside as they trundled towards London.
He was right of course. It would be another decade before the highspeed rail link to St Pancras was opened. Early plans to run Eurostar services straight through from Edinburgh and Glasgow to Paris and beyond were shelved, even though the trains were ordered (they are now used on French routes). After the ceremony he chose to fly back to Paris, but the point was made. Now it is possible to imagine how, after the tunnel and HS1, the new highspeed line to the North will one day too be little more than a mundane service, remarkable but ignored.
Its French champions saw the Channel Tunnel as a way of taming the Brits. In 1994, the French rejoiced that Britain was at last linked to Europe. Mitterrand declared the tunnel "a major trump card reinforcing the EU", while Le Figaro proclaimed the end of "the divorces and quarrels through the centuries". John Major proclaimed it a potent symbol of "Britain's new role in Europe", just as his party was tearing itself apart over the issue.
To them, the tunnel mattered more as a political symbol. Yet it quickly proved itself to be an economic success that aided trade and provided greater opportunities for British businesses to take goods and services to Europe. Of course the £10 billion cost was borne entirely by the private sector, and those who put up the money lost their shirts when the company went belly up and had to be restructured.
Boris Johnson, more presciently perhaps, predicted "the contamination will be in reverse": the tunnel would allow Britain to export its ideas across Europe.
Some things come the other way of course. Eurotunnel uses French electricity, which is cheaper and cleaner, and is completing an inter–connector – a giant cable through the tunnel – that will allow Britain to import even more energy from France. The tunnel uses just half its capacity. Projections are for freight use to continue expanding – more rolling stock has been ordered. A Brussels demand for more competition on inter–city routes means German railways will soon start services to London, putting Eurostar under pressure to offer cheaper prices and more routes.
Eurotunnel is upgrading its terminals to deal with crowds and the holiday jams caused by the Government's immigration crack–down. Plans to check the passports of every passenger on exit as well as entry has alarmed the company, which predicts longer waits and complaints from other EU countries who will ask why, when consumers expect to move quicker, things have slowed down.
Twenty years on, Britain has moved closer to breaking its political connection with Europe. Launching his European election campaign yesterday, David Cameron repeated his promise of an in–out referendum in 2017. By the time the tunnel marks its quarter–century, we may have voted to cut ourselves off from the EU. Yet deep underground, where the French and British engineers monitor the tunnel round the clock and tend to its systems, speak an improvised franglais and drive on the left in French cars, the tunnel feels a lot more permanent.
Even Margaret Thatcher, who gave the project the go–ahead, when she saw the tunnel, said: "Every generation has to do something exciting that will affect the future. This is wonderful, even better than I thought it would turn out."
Of course, few back then knew that the planners had called in a senior British Army officer to identify how to blow up the tunnel and make it unusable in an emergency. To this day, a plan exists that would allow Britain to seal itself off from the Continent again. Wisely, though, the builders insisted the damage should be reversible, and that the tunnel be capable of being reopened within a month. Next week, the Channel Tunnel will mark not just our connection to the Continent, but how hard it is to break.
Document DT00000020140503ea530006u
