{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2100"}
____
  
The EU elections promise everything to lose
By Iain Martin   
1,778 words
18 May 2014
08:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
This week's European elections will reflect the way the political wind is blowing ahead of next year’s general election. What will be the cost of a poor result?
The European elections are not meant to be exciting and unpredictable. Only about a third of Britons vote to choose their Member of the European Parliament twice a decade, and in a normal year the losing parties say, with some justification, that the outcome does not really matter.
This time it is different. All the British parties involved go into this week’s European and local elections knowing that the result is difficult to predict and that, for once, the contest counts because of its potential impact on the general election in under a year’s time.
Voters are also going to the polls this Thursday in local elections in 161 of England and Northern Ireland’s local authorities, but the Euros are the much bigger test – all UK voters can have their say at the ballot box.
The parties approach the vote with trepidation – and no wonder. They all have a lot to lose in the first truly national test of public opinion since Ukip began its latest surge.
Having promised supporters a historic breakthrough this week, Ukip and its leader Nigel Farage must now deliver or face accusations that they have peaked. In contrast, the Tories want to avoid a difficult day for David Cameron turning into a rout.
Labour, which this close to a general election should be well advanced in establishing itself as a credible government in-waiting, is in trouble. If the party somehow slipped into third place behind Ukip and the Tories this week, it could even be fatal to Ed Miliband’s leadership.
Meanwhile, the Lib Dems are battling to stay in business. Leader Nick Clegg valiantly tried to take on Mr Farage in two televised debates. The result was a kicking for Mr Clegg and a further boost for Ukip.
Thursday’s vote – the results of which are announced next Sunday evening – also raises the curtain on an extraordinary period of potential instability that stretches well beyond the general election. The Euros will be followed in September by a referendum that could mean Scotland breaking up the United Kingdom. Shortly after that, in May, comes a general election likely to be the most closely fought in a generation. Then, if the Tories somehow hold on to power, there is due to be a complex renegotiation of Britain’s terms of membership of the European Union followed by an in/out EU referendum.
Against a backdrop of populist anger aimed at mainstream politicians and institutions, it is clear that the established parties are in a spin and confused about what to do next.
The economic recovery that is under way might conventionally presage an equally strong revival in the electoral fortunes of the governing parties. Certainly, the Tory position has improved relative to that of Labour, as illustrated by the latest Sunday Telegraph ICM Wisdom Index, which today suggests that, by a narrow margin, voters expect the Tories to win.
Twice in the last week, Labour has also dipped behind the Tories in opinion polls on the state of the parties. But other polls have continued to put Labour in front and the Conservatives are not recording anything approaching the large leads they need for a Commons majority. Thanks to the vagaries of the election system, the Tories require to be as much as five to seven points in front of Labour on general election day.
Labour high command has its own serious problems. Ordinarily, a split on the Right, with Ukip draining support from the Tories, would be a cause for cheer on the Left. Instead, there is concern that Ukip is also attracting disillusioned working-class Labour voters.
Divisions have emerged in those around Mr Miliband on how this should be handled. Should the party attack Ukip or concentrate on the Tories along with trying to hold on to the Lib Dem voters who defected to Labour after Mr Clegg took his party into coalition?
Michael Dugher MP, who is in charge of Labour’s day-to-day campaigning, unleashed a ferocious attack on Ukip last week. Yet Douglas Alexander, the party’s general election co-ordinator, has been sceptical that attacks on Mr Farage will make a difference.
This was the unpromising situation when Barack Obama’s election guru arrived in London for a flying visit. He has been hired by the Labour leader to help. However, David Axelrod soon managed to misspell Ed Miliband’s name on Twitter. In private meetings, his main message was that Labour is getting it right in terms of its policies; it just needs to be a little better organised – analysis that sounds over-optimistic.
If Labour has the right policies – or any policies – it should probably consider telling the voters soon what they are. Yesterday, a Labour MP was despairing: “I don’t know what we’re for or what Ed Miliband is trying to say, do you? If it carries on like this, the Tories are going to win in 2015 with a majority.”
Labour’s confusion is further testament to the impact of Mr Farage. A member of the shadow cabinet says: “Farage has cracked open a sewer about how people feel about politicians in general. It’s an anti-politics vote. The depth of alienation is extraordinary.”
Regardless of the result next week, the Ukip leader’s achievement is remarkable. He has turned a rag-tag party, with very little infrastructure or party organisation and some highly eccentric candidates, into a fighting force that may well top the poll in Thursday’s elections. In terms of campaigning on the national stage, he has managed this with little support, working long hours and campaigning across the country.
Ukip stands on the verge of a breakthrough in the Euros. The party is certainly set to improve on its performance in the equivalent elections five years ago. Then, with Gordon Brown in office and the global financial crisis under way, Ukip came second with 16.5 per cent of the vote behind the Tories on 27.7 per cent, while Labour slumped to third.
Since then, Mr Farage has showed himself adept at exploiting unease over immigration and the EU. He has also capitalised on Mr Cameron’s weaknesses by appealing to Tories who oppose the recent gay-marriage legislation. One of the most recent polls, by ComRes, for the European elections, put Ukip on 34 per cent, Labour on 24 per cent, the Tories on 22 per cent and the Lib Dems on 8 per cent.
But the strain of going full throttle in this campaign does seem to be telling on the Ukip man. On Thursday, in a radio interview on LBC, he was put under intense pressure and in response pressed what his enemies hope was the self-destruct button.
Asked about Romanians moving next door, he said people would feel uncomfortable. The interviewer then asked him what the difference would be if the new neighbours were German. Mr Farage’s wife is German.
“You know the difference,” he responded. The implication was that the Romanians are to be feared simply because of their nationality or race.
There were other questions that Mr Farage handled badly. Having said recently that he felt uncomfortable on hearing fellow passengers on a London commuter train speak languages other than English, he acknowledged that his wife speaks German at home.
Indeed, the interview was going so badly that Patrick O’Flynn, Ukip’s head of communications, intervened to try to end it. If the Prime Minister’s press secretary or Mr Miliband’s spin-doctor had tried to halt a live interview, it would surely be cited by Ukip supporters as evidence of control-freakery. Mr O’Flynn claimed that he stepped in because the interview was over-running the time agreed. Opponents said that he realised that it was a car crash and moved to stop it.
The LBC interview duly went viral on the internet. And yesterday, the Sun, a newspaper that shares Mr Farage’s concerns about uncontrolled immigration, accused him of racism. “It is not racist to worry about the impact of millions of migrants on Britain, as we have for years. It is racist to smear Romanians just for being Romanians. Nigel Farage, Ukip leader, did just that.”
The incident is unlikely to cost Ukip in the European elections – most voters will have missed the LBC interview and even the resulting news reports. But Ukip will have a longer-term problem if the voters it has attracted conclude that Mr Farage is incompetent at managing his party or controlling its wilder elements.
Such perceptions may already exist. Tories say that when they ask voters about other parties, concern about the “unpleasantness” of some Ukip attitudes features highly.
The Tory leadership is already preparing to make its pitch in the days after the vote to those voters who are abandoning the Conservatives for Ukip in the European elections. They are wary of dismissing the rise of Mr Farage as a protest vote, because it sounds unduly dismissive. “People vote for protest parties because they think there is something worth protesting about,” said a senior Tory source.
“We get it. We will be saying we understand your frustration. But we have to explain that the next election is the one that matters. The question to people is 'Who do you want to govern?’ ”
After the Euros, there is the Newark by-election on June 5. Ukip’s Roger Helmer hopes to become the party’s first MP at Westminster. The Tories are cautiously optimistic that a majority of 16,152 is too large for Ukip to overhaul, although in by-elections held in difficult circumstances for a governing party anything is possible.
Once Newark has voted, the Prime Minister is expected to announce a Cabinet reshuffle. He wants to bring in more of the next Tory generation ahead of the general election. Then, with the economy growing, the Tory high command hopes to go into the autumn party conference presenting Mr Miliband as a menace, while trying to convince former Tory Ukippers to “come home”.
This week’s elections will reveal how far its recent surge has taken Ukip. The Tories will then be able to assess just how many disaffected voters they need to win over in time for 2015. What is clear already is that Mr Farage has managed to spook the established parties very badly indeed.
Document TELUK00020140518ea5i000rw
