{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2068"}
____
  
NEWS
Ed Miliband urged to debate Nigel Farage
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
599 words
18 May 2014
14:16
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Labour MP urges leader to win back Ukip voters and warns 'mantra of misery' is electoral suicide
Ed Miliband should debate with Nigel Farage and try to woo Ukip voters with “tougher” messages on immigration and welfare, a Labour MP has said.
The Labour leader must “get out more” and talk about aspiration rather than a “mantra of misery” or face defeat at the next election, Simon Danczuk, the Labour MP for Rochdale said in a stinging attack on party’s strategy.
It came as Ed Miliband said Mr Farage is not a racist but his views are “deeply offensive”.
And Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrat leader, said the Ukip leader’s “beer-swilling bonhomie mask” had slipped to reveal an “extremely nasty view of modern Britain.”
Labour must recognise Ukip voters are not “loons” but its “despairing” former voters who need to be won back, Mr Danczuk said.
Writing in the Mail on Sunday, he warned Labour needs to “up our game” and “come out swinging” if it is to win the next election. Its leadership treats politics merely as “an intellectual pursuit” and has failed to reach out beyond Labour’s core vote of people angered by food banks and the so-called bedroom tax, Mr Danczuk said.
“We won’t win a General Election by campaigning excessively on food banks and the bedroom tax. Continually reciting a mantra of misery is not the answer. We have to start speaking the language of aspiration.
“Britain needs a Government with a convincing mandate to introduce the big changes that are required. But Labour can’t achieve that with the core vote and a few disgruntled Liberals. That’s a suicidal strategy.
“UKIP has proved that there’s a rich seam of despairing voters out there. They’ve been ignored for far too long and Labour has to show it’s willing to listen.
“It’s daft to characterise UKIP voters as disaffected loons, because many are simply working-class people tired of the three main parties. A lot are Labour people and we need to work hard to get them back,” he wrote.
Speaking on BBC 5 Live, Mr Danczuk added: “He should have probably debated Farage along with Nick Clegg. That would probably have been a smart move in terms of putting Cameron on the back foot. I also think he needs to get out more. He did a piece in the Daily Star where he was playing pool. I think people see Ed at his best when he’s doing that.”
Mr Clegg accused Nigel Farage of sowing divisive after saying people have the “right” to fear Romanians moving next door to them because “there is a high level of criminality within the Romanian community”.
Asked if Mr Farage was "indulging in racist language" with his Romanian comments, Mr Clegg told BBC One's The Andrew Marr Show: "I think the mask is starting to slip and I think what's being revealed that sort of behind the beer-swilling bonhomie is a rather nasty view of the world.
"I think anyone who singles out one community, one nationality, and says 'I don't want to live next door to them', I really think that's the politics of division and I think it really should have no place in modern Britain.”
Mr Miliband said: “I think his remarks he made were deeply offensive. I think they were a racial slur but I don't think of Nigel Farage as a racist himself."
Document TELUK00020140518ea5i002gx
