{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2427"}
____
  
News
30 lawless migrants try to reach UK each night
Giles Sheldrick   
610 words
14 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
7
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
AT least 30 desperate migrants make a bolt for Britain across the Channel every night trying to reach "the promised land".
They are prepared to die getting from Calais by stowing away on freight trucks - or even attempting the Channel Tunnel on foot.
And many do die, with four migrants believed to have been killed in the past week.
The Daily Express can reveal that waves of refugees have swelled the population of a makeshift camp near the ferry terminal in the French port to around 500.
Last night, the bottleneck in Calais was blamed on Britain's "broken open-door immigration policy".
The disease-ridden tent city - dubbed "Sangatte II" - evokes memories of the original camp near the Channel Tunnel terminal, where illegal immigrants gathered and rioted before it was closed in 2002.
Squalid Inside the filthy camp, professionals from war-ravaged countries such as Syria, Sudan, Iran and Pakistan live alongside the penniless. Each travelled thousands of miles to make a bid to get to the UK, just 21 miles over the water.
Afghan Khanabid, 18, told how he paid £1,200 to escape his homeland and has broken his arm trying to smuggle himself into the UK. His story was repeated by many.
He said: "I try every night to get in a truck or hang on to the axle. Maybe 20 to 30 of us try each night. Some of my friends died.
"I don't want to stay in France. Afghanistan is worse than the camp but Britain is great. I get arrested all the time but I'll one day be successful. I'm prepared to die trying." Migrants started gathering in huge numbers six months ago, turning a patch of grass close to the ferry terminal into a squalid camp.
Some have spent two years travelling from Kurdistan, Turkmenistan and Eritrea. If Khanabid is correct, an estimated 11,000 attempts have been made on Britain's border in the past year.
Calais immigration chief and deputy mayor Philippe Mignonet said the UK was a sitting duck because it was a "soft touch".
He said: "People say, 'If you go to England, you will have everything. You will have a house, you will have money, you will have a job, your family will be able to join you. Right or wrong, it is what is said."
Refugees huddle in flimsy tents with the lucky ones sharing grubby mattresses. They are fed once a day - rice or pasta and a roll. There are three portable toilets.
Each night, they negotiate razor wire, armed police and dogs to attempt to smuggle themselves on trucks or walk through the tunnel.
Tim Aker, head of policy at Ukip, said: "It is clear the Government's soft approach on border controls is driving many to risk their lives in an attempt to enter the country."
A Home Office spokesman said: "Illegal migration is a Europeanwide problem. We are taking action and working with France. If people have need of protection, they should claim asylum in the first safe country they reach.
"If they are seeking to evade immigration control, they are risking their lives and will get caught."
q NO: 0901 792 5301 No text DXMONNO to 86611 YEs: 0901 792 5300 Yes text DXMONYEs to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight. Should Britain tighten its border controls as a matter of priority?
Document THEEXP0020140414ea4e00051
