{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"584"}
____
  
Features; Opinion Column
Nigella's easy ride a disgrace
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN   
619 words
6 April 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; Ulster
29
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
And the award for skirting the issue goes to... Michael McIntyre for turning his scintillating Nigella Lawson "interview" into a Saatchi-free zone.
As he nervously tiptoed around the only thing we wanted to hear her talk about, meek and mild Mike dared to disturb the universe with the killer question: "Have you felt the unbelievable amount of support you've had?"
Yes, the support of the American immigration guys must be a great source of comfort after they banned her from the land of the free following her cocaine confession.
And the unflinching support of her loyal fans as they came flocking to her smash Channel 4 flop The Taste was just the tonic she needed. Sometimes the ratings soared into three figures.
Treating her hopeless host's simpering enquiry with the contempt it deserved, Nigella replied: "If the major thing in your life is what people you don't know think, you're living your life wrong." She's right, of course.
In fairness, the likeable Ms Lawson was clearly prepared to discuss the past few marriageending months during which her carefully constructed Domestic Goddess image has been strangled to death.
Sadly, Mr McIntyre wasn't. It was his pivotal chance to prove he's got what it takes. And he blew it.
He's a gifted comedian. A born entertainer. No one expected a ruthless Paxman-style grilling. But the way he descended into shameless showbiz luvviedom was nothing short of pathetic.
After a series of dud guests and plummeting audience figures, The Michael McIntyre Chat Show was in trouble. Now it's flatlining.
The earth-shattering Nigella experience involved 10 mindless minutes of PR tosh about fudge and her latest cookbook before Michael finally delivered the big bombshell: "Where are you living at the moment?" Not with Mr C Saatchi, that's for damned sure.
Granted, most of us are aware that the Goddess's halo has slipped and - to say the least - she's been having a turbulent time of it lately.
But for unsuper-Mac not to even mention her restaurant incident, her court ordeal or her divorce was an unforgivable dereliction of duty. Instead, he resorted to shooting the messenger.
"You're at the centre of a media storm," he unnecessarily informed her. "And it's being fed by journalism. How does that feel?" Even though she is one, Nigella feels it's horrible to see journalists "being cruel about other people's misfortunes".
Yep, the scourge of journalism really hacks me off. It must be stopped. At all costs.
By now Michael was going all deep and meaningful on us. No laughing matter as the funnyman got serious and pondered the arduous business of being rich, famous and occasionally getting written about.
"It's so important," he began. "And it's hurtful, it's difficult but it's in the public domain. It's gossip, it's trivial and it's horrible to be part of. But you move on." Please do! Cheers for the sermon.
Thanks to Nigella's co-operative approach, a dire situation was just about salvaged. But this make-orbreak encounter emphatically established that as an ungrand inquisitor, McIntyre is a major mistake. A full-on failure.
Especially, when the Beeb is paying him an obscene half a million quid for six poor quality programmes. Oh how they love to waste our money.
And finally... if you thought the Lawson interview was bad, the one with Gary Barlow was awful.
"You look incredible!" gushed Uriah Mike. "Do you ever tire of hearing that?"
What's the word I'm looking for? Could it be tragic?
Document SMIRR00020140406ea46000kb
