{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3798"}
____
  
News
Foreigners work at flats owned by backer of UKIP's 'racist' posters
Dipesh Gadher; Tim Shipman; Paul Stokes   
811 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
THE millionaire businessman who is bankrolling UKIP's controversial poster campaign targeting immigration is the owner of a luxury apartment complex that employs Polish, Lithuanian and Portuguese workers.
Four out of 10 staff observed last week at the Residence 6 serviced apartments in Leeds city centre were foreign nationals.
The accommodation belongs to Paul Sykes, a property tycoon who recently joined Nigel Farage, UKIP's leader, to launch a series of anti-EU posters ahead of the European elections in May.
Opposition politicians branded the language and imagery as divisive and racist. The posters include an image of a giant finger pointing outwards beside the slogan: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?" Another poster portrays a builder begging on the street after apparently being laid off. It states: "EU policy at work. British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour."
The campaign is being paid for by Sykes, 70, at a cost of £1.5m. The fact that foreign staff are employed at one of his own businesses could leave him open to charges of hypocrisy.
Sykes owns Residence 6, which comprises 23 guest apartments in the historic Old Post Office building in Leeds, through a company called Highstone Group. It had assets in 2013 worth £254m according to accounts filed at Companies House.
Promotional material for the grade II listed complex says the flats are aimed at "the discerning business or leisure traveller", with features including hand-built kitchens, plasma televisions and a concierge service.
Guests trying to find a room at Residence 6 on the Booking.com website are told that staff speak Portuguese, Polish, Lithuanian and English. Just over a third of the employees seen on duty last week by The Sunday Times were from abroad.
Staff on the reception desk included a woman in her twenties from Lithuania and a woman from Poland who said she was unlikely to return to her home country after living in Britain for the past nine years.
Both are thought to have been employed at the complex for at least three years. Their manager, who is in charge of the concierge service, was said to be Portuguese.
One of the housekeeping staff, a man in his mid-thirties, was from Goa, a former Portuguese enclave in India. He said he had worked at Residence 6 when it first opened before he returned to the subcontinent.
He said he he had come back to Britain recently on a Portuguese passport and started work again at the apartments a month ago. The man said he missed his young family, but could earn more in the UK than in Goa.
Six other workers, including the property's general manager, appeared to be British.
The allure of the apartments — which boast Molton Brown toiletries — and the professionalism of its staff are reflected in guest reviews online. One said: "Excellent service from the staff, especially the girl on reception who was so helpful." Another wrote: "It was perfect, the hotel was spotless and the management and staff couldn't do enough for us."
When UKIP unveiled its poster campaign last week, Mike Gapes, a Labour MP, said he hoped the "racist" material would encourage "decent" people to vote for another party next month.
Farage has claimed that the posters are "a hard-hitting reflection of reality" and only the "chattering classes" would object.
Embarrassingly for UKIP, the "British builder" featured in the begging poster has been revealed as an Irish actor.
Last night it emerged that UKIP council candidates had made a string of offensive comments on social media, including one who suggested that Lenny Henry, who recently complained about a lack of diversity on television, "should emigrate to a black country".
This weekend Sykes said he was unaware that foreigners were working at Residence 6 until alerted to the fact by The Sunday Times, because it is run by a managing agent. "I didn't even know I did benefit [from such staff]," he said.
Sykes, who started his working life as a tyre-fitter before amassing a £ 650m fortune, said he did not know how much the staff were being paid, but denied they had been hired because they were cheaper than British workers. "We would never undercut the minimum wage," he said.
"I'm certainly not removing them. If they are good workers, if they are doing the job right, they deserve the job."
Sykes said UKIP wanted "controlled immigration" based on skills shortages rather than a complete stop to all labour movement across the EU. He warned that in Yorkshire "these people are just pouring in for reasons only they know and this unlimited immigration is going to end in catastrophe".
@dipeshgadher
Document ST00000020140427ea4r000oq
