{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1218"}
____
  
Features
CLEGG v FARAGE
Roland White   
624 words
23 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
3
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The deputy prime minister and the UKIP leader are to go head to head this week in the first of two debates on Europe. Roland White weighs their strengths and weaknesses
EU LINKS Spanish wife, lawyer Miriam Gonzalez Durantez. Worked as an official in the European Commission before serving for five years as MEP for the East Midlands. Mother is Dutch. Speaks five European languages.
IMAGE Looks and sounds like a popular young housemaster at an agreeable private school, but can turn into a sanctimonious vicar under pressure. "The more Clegg is rattled, the more unctuous he becomes," says a broadcaster who has interviewed both men.
STRENGTHS "He's initially quite enthralling," says Warwick Partington, managing director of MTM Skills Training, who specialises in media coaching. "He looks young, reasonably fresh, he smiles a lot. He looks the part, and comes across as a man with conviction who is speaking from the heart."
WEAKNESSES "His style gives away his ties to the upper-class, intellectual elite," says Partington. "Under pressure of cross-questioning he also falls into the trap of speaking too quickly. He blusters when asked about areas he is unsure on. Vocally he needs to develop better breath control as he often tails off in volume at the end of sentences, making even good news sound negative."
EXPECT TO HEAR "Leaving the EU would be economic suicide." Claims 3m British jobs depend on the EU because international companies use Britain as a base to reach European markets. Being part of the EU gives Britain a bigger voice on the world stage, and makes it easier to fight international crime and tackle climate change.
TACTICS TO AVOID Personal stories about meeting the public. They sound schmaltzy and we see right through them. So the Liberal Democrat leader should fight any temptation to repeat the ones he used in the general election debates about meeting a nurse in a short-staffed hospital, and a burglary victim.
EU LINKS His German wife, Kirsten, works as his personal assistant (paid for, controversially, by the European parliament). Is MEP for South East England. Can trace his roots back to the Huguenots — the Protestants who fled French persecution in the 16th century.
IMAGE Like watching a presentation by the sales manager of a medium-sized company. All that's missing is PowerPoint. "The more Farage is rattled, the more matey he becomes," says an interviewer. "He does the: yes, I know I'm surrounded by idiots but what can you do, eh?" STRENGTHS "In a one-to-one interview Farage often does well," says Partington. "His key messages are clear and simple and designed to appeal to his target audience of disgruntled middle England."
WEAKNESSES "Occasionally posture lets him down," says Partington. "He sits back in his chair or even slumps like a sullen teenager. In panel debates he butts in to opponents' answers or mutters comments in the background that are distracting and irritating. If Clegg wants to show him up he should ask what UKIP's detailed policies are and demand numbers and examples."
EXPECT TO HEAR UKIP says Britain would save £53m a day by leaving the EU and will regain control over immigration, business and employment, fishing, farming, law and order, energy and trade. The party wants an immediate referendum: should we be in or out of Europe? TACTICS TO AVOID According to the pollster Ipsos Mori, floating voters don't like attack-dog politics. So the UKIP leader should probably avoid a repeat of his 2010 speech to the European parliament when he berated Herman Van Rompuy, the EU president: "You have the charisma of a damp rag and the appearance of a low-grade bank clerk."
Document ST00000020140323ea3n00045
