{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3768"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
PM must steal Ukip's thunder
TREVOR Kavangh   
692 words
28 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
6
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
IF the polls showing Nigel Farage storming to victory in Europe are right, then we are all "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists" now.
One in three voters is ready to back Ukip — and that figure could soar further in the run-up to local and EU elections on May 22.
Many more agree with Farage's outspoken views on mass immigration and EU arrogance, even if they won't vote for him.
David Cameron regrets using such ripe terms to label Ukip voters — many of them ex-Tories — even though the evidence increasingly shows he was not far from the truth.
One racist Ukip candidate wants comedian Lenny Henry to go and live in "a black country" while another has branded Islam "organised crime under religious camouflage".
Nige himself is accused of using the N word, although he denies it.
Such outbursts might have torpedoed any other established party. Ukip seems to absorb them as valuable free publicity.
For the time being, voters no longer care what Ukip really represents, no matter how shady or objectionable.
They just relish this chance to give politicians a free kicking. Since discovering my MEP is a Lib Dem, I might do the same.
Ukip is now way ahead of the three major parties, with Tories trailing Labour in third place and Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg gloriously at risk of losing all his 12 Euro MPs.
Cabinet minister Jeremy Hunt yesterday admitted voters are "angry".
"They are right to be angry because we have just had the worst recession since the War," he said.
Protest parties There is plenty of good news around on jobs and economic growth, but the PM would be wrong to assume this is enough to make the Kippers go away.
Many unhappy Tories will vote Ukip next month then return to the Tory fold for next year's General Election.
But many will never come back, or they will cease voting altogether. Maverick Farage has caught the public mood against endless Brussels bullying. Europe and the scandal of mass immigration are inextricably linked in the public mind.
His forthright speeches make the three major parties look deceitful and insincere — especially Labour, which slyly opened the floodgates to FOUR MILLION newcomers in a single decade.
Indeed, the most astonishing poll finding is not Ukip racing ahead, but shameless Labour holding second place while refusing to give us a referendum.
Voters across Europe are increasingly resentful and turning to protest parties such as Ukip. One day, Red Ed will have to cave in.
Meanwhile, David Cameron needs to demonstrate in deeds, not words, that he "gets it".
So far he has talked a lot about changing the way Britain does business with Brussels. But his enemies within the Tory party claim they have seen little evidence he is ready for a showdown.
"David Cameron's biggest problem is complacency," says a senior minister.
"He leaves issues to fester and then has to scramble to repair damage that should have been avoided."
The worry for Mr Cameron is that a humiliating defeat on May 22 could stir rebellion within his own party on May 23.
Rebel Tory MPs can't wait to march into Downing Street with a list of demands on tax, welfare reform and a shake-up on human rights.
One Cabinet minister believes the right policies could still win the Tories an outright majority in 2015.
"It is like 1992, when John Major was behind in the polls right up to election day," he said. "People pulled back from the brink, but it was a close-run thing."
Chancellor George Osborne will be pressed to deliver his promise on inheritance tax.
Migrants might be made to wait three years for welfare — especially housing benefit.
The most outspoken rebels are in a minority. But their views are shared by many of the bright new MPs elected in 2010.
Mr Cameron's task is to stop opportunists striking for reform while the issue is hot and persuading moderate Right-wingers to hold fire until he has won — or lost — in 2015.
Document THESUN0020140428ea4s00099
