{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1217"}
____
  
Features
They're not going away
Camilla Cavendish   
1,053 words
23 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
42,43
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
UKIP has made all three of Britain's main parties jumpy; and with good cause, points out this insightful analysis
POLITICS
POLITICS
REVOLT ON THE RIGHT
Explaining Support for the Radical Right in Britain by ROBERT FORD and MATTHEW GOODWIN
Routledge £14.99/ebook £9.99 pp318
This is the book to arm yourself with for those dinner parties when the talk turns to politics and elections. The phenomenon that is UKIP has all three main parties rattled. And in Revolt on the Right, Matthew Goodwin and Robert Ford suggest that they are right to be worried: the governing elites have both underestimated and misunderstood UKIP.
For an academic study, this is a great read. But why wouldn't it be, given the hilarious and eccentric characters involved? Charting UKIP's unlikely rise to prominence, the book romps through a cast of colourful personalities including the billionaire Sir James Goldsmith, whose "rabble army" Referendum party polled much better than UKIP in the 1990s. There's perma-tanned Robert Kilroy-Silk, the television celebrity who lasted only nine months in UKIP before disappearing in what one activist called "a puff of vanity". There are various sightings of the BNP, from which UKIP sensibly took care to distance itself; and of UKIP stalwarts such as the MEP Godfrey Bloom, who has described women as "sluts".
The authors argue that UKIP's success is almost unrivalled in Britain, more impressive even than that of the Social Democrat party (SDP) that split Labour in the 1980s. The Gang of Four who founded the SDP (Roy Jenkins, David Owen, Shirley Williams and Bill Rodgers) were already national politicians. UKIP, by contrast, is a grassroots insurgency. Far from being a "tiny cluster of discontents bound together by a single, marginal issue", like most small protest parties, UKIP is "the first new movement with national reach since the emergence of the Labour party at the end of the 19th century".
Prominence was not assured. For its first 10 years, UKIP barely registered at elections. And it has had spectacular ups and downs, furious fallings-out between various intellectual leaders and wealthy donors taking fright. There is a wonderful scene in 2000 when a general meeting of 900 activists descends into virtual war, and Nigel Farage saves the day by grabbing the microphone and talking them all out of tearing up their memberships.
With hindsight, the use of proportional representation in the 1999 European elections was crucial. This was the first time a British national election had been fought using PR, giving smaller parties a better chance. This was when UKIP got its three MEPs — and 7% of the national vote. But the party slumped back again when the heat came off the Maastricht Treaty, and Europe slipped off the voter radar.
Another decisive moment came in 2005, when UKIP shrewdly rebranded itself as campaigning for independence not just from the EU but from the established political class, whether in Brussels or in Westminster. This meant taking a tough stance against immigration, which had by then risen to become the third most important issue for voters. "Farage's party now encourages voters to say 'no' three times," say the authors: "No to the Eurocrats in Brussels and Strasbourg; no to the politicians in Westminster; and no to immigration. This is not a grand ideological vision — there is no 'Farage-ism' — but it is a coherent and highly effective message."
UKIP is not, as is often thought, a party of disaffected Bufton Tuftons from the Tory shires. Although its voters do tend to be old white men, and many are Conservative, a lot are also working class. In fact, the author's study of almost 6,000 UKIP voters leads them to conclude that UKIP is the most working-class party since Michael Foot ran Labour in the 1980s.
The typical UKIP voter is someone who feels "left behind" by changes in society: immigration, the loss of manufacturing and static wages. He feels his concerns have been ignored by what Farage calls "the cardboard cutout careerists in Westminster". He resents the rise of the middle-class, graduate, professional elite. When Harold Wilson was elected in 1964, working-class voters outnumbered professional middle-class voters 2:1. Today, that ratio is 3:4. "The rise of the university-educated middle class has done more than just transform Britain's economic structure," say the authors. "It has changed the values that dominate in British society": from economic security and social stability, to things such as human rights and environmental protection.
This loathing of the political establishment explains why UKIP is building momentum under the most Eurosceptic, immigration-focused government in living memory. By the end of 2012, UKIP support in the polls had risen from 2% to more than 10%. They now have more than 30,000 members and are regularly polling ahead of the Liberal Democrats as the third most popular party.
A central message of the book is that while the Conservative party is currently feeling the most heat from UKIP, Labour cannot afford to be complacent. The authors have identified the 10 seats most likely to vote UKIP in 2015. Astonishingly, eight of these are Labour. Ed Miliband will be tempted to sit back and let UKIP divide the Conservative vote next year. But the authors warn him to think seriously about the working-class votes he may lose the next time around.
There are problems ahead for UKIP, however. The authors suggest that their Euroscepticism makes it hard for them to appeal to the mass electorate. UKIP holds no appeal for the young, women, ethnic minorities or the half of the electorate who do not share their hostility towards the EU.
Will this be enough to stop them? Last year, Farage said: "UKIP is not a pressure group. It is not a spin-off of the Conservative party. It is a new political force, and it is here to stay." The authors agree. Many hope that UKIP will peter out. This book suggests they should not bet on it.
Available at the Sunday Times Bookshop price of £13.49 (including p&p) and £9.99 (ebook) on 0845 271 2135
UKIP is the most working-class party since Foot ran Labour
Document ST00000020140323ea3n0002b
