{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"257"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
The EU debate must be realistic – and honest
483 words
12 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
19
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
Next week, the country will go the polls to elect its representatives to the European Parliament for the next five years. In truth, however, it would come as a surprise if much more than one third of the electorate bothers to vote. Although a large proportion of our laws start life in Brussels, it is tempting to dismiss the importance of the parliament; indeed few of us can even identify our MEP.
Yet the parliament does matter because it can influence and instigate some policy initiatives; and the parties for the first time have the power to nominate a candidate to run the commission, though a final decision is still a matter for the Council of Ministers.
Although disgruntled voters in many countries use the European elections as an opportunity to register a mid–term protest against whichever domestic government is in office at the time, these contests take place against a backdrop of renewed debate about the EU's future. The Daily Telegraph will this week, both in the newspaper and online, explore many of the relevant issues, beginning today with James Kirkup's analysis of the impact of European immigration on the UK.
The free movement of people is a fundamental principle of the EU and, as David Cameron said yesterday, it enables British people to settle and work in member states just as much as the other way round. However, the rapid changes wrought in some communities by high levels of migration, especially from eastern Europe, is a concern that Ukip is exploiting in its campaign to top the poll next week.
The only guaranteed way in which the UK would be able to prevent EU citizens entering the country would be to leave, which is not the policy of any of the mainstream political parties. However, Mr Cameron, in his interview with Andrew Marr on the BBC, said he was determined to get a better deal for Britain before staging an in/out referendum on membership in 2017 should he win the general election.
Gradually, the prime minister is beginning to set out the areas for negotiation, which include making it harder for migrants to claim the dole, stop child benefit being sent to families living across the EU, a guarantee that Britain will never be forced to join the euro and an exemption from the federalist aim of "ever closer union".
But Mr Cameron needs to be clear and realistic about the chances of success – and also about the limits of his ambitions. The overriding reason for the cynicism that will ensure a poor turn–out next week is that voters are fed up being promised reforms that can't be delivered or told things that turn out not to be true. One thing this debate needs above all is honesty.
Document DT00000020140512ea5c0005r
