{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2598"}
____
  
Features
Truth on immigrant cost
517 words
18 March 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
43
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
£50 LETTER
A REPORT from Migration-Watch UK says immigration has been costing £22million a day.
No doubt the Government will ridicule these findings but I for one will never again believe a word that comes from a politicians' lips. Our MPs have an I'm Alright Jack attitude.
TERENCE ROBINSON By email
AT last MigrationWatch UK has come up with the real cost of mass immigration.
Anyone who lives in areas of high immigration was already aware the majority of immigrants are on lower wages and are therefore benefits-dependent. They rely on tax credits as well as child benefit and housing benefit.
This, along with their dependence on the NHS and state schools, means it was illogical for the pro-immigration lobby to suggest they were net contributors to the UK economy.
ROY ADAMS By email
SO immigration has cost the UK £148billion in 16 years.
This is an extortionately wasteful amount of money.
Meanwhile my grandmother is refused drugs by the NHS which will help her Alzheimer's because they are too costly.
VAMELIA BARNES By email
I CAN'T believe that One Direction offered free tickets to fans who sign up to a scheme to lobby Chancellor George Osborne not to cut the foreign aid budget after The Sun for free bet. 1 winner with 2015.
It's OK for Harry Styles, pictured, and his bandmates. They are millionaires.
There is poverty in Great Britain.
Why should the Government cut services and benefits in this country, making the poor poorer, while sending money abroad? It doesn't make sense.
It's about time David Cameron and Osborne stopped overseas aid and gave British people the money they need.
IAN NICHOLSON By email
One Direction — young spoilt kids who hope we keep giving £11billion away to aid foreign countries.
They're having a laugh. Let them give their own money away
TERRY KEYLOCK By email
WITH a bank CEO having a salary of £3.5million a year, a footballer on £300,000 a week and a celebrity paid £1.5million for appearing on a trivial TV show, is it any wonder the youth of today are not interested in the mundane jobs on offer?
ERNEST MUNDY By email
JANE MOORE says "nagging" is used only in relation to women and if a man does it the label is "constructive comment". This is very sexist. When a man does it he is seen as controlling.
I would rather it was labelled nagging.
RONNIE BIGGS By email
WELL done to Aberdeen on winning the League Cup.
OK, so it wasn't a great game of football, but the Dons' fans have waited long enough for some silverware, so I'm sure they don't mind how they got it.
JAMES PATERSON Dundee
TEAMS in red did well at the weekend — even Russia looked like it got a result.
TOMMY CONNOR Glasgow
THANK you to The Sun for my Cheltenham free bet.
I backed a 33-1 winner with Hawk High so thank you very much, my Sun.
RAYMOND BOYD By email
Document THESUN0020140318ea3i000dz
