{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1542"}
____
  
Editorial
Keep it up, Nigel: voters love it when you're a wild animal
ROD LIDDLE   
683 words
16 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
23
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Iwonder what animals are allowed to run amok in the London headquarters of the United Kingdom Independence party. It would be terribly disappointing if it were only something like dogs. According to a former HQ worker the place is a menagerie of animals and naked people, all cavorting in a sort of pantheistic ritual. Most animals are right-wing in temperament, of course, although they rarely choose to express those views in terms of party membership.
Weasels and other mustelidae are nailed-on certs for the BNP: you can see it in their pinched and unforgiving faces. My guess, though, is that the animals in question at UKIP are beasts from the compendiums of myth and legend — almost certainly satyrs or centaurs — hairy and lustful creatures, committed to hedonism and an immediate cap on immigration. I can imagine them now, rampaging through the offices, knocking over the golf clubs.
It wouldn't be unicorns, obviously. They are so Lib Dem, unicorns. Epicene and extinct.
This former UKIP staffer wasn't the only person to shed light on the goings-on at the 19th hole, otherwise known as Farage Central. The other was the leader's German-born wife, Kirsten Farage, who described the place as a "freak show". It all sounds terribly exciting, don't you think? Kirsten has also revealed that whenever England play Germany at football, Nigel barks out the song Two World Wars and One World Cup (doo-dah, doo-dah) at her, shortly before we lose. Maybe he also does that Dambusters song that the England fans like so much. Who knows, he may even jab his finger at Kirsten and sing: "You're going home in an ambulance" — we can't be sure one way or the other. But you would pay good money to be a fly on the wall, wouldn't you? And now Kirsten has to put up with media rumours of Nigel's alleged infidelity. According to that intellectual colossus Godfrey Bloom MEP, who has recently had the party whip withdrawn, Nigel is "partial to crumpet". What a pleasure it is to hear the word "crumpet" used in that most fragrant of senses — incidentally, for the first time since a 1972 episode of Steptoe and Son, the one where young Harold has "pulled a bird", to his father's disdain.
Anyway, the allegation is that Farage has had a bit of how's your father, as UKIP members might put it, with a minxtastic former UKIP worker called Annabelle Fuller. It is alleged that on more than one occasion they may have had it off. Nigel denies everything, although Kirsten has said, rather ominously, that she is going to discuss the matter with him. I just hope it doesn't end with Nigel shouting "Back of the net" in jubilation.
We know that Farage has form — some eight years ago he apparently copped off with an attractive Latvian journo babe called Liga Howells — and she complained about his snoring once her pine-clad and pristine Baltic shoreline had been successfully breached. Nigel on that occasion denied everything except the snoring. You have to like the man, no? Are women really Farage's Achilles heel, as has been suggested? Does any of this matter? I don't suppose Harriet Harman will vote for him, but than I doubt very much that she'd have been that way inclined before these latest revelations. Truth is, the mainstream parties are scared stiff of Farage.
The latest report suggests he has a unique appeal to some 30% of the electorate — including a good many Labour voters — who have come to believe that the three main parties are a remote and aloof elite, indifferent to their concerns.
This is especially marked among working-class voters. The suggestion that UKIP's leader might, from time to time, play the field will not remotely dissuade that constituency from voting for him.
Ah, so he's flawed; aren't we all? At least he's human.
Document ST00000020140316ea3g000mb
