{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1956"}
____
  
NEWS
Travellers hit by airport delays after computer glitch
By Keith Perry and agencies   
448 words
30 April 2014
20:40
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Air passengers across the country reported problems at passport control desks, mostly affecting those trying to enter the country
Thousands of airline passengers faced disruption last night after an IT glitch resulted in long queues at immigration desks.
Delays started building up at airport terminals across the country after a fault on UK Border Force computers on Wednesday afternoon. Extra staff were drafted in to try and reduce the queues.
Passengers across the country reported problems at passport control desks, mostly affecting those trying to enter the country. The problem had a particular impact on non-EU airline customers.
A Heathrow spokesman said: "There are some longer queues than normal in the terminals, but we have spoken to border force and they are putting on extra staff.
"Obviously we want to sort the issue out but not risk the integrity of the border controls."
A Birmingham Airport spokesman said: "We are aware (of the glitch) and the impact it is having at the moment.
"It appears to be getting progressively worse but we are hoping it will be sorted out soon."
At Gatwick, a spokesman added: "We are experiencing similar (problems) to the rest of the airports, and we are working to get people through.
"People should be able to get off the plane, it is those coming through the immigration process which it is frustrating."
The spokesman said there should not be any delays to flights leaving UK airports.
Chris Hyland, a 32-year-old company director from Islington in north London, said international passengers had been told to expect a wait of up to four hours.
He said: "We landed from Geneva at 5.20pm but it took until 6.40pm for us to get through passport control.
"It's an absolute nightmare. We've been told there is an IT failure but that's it.
"You would have thought there would be a back-up plan."
Mr Hyland said non-EU passengers are preparing for a long wait to officially enter the country.
He said: "It is very frustrating. Nobody is really saying anything.
"The international queue is pretty huge, so people have already started sitting down because they know they will be there for a long, long time."
A Government spokesman said: "We are currently experiencing temporary IT problems which may add to the time taken to conduct passport checks.
"We are working to rectify this issue and are providing extra staff to get passengers through the controls as quickly as possible. Our priority remains security of the border.
"We apologise for any additional time this adds to passengers' journeys."
Document TELUK00020140430ea4u004bl
