{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3603"}
____
  
News
My gang will set the clergy straight on benefits
Harriet Sergeant   
837 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
25
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The attack on welfare reform by our leading clerics verges on immoral, says Harriet Sergeant
The bishops and the prime minister were eyeballing each other last week over how the state treats the poor. It is about time that politics considered morality. The question is: whose morality? One set of beliefs has become the measure by which a person, a policy or a political party is judged, and it is that of Labour and the left.
It is these beliefs that the newly capped Cardinal Vincent Nichols, leader of the Roman Catholic Church in England and Wales, champions. It is right that he and the 27 Anglican bishops, together with the Methodist and Quaker leaders, raised their concerns about the danger of benefit reform creating malnutrition and a "national crisis". My quarrel is with their selectivity.
Morality should be about independent thought and hard-fought principles — especially among the clergy, whose business it is. What we have here is the church coming out for the liberal establishment without a quibble. For a refresher course on morality the clergy should turn instead to those most reliant on the state.
For the past five years I have befriended a south London gang. Far from the helping hand envisaged by William Beveridge, these young men see the welfare state as a clunking fist designed to beat them down. They define it as "a liability" that holds you back, rather than "a link" that helps you on in life.
This starts with their education. One in five pupils leaves a British secondary school functionally illiterate. What does the clergy think happens to young people who can barely read a Tube map? Half of all prisoners have a reading age of 11 or below. It is not surprising that the young men in the gang looked on their poor education as a conspiracy to keep them impoverished and dependent on the state. Here surely is the stuff of moral outrage yet our clergy remains silent.
When the gang members try to get unskilled work — the only type for which they are qualified — they find themselves in competition with better-qualified immigrants, who have not had the drawback of a British state education. Where is the moral outrage from the clergy on behalf of the 917,000 under-25s out of work? In fact, where was the moral outrage from the clergy when immigration rose dramatically under the last Labour government to the detriment of the poorest in this country — many of them former immigrants themselves or their children? The clergy appears to have colluded in the belief that it is better to let foreign workers in than risk reforming the benefits system. But this is a benefits system that penalises work and has sidelined generations of young men such as those in my gang.
Take what happened when the older brother of one member of the south London gang succeeded in getting a minimum-wage job. After paying emergency tax he found himself almost a third worse off than when he was on benefits and was summoned to court for council tax arrears. After narrowly avoiding prison he will never dare work again.
There is a chance, and surely a chance worth taking, that benefit reform would transform the lives of such young men. But it does take political and moral courage. The clergy is right to flag up the dangers but wrong to ignore the chance of doing real good. What will be on offer in your nearest church today? No doubt platitudes about social exclusion, without a grasp of what causes it, followed by prayers for teachers and refugees. The clergy's morality has a limited quality and operates only in an area that sits comfortably within its prejudices.
The very public rebuke from the clergy and the archbishop has at least highlighted what may well be the legacy of this government: the bravery and determination of Michael Gove and Iain Duncan Smith, both churchgoers, to confront and reverse the accepted thinking on poverty, education and benefits. As for my gang members, after a particularly frustrating day trying to get them on a literacy course, I lost my temper. They were astonished. Had I really not known how the state entrapped them? They assumed that everyone, meaning white middle-class taxpayers, knew and colluded. It was obvious to them what the welfare state was for — a conspiracy to stop the black man getting on, while providing jobs for social workers, probation officers, jobcentre staff and prison officers. As one said: "You want to better yourself but they stop you. Where is the morality in it? There is none. You are just there to feed the system and that's it."
Here at least he was on common ground with the archbishop, who, after berating David Cameron, mused: "There must be something wrong with the administration of a system which has that effect on so many people's lives."
Document ST00000020140223ea2n000n1
