{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"421"}
____
  
News
Judge quits over living with illegal immigrant
Anil Dawar   
425 words
11 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Lancs
17
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
AN immigration judge has been forced to quit after it emerged he was supporting an illegal migrant.
Richard McKee, 65, stepped down after law chiefs discovered he had been living with Nigerian Fatima Umar, 39, who had overstayed her visa.
The Lord Chief Justice's office confronted him after Umar was arrested for smashing up the home she once shared with Mr McKee in Kilburn, north-west London.
She is currently serving two eight-week terms for assaulting two policemen and causing damage estimated at £5,000 to Mr McKee's basement flat.
Wounding The former judge retired on February 4 - less than a week after the incident - after admitting providing Umar financial support.
He is expected to pick up a full judicial pension of £50,000 a year. Umar faces deportation once her sentence is up.
It emerged that she was also jailed in 2011 for assaulting Mr McKee. Last year, he was reprimanded after police revealed they had investigated "unlawful activities" carried out by "others" at his address.
Mr McKee was one of three judges named two years ago for allowing 26 foreign criminals to avoid deportation because of their "right to a family life".
He ruled in favour of 11 migrant offenders in 13 cases between 2011 and 2012. Those who benefited included failed African asylum seeker Wabi Longange, found guilty of causing death by careless driving, and Algerian illegal immigrant Amar Chennaoui, 43, allowed to stay even though he was jailed for two-and-a-half years for unlawful wounding.
Mr McKee's case prompted outrage last night. Euro MP Gerard Batten said: "It is unbelievable that a judge whose job is to defend the UK's borders has been helping someone who has no right to be here. Not only that, he is walking away with a full pension."
Legal experts said it is a crime to employ an illegal immigrant but it is not an offence to give them money.
Conduct A judiciary spokesman said: "On 31 January 2014 it was brought to the Chamber President's attention that Upper Tribunal Judge McKee was providing financial support to a person who was alleged to be an immigration offender.
"This was put to Mr McKee, who then retired with effect from February 4."
As the incident was a conduct matter rather than a professional one, there will be no investigation.
Barrister Mr McKee, an immigration adjudicator since 2000, said yesterday: "I am sorry but I really can't say anything."
Document THEEXP0020140311ea3b0000w
