{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"43"}
____
  
News
COMMENTARY
363 words
25 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
7
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
Chris McGovern Chairman of the Campaign For Real Education
MOST people in Britain agree that discrimination is abhorrent. Whether it be on the grounds of race, religion, sexual orientation, gender, disability or age, we rightly outlaw it.
The Government's website on "Crime, justice and the law" states: "It is against the law to discriminate against anyone because of...race including colour, nationality, ethnic or national origin."
It adds: "You're protected from discrimination…in education."
What, then, are we to make of a decision by a Leeds school to discriminate against children who are native speakers of English? They apparently make up 15 per cent of all pupils in a school that has children from more than 50 different countries.
Clearly, the school faces a problem in having to educate so many children whose first language is not English.
Sensibly enough, its solution is to introduce lessons in English as a foreign language for these non–native speakers.
What comes as a surprise is that native speakers of English are also required to attend these particular lessons.
In other words, all children are to be treated equally and the needs of all of them are to be met – with the exception of those who are native speakers of English.
They will be treated as non–native speakers on the grounds, it seems, that this will make things more manageable for the school, even if it is not in the interests of the pupils concerned.
What clearer example could there be of discrimination against a school's ethnic minority? Yes, of course non–English speakers need to be properly provided for. Most will be immigrant children who, invariably, have an excellent work ethic and make rapid progress. But it is unfair if their progress comes at the expense of native speakers.
I have taught English both to pupils who are learning it as a foreign language and to native speakers. The process is very different.
The needs of non–native speakers are best met by giving them six to 12 months of intensive English language tuition so they can move from partial to full integration into the school's whole curriculum.
Document THEEXP0020140325ea3p0004v
