{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1976"}
____
  
Editorial
Britain has Just done a great thing. Why the silence?
Ben Jackson   
439 words
30 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
24
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
THUNDERER
After 25 years of arguing the case for aid, I was hoping to see some celebrations this month. Why? Because Britain became the first major nation to spend 0.7 per cent of gross national income on aid. This is a historic achievement and should be a source of national pride.
So why am I finding the cheers so deafening by their absence? Have campaigners and politicians been cowed by tabloid headlines such as those urging aid be diverted from Somalia to Somerset?
NGOs and political leaders of the major parties (who all backed the 0.7 per cent target in their manifestos) need to defend the aid budget from populist onslaughts. While aid is not always perfect, it is so much better spent today than 20 years ago. In 1994 I led World Development Movement's campaign to unmask Margaret Thatcher's secret pledge of £234 million of aid for the uneconomic Pergau Dam in Malaysia. It was a sweetener for an arms deal. That wouldn't be possible today. Through the UK government's aid transparency guarantee, UK taxpayers as well as citizens of aidreceiving countries can increasingly see exactly how the money is spent.
People with the inclination to look beyond the scare stories can see that British aid provides immunisations, life-saving aid to people in crisis and access to education and clean water. It also builds for the long-term by backing women's empowerment and by helping national governments to build better health, education and tax collection systems.
In other ways too, it is in our interest to help to shape what happens in the world. Violent extremism, illegal immigration, climate change and rising food prices are not problems we can address by acting only within our borders. Aid focused on tackling poverty and nurturing civil society can play an important part in tackling the root causes behind such challenges.
Of course, aid is not the only flow of money into poor countries — in many countries it's increasingly overtaken by private capital flows and remittances. But in a world in which nearly one in eight people go to bed hungry there is still much to do. For all of us concerned in creating a stable as well as a more equitable world, our job is far from complete. But we are making progress. It is just weird that no one wants to shout about it.
Ben Jackson is CEO of Bond, the network of development NGOs
Transparency means it's much harder for aid to be used corruptly
Document T000000020140430ea4u0009p
