{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"919"}
____
  
News
You want tougher immigration controls? Prepare to queue for them
By Benedict Brogan   
1,062 words
3 May 2014
18:11
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Earlier this week travellers coming through London's major airports had a horror of a time because of a problem with the computer that reads passport details. Border Force staff manning the desks had to enter the information of arriving passengers manually, which meant queues lasting hours, which in turn meant anger, frustration, mayhem on Twitter and pictures flooding the internet of passengers herded like cattle down corridors at Heathrow and elsewhere. News reports were rich with colourful commentary from those trapped by the problem.
I was reminded of the story on Thursday as I stood on the ramps overlooking the Channel Tunnel terminal outside Folkestone, watching the shuttles set off one after another carrying lorries and cars towards France. I was there to report on the Tunnel's 20th anniversary, and you can read my report and see the accompanying video here. A Thursday in May is a low-key day for the Chunnel, but there was plenty of traffic, and lorries queued to get in to their special pen. Any Telegraph reader who has used the Tunnel for a holiday break will know what it's like on the first days when the schools break up, or on bank holiday weekends. And those returning from their gites on the other side of the Channel will know about the hours of waiting to enter the terminal on the French side on a balmy late August evening as the Brits head home. Hang about the newsagent at either end and you will see a lot of Daily Telegraphs (and Daily Mails and Suns and even Daily Expresses) being bought by those waiting for their turn to drive onto the shuttle. It's only a hunch, but I suspect quite a few of those travellers are of a conservative bent, possibly Tories or Ukippers. And – again, just a hunch – I suspect many of them, if not a majority, have quite strong views about immigration, whether it's the illegals hiding in the scrubland in and around Calais looking for a lorry to sneak onto, or the European citizens who have, entirely legally, come to Britain to find work and even now hold the countless service jobs that keep the country ticking over.
What is certainly true is that anyone who has spent time trapped in the queues at either end of the Tunnel on a busy travel day will have witnessed the outbursts of anger from British travellers (85pc of the traffic is from the UK) who don't like having to wait one bit, and, after a few hours of stewing with grumpy kids in the family car are more than happy to give a spot of the hairdryer to Eurotunnel and Border Force staff. I wonder if they know it's about to get a whole lot worse?
The new Immigration Bill being proposed by Theresa May includes a provision to require exit checks. This means that not only will Border Force staff have to check all passports when anyone enters the UK, but they will now have to check them whenever someone leaves. And by checking I mean taking hold of it, comparing the picture to your face, studying the document AND putting it through the scanner thingy that records the information it contains. Now, you might say that's a brilliant idea. After all, haven't we banged on for ages about Labour dropping embarkation controls, and the fact that we don't have a way of counting people in and out to give us an idea of how many people are here? Of course. But go back to all those Telegraph readers, all those conservative folk who, understandably but possibly unconsciously, have become accustomed to what the Europeans call the "free movement of peoples". What's more, they have come to appreciate the way modern technology has made things faster and easier. At the Tunnel, for example, cameras and computers now read number plates as a vehicle approaches the terminal, so there is no need to type in anything, and one can just zip through check-in – only to crash into the queues of the manually-controlled border point. The French, and other European forces, do it differently. They rely on intelligence-led policing and controls. They don't worry about discriminating. They think nothing of yanking the car full of young bearded Asian men from the queue for example, while leave the white family of four with bicycles on the roof free to go through. On our side we fear discrimination, and prefer to be thorough. And slower.
Most of this is about politics. David Cameron, under pressure from his right, and the press, and Ukip, has promised to do something about immigration. So far he is failing, and so is trying even harder. The experts of course say there are other ways of doing things that don't require checking every single passport, if what matters is national security. But of course that's not what matters to Mr Cameron. What matters to him is not being outflanked by Ukip or shouted at by the Telegraph, Mail, Sun and Express. Then there's the Border Force, which has been reformed, changed, had money taken away, and is now demoralised and politically angry. I know for example that Eurotunnel bosses are frequently incensed because on the days when traffic is highest they are more likely to be told that staff are sick or – ironic, this – on holiday themselves. The sick-rate in the Border Force is noticeably higher than among Eurotunnel employees, which tells you something.
Mr Cameron wants exit checks in place before the election. There's a great debate underway about the means. Will there be funding for more staff? Will the Government allow the use of face recognition technology? Will local managers be allowed flexibility to deal with crowds and use intelligence discrimination on checks? Who knows. But it is one of the fascinating paradoxes of our time: we have demanded tougher immigration controls. We are gradually getting them. And you know what? We are going to have to queue for them. I wonder if the people lining the corridors at Heathrow and the lanes at the Channel Tunnel have an inkling that they have got what they wished for.
Document TELUK00020140503ea5300335
