{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1577"}
____
  
News
Wrong arm of the law
507 words
27 March 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
51
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
£50 LETTER
I CAN'T believe they are going to enshrine Sharia law in our legal system.
This is bad news for Britain. What is the Law Society thinking? It is going to cause so many problems in the future and goes against everything we stand for. I'm sure a vote would see most Brits against this.
BOB HEINSEN Walton-on-the-Naze, Essex
OUR Government and our Law Society have completely lost the plot.
To enshrine Sharia law in UK law is wrong. We have been made to change our way of life to appease immigrants. We are now changing our laws.
BRIAN LEA Nottingham
IF I were to go and live in a Muslim country, I'd be expected to follow their laws. And they should be expected to do likewise in our country.
We cannot afford to go backwards.
JOYCE FISHLOCK Cranfield, Beds
HOW disgraceful that this has been secretly sneaked through. We did not ask these people to come here with their archaic laws.
British women who fought for equality are at risk of being flung back into the past by a bunch of women-haters. If you don't like our Western ways, then leave.
ROBERT BLACKMORE Bristol
WHAT does the Law Society, led by Nicholas Fluck, pictured, think it is doing?
We have the finest and fairest laws in the world. If people from other ethnic groups don't agree with our laws, tough.
They are welcome to go back to their homelands if they feel hard done by. Our laws help protect EVERYONE.
MARTIN LOCKHART By email
AS reported in The Sun, moves to enshrine Sharia law into our legal system are a no-go. It's multiculturalism gone mad. We are a Christian nation with our own set of laws and that's the way it should stay.
KEN CHAPMAN Alfreton, Derbys
UNLESS we, as a society who believe in equality, stand up for the right under British law for Islamic women to be treated with respect and fairness, we will be as guilty as the gunman who shot schoolgirl Malala Yousafzai for defending her right to learn.
ANNE RUTHERFORD Doncaster, S York
I'M disgusted at the cruel way bosses of Malaysian flight MH370 sent texts to relatives telling them the plane was lost, with no survivors.
Many relatives were waiting at Kuala Lumpur Airport. Couldn't they have been taken to a side-room, then given the tragic news? This has been handled very badly.
JOHN BAILEY Surbiton, Surrey
IT is scandalous how the whole tragedy of the missing passenger plane has been managed. A lot more questions need to be answered. This is starting to look like a massive, mishandled cover-up.
SYD VAUGHAN Birmingham
GEORGE OSBORNE wants to reward hard workers with the opportunity to own their own home.
Could he list banks and building societies that will lend to people on minimum wage or zero-hours contracts? It won't take long.
MEL STEER Crawley, W Sussex
Document THESUN0020140327ea3r0007e
