{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2433"}
____
  
Editorial
The Lib Dems are a Goldilocks party or they are nothing
Stephen Tall   
450 words
14 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
18
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
THUNDERER
Jeremy Browne is on the hunt for "a bold, ambitious liberal party". The Liberal Democrat MP does not believe his own party quite cuts it, pointedly criticising Team Clegg as "an illdefined moderating centrist party" in a Times interview this weekend.
Fired as home office minister by his leader six months ago, Mr Browne's initial response was properly liberal: he grew a beard. Then he did something more indelible: he wrote a book, Race Plan, published last week.
It is a full-throated rallying cry for the Lib Dems to return to "authentic liberalism": the 19th-century Gladstonian ideal of a low-tax economy and pared down state, of a Britain chock-full of pioneering entrepreneurs, a self-confident and engaged world power.
His proposals are distinctly Thatcherite — school vouchers, insurance-funded healthcare, payment-by-results — though his pro-immigration enthusiasm would have fallen foul of the Iron Lady's fear that Britain "might be rather swamped by people with a different culture".
I have good news for Mr Browne.
The party of his dreams exists. It is pro-globalisation, state-sceptic, intensely relaxed about private profit, freedom-loving, advocating tax cuts, deregulation and deficit reduction.
But I also have some bad news.
This party is in Germany: it's the FDP.
Even worse, after its last experience of coalition with a centre-right, larger party, Angela Merkel's Christian Democrats, it was obliterated from the German parliament.
That's the problem with Race Plan: it doesn't explain how free-market purity will build a party that's attractive to the electorate. He rightly dismisses those who regard the Lib Dem identity as little more than "socialism plus civil liberties". Yet he fails to show how "Thatcherism plus immigration" will be a vote-winner.
In contrast, Team Clegg's strategy is clear: for the Lib Dems to be seen as a "well-defined moderating centrist party". It doesn't excite party activists, who would like nothing better than to campaign as radical liberals. But in reality it's because we are reckoned to be the fair-minded, Goldilocks party (not too hot, not too cold) that people vote for us.
If the Lib Dems are to continue as a party of government, there will be no alternative but to do a deal next year either with the right-leaning Tories or left-leaning Labour. We'll fight 2015 from the moderate centre because there's no other position from which we can credibly fight it.
Stephen Tall is co-editor of Liberal Democrat Voice
'Thatcherism plus immigration' will never be a vote-winner
Document T000000020140414ea4e00008
