{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"272"}
____
  
Observer Home News Pages
Front: Voters can't name their MEP
by Julian Coman and Toby Helm   
518 words
11 May 2014
The Observer
OB
1
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
Only one in 10 UK voters say they can name a member of the European parliament in their region, and even fewer have ever contacted one, according to a new poll that highlights widespread public disengagement with the EU.
The Opinium/Observer survey, conducted a fortnight before European elections later this month, shows that people are five times more likely to be able to name their local MP than any of their MEPs.
Just 11% say they would be confident of naming one of their MEPs, against 52% who say they could name their MP and 31% who could name one of their local or county councillors. Just 8% say they have made contact with an MEP, while 79% say they have never considered doing so.
While there is clearly a low level of engagement with MEPs, the poll shows that more people (43%) think the European parliament is important in the way Britain is governed than those who think it is unimportant (37%).
With turnout in the European elections likely to be low - in 2009 it was just 34% - the findings will alarm members of the EU establishment who fear that voter apathy and lack of involvement with the European project is allowing anti-EU forces such as Nigel Farage's Ukip to gain a bigger foothold in the European parliament.
Today a special Observer report shows anti-EU sentiment is also on the rise throughout the continent. Brussels is braced for a historic breakthrough for Eurosceptic parties in this month's elections, as polls across the EU show they could obtain as much as 30% of the vote and up to 200 MEPs.
The Front National leads French polls, having campaigned on a platform of withdrawal from the euro and a crackdown on immigration. The party's leader, Marine Le Pen, and the Dutch far-right populist Geert Wilders are hoping to form a new anti-EU alliance of at least seven parties within the European parliament.
The grouping could include the Flemish nationalists of Vlaams Belang and the Italian separatists of the Northern League. Meanwhile, the Italian comic Beppe Grillo's grassroots Five Star Movement, which is campaigning for an Italian referendum on the euro, is on course to win 25% of the vote and send more than 20 MEPs to the Strasbourg parliament. In the last European elections in 2009, Ukip won 13 seats and could double that number in these elections with a share of the vote that could be as high as 30%.
In today's report on the rise of Euroscepticism, the celebrated Italian satirist and playwright Dario Fo backs Grillo's calls for a referendum on the single currency.
Guy Verhofstadt, the former Belgian prime minister and leader of the Liberal group in Strasbourg, told the Observer: "You will see a kind of victory for the Eurosceptics in the election. But that will hopefully lead to the emergence of a pro-European electorate and eventually to the new leap forward that we need."
Document OB00000020140512ea5b0001u
