{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1792"}
____
  
NEWS
Illegal immigrant abducted and raped teenager after officials failed to deport him
499 words
23 April 2014
12:20
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Illegal immigrant Hamidullah Hamidi is jailed after court hears he abducted and raped a 14-year-old girl a month after officials failed to deport him
An illegal immigrant dragged a 14-year-old girl with learning difficulties off the street and raped her a month after officials failed to deport him, a court heard.
Afghan Hamidullah Hamidi, 19, was smuggled out of his home country by his mother and entered Britain illegally as a young boy.
But just a month after officials tracked him down to his home and ordered him out of the country, he lured a "vulnerable" girl with money and attacked her.
His victim – who has the mental capacity of a seven-year-old – managed to escape with her attacker in pursuit.
She was helped by a member of the public who flagged down a police car, and Hamidi – who initially denied the attack – was arrested three days later.
Jailing him for six years at Bristol Crown Court, Judge Michael Longman said Hamidi would be deported from Britain halfway through his sentence.
He said: "Your victim was just 14 when you raped her. She was plainly an extremely vulnerable girl."
He added: "When she was able to leave and make off, you followed her until you were stopped from doing so. You caused her severe psychological harm."
The court heard Hamidi was smuggled out of Afghanistan by his mother to prevent him being recruited by the Taliban, and was raised by a foster family in Britain.
He was given limited leave to stay in the country – which he exceeded – leading to a warrant being issued to have him deported.
Giles Nelson, prosecuting, said he was classed as an "overstayer" and was supposed to leave the UK last November – with attempts to deport him made at his home that month.
But he was still in the country on December 8 when he approached his victim when she left a shop in Bristol.
After the attack she managed to escape from the property and approached a member of the public in a distressed state.
Hamidi, 19, of Easton, Bristol, pleaded guilty to one count of rape in court.
Stephen Mooney, defending, said his client was still appreciating "the enormity of what he has done".
He added: "He has thrown away all that he has in this country."
Speaking outside court, Detective Constable Chris Shaw of Avon and Somerset Police said: "This is a particularly distressing incident in which Hamidi coerced a young and vulnerable girl into going back to his home, where he raped her.
"He acted in a predatory fashion in approaching the victim as she left a local shop and used money as a means of persuading her to go his home address.
"The fact he has admitted the offence shows the weight of evidence against him and at least spares the victim from having to relive this incident in the courtroom."
Document TELUK00020140423ea4n00265
