{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2133"}
____
  
News
Our political masters are horrified by Ukip. Trouble is, the voters aren’t
By Sean Thomas   
745 words
17 May 2014
12:44
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
You can almost hear the screams from Westminster, can’t you? Every time Nigel Farage opens his mouth, the combined political classes of Primrose Hill and Holland Park react like a chorus of flashed spinsters, exposed to the hairy buttocks of a drunken navvy. Oh my word, he’s done it again! Someone stop him! Help!
But it’s a funny thing, this metropolitan fainting fit induced by anything connected to Ukip. To me it seems overdone; to me it suggests there are deeper psychological forces at work. After all, Ukiphave yet to win a single MP at Westminster. So why do they invoke all these bladder-bursting conniptions in the chatterati?
Opinion formers would have it that Ukip’s opinions are the problem; i.e. the party is a bunch of crypto-fascists, the BNP with polished brogues, a bus-load of “loonies, fruitcakes and closet racists” (according to the PM). Therefore these barely concealed bigotries need to be exposed, by the scandalised elite, so the proles can react with proper aversion, and go back to dutifully voting Lib, Lab and Con.
But what are these appalling Kipper opinions, polices and personalities which so affront the Top Ten Thousand?
First, the people. There’s no doubt that Ukipdoes attract a few crazies and extremists. But then, all political parties do that, indeed I’d suggest that, for most citizens, the mere act of joining a political party – any party – is the act of a dubious nerd with narcissism issues, so Ukipare hardly unique. Furthermore, Ukip– as Farage ably put it – do not have a monopoly on oddballs. Or extremists.
Here, for instance, is a list of Labour Party notables who used to be communists or Marxist fellow-travellers: Alistair Darling. Jim Murphy, Jack Straw, Peter Hain, John Reid, Peter Mandelson. Now, whatever you think of Nigel Farage or Paul Nuttall, as far as I know they have not called for the overthrow of bourgeois democracy, so let’s toss out that canard about Ukipbeing uniquely “full of extremists”.
How about their policies then? One Kipper position that Ukipphobes love to cite is their apparent desire toreintroduce the death penalty. And on the face of it that does seem quite “out there”. No EU nation uses the death penalty (it is forbidden by quasi-EU law), virtually no western nations use the death penalty. So this policy is indeed a fringe position, right? Wrong. On the latest polls about 50 per cent of Britons support the death penalty.Half the country.And until Ukipcame along, the views of half the country, on this issue, were entirely unrepresented in mainstream politics.
Then what about Europe? You probably know what I’m going to say here but it’s worth saying anyway. All three mainstream parties are intent on remaining within the EU (after some pantomime renegotiation if you are a Tory). That means that the 30-50per cent of the country thatexpressly wants to leave the EUhas been wholly unrepresented in politics. Until the rise of Ukip.
Then what about immigration? Ukip’s policy is to severely restrict immigration. Again this seems pretty radical, until you look at the polls.Sixty-nineper centof peopleactually wantzero net immigration. In other words, most Brits, when it comes to immigration, are even further to the right than Ukip.
And so on, and so forth. Ukip are against HS2 (the only party with that position). So are48per centof the British people.Ukip have considered a policy to ban the burqa (the only party to consider that position) – this is a policy supported by61per cent of British voters. Ukip want to cut foreign aid (the only party with that position) – this is a policy supported by55per centof the British people.
Now personally, I’m not a Ukipsupporter, but I can damn well read Ukip’s polling numbers. And what they tell me is that virtually all of these “cranky”, “fruitcake”, “loonytoon” positions adopted by Ukipturn out to be opinions shared by large minorities, or outright majorities, of the British electorate. They are also opinions that have, until recently, been ignored and repressed by the liberal elite.
This then, is why the political classes are horrified by Ukip. It’s not because they believe Ukip are really crazy. It’s because they are worried Ukipmight be really popular.
Document TELUK00020140517ea5h002bi
