{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3818"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: FICTION: The call of the Lambeg drum: Kate Clanchy welcomes a brave, beautiful novel about Scottish sectarianism: The Walk Home by Rachel Seiffert 304pp, Virago, pounds 14.99
Kate Clanchy   
842 words
26 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
10
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
In 1969, the great Scottish poet Tom Leonard imagined a Glasgow crucifixion. The Good Thief leans from his cross to address Christ, friendly fashion, in his native tongue - "heh jimmy" - and to ask him the crucial Glasgow question, the one that can also be phrased as: "Are you are a Celtic supporter and do you kick with the left foot?". "Ma right insane yirra pape?" The thief is happily confident that Jesus is with him: "yirwanny us jimmy / see it nyir eyes /wanny uz".
Ah, the great wen of ancient feeling, hot loyalty and shameful acts that is Scottish sectarianism. We haven't heard much about it in the independence debate - which makes Rachel Seiffert's unsparing, thoughtful and immaculately researched novel all the braver and more welcome. Opening in the present, but mostly set in the 1990s, it tells the story of a Glasgow boy, Graham, who falls desperately in love with a Northern Irish girl, Lindsey, while visiting County Tyrone with his Orange marching band. At first, the birth of their son, and Graham's warm and loving family, especially his mother Brenda and her artist brother Eric, seem to offer Lindsey an escape from an unhappy childhood and an abusive father; but gradually Graham is called by his talent for the Lambeg drum back into his limited sectarian ways, and Lindsey finds the life she is offered harder and harder to live. The effect of this on their son is played out through his interactions with contemporary Polish immigrants, who are also in the process of deciding what is home.
Seiffert (pictured) has a fine ear for Glasgow speech and an even better eye for images. Graham and Lindsey, young and in love, sharing a bicycle: "The girl kept her fingers hooked into Graham's belt loops, her arms rising and falling while he stood on the pedals; her spine dead straight, arms slender, all her limbs, and her face showing nothing, but taking everything in"; Eric's pencil sketches of Glasgow, both naturalistic and in the grip of a biblical apocalypse; Stevie's red hair and freckles, appearing and disappearing in the crowd; Jozef the Polish builder's eagle eye on the city from an unfinished flat: all contribute to a rich, nuanced portrait of a changing community, and all are beautifully, sparely rendered.
Through the images, three strands of story emerge: that of Graham and his family; that of Eric, his art and his tragic marriage to a Catholic; and the anxieties of Jozef. Each is authentic and convincing, but they are told overwhelmingly through individual reminiscence, with a bare minimum of interaction between characters in the present. Often, in fact, the connections between the strands are so glancing that the tales seem to interrupt rather than supplement each other, to the point where you wonder if this book might not have been better arranged, like Seiffert's first novel, The Dark Room, as a triptych of novellas.
The sharp, imagistic exits of a novella might also have granted Seiffert's central characters a little extra grace. As it is, all five are weighted with the difficult task of embodying unbridgable gaps, not for the space of a few pages, but for an entire novel. Graham cannot let go his Lambeg, nor Lindsey talk about her dad, or the essential tragedy of their circumstances will be lost; nor can Eric have a happy marriage or be discovered by the Glasgow School of Art; nor Jozef impulsively hop on the plane to Gdansk. Stevie, victim and vehicle of all these disputes, cannot contact his family; nor can his family talk to him, because the problem is, they can't talk. So the characters get bogged down in years of inarticulate hiatuses, and the reader chafes. While this does bring home the multiple awfulness of sectarian repression, it also risks the characters, otherwise so richly drawn and gifted with so many delicate feelings, seeming blank, or passive.
The same solemnity also seems to deprive these Glaswegians of a characteristic almost as essential as the rhythms that Seiffert hears so well: jokes are said to be told, but none are actually cracked, perhaps because humour would open too many channels of communication. But Glaswegians will tell jokes about anything, really, and to anyone: ironies so black you cannot believe they are ironies, jokes about the very worst thing in the world. As Leonard's Good Thief remarks to Christ, the trouble with a crucifixion is you miss the football:
gonny miss thi GEMM jimmy
nearly three a cloke thinoo
dork init
good jobe theyve gote the lights
Kate Clanchy's Meeting the English is published by Picador. To order The Walk Home for pounds 11.99 with free UK p&p call Guardian book service on 0330 333 6846 or go to guardianbookshop.co.uk.
Document GRDN000020140426ea4q0001t
