{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"217"}
____
  
NEWS
British Asian Ukip youth leader quits 'racist' and 'terrifying' Ukip
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
564 words
13 May 2014
19:08
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Sanya-Jeet Thandi, who defended her support of Ukip on Channel 4 News, says the party is now appealing to 'stupidity of ignorant anti-immigrant voters for electoral gain'
A British Asian leader of Ukip’s youth wing has quit the party, branding it “racist” and “terrifying”.
Sanya-Jeet Thandi, who had been introduced at Ukip’s party conference as a future leader, said the party has abandoned its core supporters and now appealed to the “stupidity of ignorant anti-immigrant voters for electoral gain”.
Miss Thandi appeared on Channel 4 News this week to defend her membership but has now quit the party and is calling on other Ukip supporters to boycott the upcoming European and local elections.
Miss Thandi, who joined Ukip at 17 as events co-ordinator of the youth wing and spoke at the party conference, said new Ukip posters pointing the finger at immigration “epitomise” what has gone wrong with the party.
Nigel Farage has recently sought to rid Ukip of its racist image by appearing at a rally flanked by 40 ethnic minority supporters. At an event in London, he said: “I don’t care what you call us, but from this moment on, please do not call us a racist party.”
However, the strategy, Ms Thandi said, is not “good enough" to reverse the “form of racist populism” that had developed in the party over the last three years.
Over the last few weeks a string of Ukip candidates have been exposed as harbouring racist views. Andre Lampitt, who featured in the party’s election broadcast, was suspended after saying Ed Miliband was “not a real Brit” and describing Islam as an “evil organisation”.
Another supporter said Lenny Henry, the comedian, should emigrate to a “black country”.
Mr Farage said people with “offensive and idiotic” views had managed to join the party, despite his efforts to vet candidates and imposing a ban on former BNP and National Front members.
Ms Thandi, a privately-educated London School of Economics student born to Punjabi parents, joined Ukip because she said David Cameron was “going soft”.
Three years ago, she agreed with Ukip’s policy on immigration because current policy favoured Eueopeans over other migrants when her grandparents had to “work so hard” to come to England, she said.
Miss Thandi, who grew up in Kent, became one of Mr Farage’s biggest cheerleaders, telling The Times that Mr Farage was “a babe” and describing Godfrey Bloom as “cute and so kind and hilarious, he just says things for the reaction. Lovely guy but a bit misunderstood".
However, announcing her resignation on The Guardian website Miss Thandi said people with “racist views” had now been slipping through Ukip’s checks “time and time again”.
She wrote: “In order to convince society they are not racist they need to stop giving positions in the party to people with racist views.
“It is not good enough to say that these individuals just slipped through the net, time and time again. Yes, Ukip is still a relatively young party.
“No, that is not an excuse to allow racists to stand for election. Nor is it an excuse to exploit the ignorance in British society and indulge the racist vote by telling them 'they'll take your jobs'."
Document TELUK00020140513ea5d005hc
