{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1548"}
____
  
News
The real winners, if they play it right, could be Cameron and Miliband
By Daniel Hannan   
516 words
26 March 2014
21:35
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Who won? They both did – simply by holding their debatedeux.Ukip are used to being a small party that must fight for every second of airtime; but it's the Lib Dems who, according to the every poll, need the oxygen most.
Nick Clegg's strategy of playing up his party's pro-EU credentials may seem insane: why go on and on about the single policy area where you are most at odds with the electorate? The answer has to do with niche marketing. Say the committed Euro-enthusiast vote out there is 20 per cent. Twenty per cent is still well above the 8 per cent thatCleggie is polling now. If he can persuade just a few soggy Blairites, just a few hoary-headed Tory grandees, to come over to "the party of in", he may yet rescue some Lib Dem MEPs.
Conversely, Nigel Farage wants Eurosceptic voters to back him on 22 May even if, as he knows most of them will, they return to their traditional allegiances for the general election. The two big parties want to talk about the economy, but the third and fourth are quite happy to bang on about Europe. Both leaders used their closing addresses quite nakedly to appeal for support in the Euro-elections.
Who had the edge? I'd be surprised if many people changed their position after listening to the arguments. Twitter saw an hour of uncomplicated cheerleading: "Another devastating point by my man! The other man is a hopeless imbecile! This is a walkover!" And, in truth, we are all primed to note the facts that sustain our starting assumptions, and to screen out those that don't.A snap poll afterwards by YouGov showed that 57 per cent of viewers gave the victory to Nigel, though I suspect that that's fairly close to the number who preferred him all along.
Cleggie's tactic, predictably enough, was to try to be tempered, measured and cool, in the hope of showing up Nigel as bombastic. Actually, the Ukip leader trotted out some impressive statistics on trade and investment but, as I say, people tend only to hear the data that accord with their prejudices.
How should the leaders of the two larger parties react? Well, the immigration officer at the Eurostar yesterday had rather a good idea. Having very discreetly wished me luck – there are still a few Conservative voters in the public sector – he suggested that David Cameron and Ed Miliband could now plausibly argue that Clegg and Farage had had their debate, and that the general election debate should be only between the potential prime ministers. "Or if they really wanted, sir, the other two could have a separate two-way debate again in a year's time, a sort of third-fourth play-off".
The temptation must be overwhelming. They could hardly, on the basis of the current polls, have included Clegg but not Farage. Now they have an excuse to exclude both.
Document TELUK00020140326ea3q004v3
