{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"312"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Agents blow whistle on doorstep tactics of Sky's sales team: Claim that rogue agents target vulnerable people Firm says preventing mis-selling is top priority
Miles Brignall   
782 words
3 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
2
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Door-to-door sellers working for Sky are seeking out vulnerable customers and "telling them anything" to get them to sign up for expensive TV, phone and broadband services, a group of Sky's own sales agents have claimed to the Guardian.
The agents, who have all worked for the company for over two years, said they have turned whistleblower to expose sales practices increasingly being adopted by colleagues. Rogue agents, they say, are targeting recent immigrants with poor English and a patchy understanding of their consumer rights.
The sales staff, who knock door-to-door using addresses supplied by Sky bosses, lie to customers about broadband speeds and prices. They also tell potential customers they can get them out of existing Virgin Media contracts to persuade them to sign up to Sky contracts which often cost more than pounds 100 a month, they claim.
The whistleblowers say the culture of "tell the customer anything to get the sale" that was once prevalent in the energy sector is now happening at Sky. At the energy companies a series of mis-selling scandals eventually forced the firms to disband their sales teams. The whistleblowers say some of Sky's sales agents used to work selling gas and electricity door-to-door.
One salesman told the Guardian: "Sky agents will target people who don't speak English - recent immigrants, Polish, eastern European people. We will tell them anything to sell Sky products.
"We don't go to expensive areas because there the customer knows the cost of everything. They know the difference between normal broadband or fibreoptic. They would just slam the door in our face and it would be a waste of time . . . so we go to the poorest areas where there are lots of immigrants that believe everything we tell them."
The Sky agents describe being under pressure from their managers to sell, with their whereabouts constantly monitored remotely, and the agents say they are carpeted if they fail to make sales.
The agents say they have raised concerns about sales tactics with managers, but were told it is "none of their concern".
Responding to the allegations, Sky said: "Preventing mis-selling is the number one priority." It said it had taken its sales operation back in-house three years ago to ensure high standards were practised, and also says it has rigorous training and management systems to prevent mis-selling.
The agents, however, describe how rogue agents are able to get round Sky's controls. The sales verification process - in which the agent calls head office to confirm the sale with the customer at their side - can be faked by using a friend to pose as the customer, they claim.
The whistleblowers also say that the commission structure, and the fact that every day they are subject to a stream of text messages from managers promising pounds 15 bonuses, encourages those happy to bend the rules.
While the energy firms disbanded their field sales operations after a number of high-profile fines and scandals, Sky is one of the few big brands to still use door-to-door sellers.
Sky's director of retail sales, Simon Raggett, said:"We take the quality of our door-to-door sales operation extremely seriously. We put significant investment into systems and training, as well as employing multiple checks and controls, to deliver a high quality experience that adheres to strict guidelines.
"If we have evidence of our staff not complying with these guidelines we will always conduct a full investigation and take the appropriate action."
Ofcom, the media regulator, asked the whistleblowers to provide further details of their allegations.
It said it takes mis-selling extremely seriously and has "an active monitoring and enforcement programme to ensure providers' compliance with our rules and legislation".
Ofcom added: "Consumers should complain if they feel they have been a victim of doorstep mis-selling. Anyone with information about any such mis-selling should also bring it to our attention."
The allegations come as figures reveal that Sky is fighting to maintain the sales growth of earlier years.
In the past week the company said that 70,000 net new customers had joined in the three months to March - down from 152,000 a year earlier. Pre-tax profits were pounds 793m for the nine months to March 2014, down from pounds 966m a year earlier.
Saturday Money, page 44 ≥
Captions:
Allegations by staff come as Sky fights to maintain its sales growth Photograph: David Moir/Reuters
Document GRDN000020140502ea530007e
