{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1571"}
____
  
News
Judge dismisses whiplash claims for 'small bump' to stem fake claims
Claire Carter   
446 words
27 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
5
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE compensation culture is a "national phenomenon," a High Court judge said as he refused to grant whiplash damages to two women to "stem the tide" of fake insurance claims.
The women, both immigration officers, took at least a week to report any pain from a crash, described as a "little bump" by others in the car.
Mr Justice Mostyn dismissed the claims as inaccurate and evasive, based on "an improper pecuniary motive". Paula McIntyre and Louise Hennessy made the claim against the Home Office after the work car they were in hit a bollard as it drove out of Seaforth Dock, Liverpool in 2008.
After the crash, a colleague heard Miss McIntyre say: "My neck, my neck, I can make a compensation claim."
The court heard it took 18 days for her to go to her GP about any pain, and Miss Hennessy waited a week before she went to a doctor to report any injury. "I do not accept the evidence of either of them, which I find to be inaccurate, evasive, partial and advanced for an improper pecuniary motive," said the judge. "This is yet a further example of the national phenomenon of false whiplash claims being made and it is in an attempt to stem the tide that I do not shrink from making firm adverse findings against them".
Mr Justice Mostyn said expert medical evidence which appeared to back up the accounts of both women was so similar it cast doubt on the professional objectivity of the expert.
In identical terms, medical reports said both had suffered "nervous shock and psychological trauma" and endured "recurrent obtrusive memories of the accident and obsessional thoughts as to how she might have been seriously injured."
The car driver, Denise Withey, described the accident as minor, and had taken photographs which showed no damage.
One a minute Drivers pay £90 a year for insurance fraud
Whiplash costs every driver around £90 a year in their insurance premium and is becoming "the fraud of choice", industry experts say.
Claims for whiplash as a result of car accidents costs more than £2billion a year.
The UK has the highest number of cases in Europe – with 78 per cent of all low value motor injury claims being made for whiplash, compared with an average of 48 per cent. In 2012 –13 there were almost 477,000 claims for whiplash – almost one a minute. A spokesman for the Association of British Insurers said it has been campaigning to reduce fake claims for whiplash, which have risen at a disproportionate rate in the past few years.
Document DT00000020140327ea3r0004k
