{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3792"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
Teachers' conference provides lesson in why schools fail our young
KEVIN MYERS   
1,149 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Ulster
18
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Aperfectly serious proposal: if you saw your child's teacher at one of the recent conferences heckling, abusing or booing the lawfully elected minister for education Ruairí Quinn, urge your offspring to behave in precisely the same way in class. Oh yes, with placards and stuff. If a teacher was using a megaphone to interrupt the minister's speech with questions, ask your child to do the same — for don't teachers want their pupils to be inquisitive and follow their own splendid example? Having a reasoned debate about the teaching profession is like having one about flags at an Ardoyne interface. The problem is the Socratic ideal — for by that measure, teachers are the most important element in any society, the very vectors of civilisation. And truly, a good teacher is culture's purest jewel.
 Oliver Goldsmith's teacher, Maguire — "and still they gazed, and still the wonder grew, That one small head could carry all he knew" — was the quintessence of those generations of Irish teachers that turned peasants into scholars. And without the inspiration of Henry Stokes at Grantham Grammar School, Isaac Newton would probably have been merely a rustic failure, toiling unhappily on the Lincolnshire fens. The fortunes of a later Grantham youngster were similarly transformed by the far-sighted teachers that helped Margaret Thatcher to a doublefirst; she was both the first science graduate and the first woman at No 10 Downing Street.
And yes, it must be utter hell trying to teach the very opposite, the pathologically uneducable, or keeping order among gangs of hormonal sabre-toothed teenagers, for whom the word "pupil" is as apposite as "mut" is for a pitbull with a baby koala clenched bloodily between its jaws.
There. I've thrown the teachers a kindly bone about the Socratic ideal, so now to the suckers' deal we've done with them. For teachers are among the most protected, most cosseted yet most aggrieved group in society. Come a gentle dusting of snow, which institutions close first? The schools, always, and probably not at the instigation of the heads, who may usually be found sweeping away the snow at dawn, but of the unionised staff, texting from bed. Two-job parents (who'll still be going to work anyway, adjoining schools and workplaces apparently having completely different climates) will suddenly have to arrange childminders.
The recent revelation that Ireland''s 15-year-olds came 17th out of 22 OECD countries at problem-solving would have surprised no one who's had the annual pleasure of witnessing our teacher unions' conferences. So naturally, what is most educationally-vital in deprived areas, a drastic reduction of class sizes, has quite simply never been No 1 priority for the unions. For according to The Unwritten Public Service Code, the primary function of any government-run organisation is the improvement of the work conditions of its employees, not the discharge of the public duties for which it was created. HSE, anyone? Moreover, it always helps to be ignorant: Irish National Teachers' Organisation (Into) delegates last week voted for the pension levy on public servants to be phased out, on the grounds that it was an unfair and selective charge on them.
A word in your shell-like, gentle teachers: we in the private sector pay for our own occupational pensions entirely. And far from getting the whopping subvention from the state's current account that makes public service pensions so generous, our own painfully-acquired pension funds have actually been raided by the finance minister to help pay for your public service pensions.
Next, holidays, which for secondary schools are: 12 weeks in the summer, two mid-term week-long breaks, a fortnight for both Christmas and Easter, plus various days for teacher-parent meetings, also mandatory term-time cross-border shoppingtrips, also known as "action days".
And teachers cry: Why are the media always so howwid to us? Actually, we're not. We usually treat teachers as gently as we would shipwrecked orphans found sprawled on the high-tide mark, because they're extremely well organised, and if crossed are as vituperative as a Siptu polecat with weeping piles (viz next week's letters' page).
We must now ask serious questions about our educational failings. For example, why are we now unable to produce enough maths graduates to run our economicallyvital high-tech industries? Is it because — as Quinn hypothesised — teaching has been feminised, and (unspoken subtext) women can't do sums? But as poor battered Ruairí soon discovered, not merely do the teachers' unions not let you wonder, but his unscripted question is now the subject of endless PC media sneers. So what hope is there, when liberal journalists and teachers' unions conspire to prolong ignorance? But credit where credit is due. Working heroically together, Irish parents and teachers have managed to create a vast underclass of obese illiterates, who if found waddling in Faroes' waters would probably be herded into a bay and harpooned. (Viking culture, apparently.) And on the other side of the class divide, we have the stunningly stupid I'mlikes, Omigods and Totes infesting the Dart and Green Luas, like a linguistic fallout from a Californian Chernobyl. By contrast, consider the immigrant graduates of Polish schools who run our retail economy: sweet, lissom, industrious young women who speak seven languages, including perfectly modulated 1950s English.
Of course, we all know that teachers are not entirely responsible for all that ails us, but they can't complain if they get the blame, because a) it's fun and b) they routinely exhibit the PR skills of Pyongyang on poitin. This, presumably, is why they insist on flaunting their differences during the Easter hols, precisely when both politics and the courts are in their seasonal comas, and we media-vampires are in urgent need of a haemoglobin top-up.
Maybe the teachers' worst indiscretions occur through species-assimilation; just as poolside zookeepers become indistinguishable from walruses and nurses soon resemble bedpans, teachers invariably end up imitating the Hutu militia that is 5C. This is the class where the brightest boy can actually spell his initials, and there's a good reason why one girl at least isn't pregnant: she's just given birth to multi-ethnic triplets in the very stockroom where they'd been conceived, courtesy of several swains called Wayne or Dwayne. And though she's not quite sure which happy three may now be called Daddy, all have again gallantly clustered round, to do the needful if called upon.
No, it's not easy being a teacher these days; so each Easter, why do teachers insist on making it even harder? kevin.myers@sunday-times.ie
TEACHERS ARE AMONG THE MOST PROTECTED, MOST COSSETED YET MOST AGGRIEVED GROUP IN SOCIETY
Document ST00000020140427ea4r0010u
