{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"130"}
____
  
News
Round two, and a case of role reversal
James Kirkup   
386 words
3 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
6
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Analysis
POLITICALLY and personally, Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage are poles apart, Dutch smoked cheese and chalk from the Dover cliffs. But two televised debates have brought them closer together – at least in terms of style and presentation.
Mr Clegg moved away from the statistics–heavy facts–and–figures approach of last week and attempted some Faragestyle passion and some demotic language, even if it doesn't come naturally: the warning that exiting the European Union would mean a "Billy no–mates, Billy no–jobs Britain" felt forced and inauthentic.
The more populist approach lacked authenticity and cost him much of the cool authority he projected last week.
Mr Farage meanwhile dampened down his passions and sometimes even played safe, no longer the firebrand demagogue but the one reasonable man in a world gone mad.
Wisely, he failed to deliver on pre–fight threats to attack Mr Clegg over his European heritage and family.
That new–found restraint largely preempted any attacks on him as an angry xenophobe.
Mr Clegg, for instance, struggled to rebut Mr Farage's calmly stated argument about the social and economic impact of European immigration on Britain's working class, both white and black.
In The Importance of Being Earnest, Lady Bracknell is described as "a monster without being a myth, which is rather unfair". Until now, the main political parties have often displayed a similar attitude to Mr Farage.
These debates have proved that Mr Farage is neither monster nor myth, but a mortal man.
We saw his strengths, especially his fluency and ability to challenge cosy consensus. We also saw his weaknesses, as he struggled to defend some of his more curious positions.
Mr Farage and his supporters take umbrage at the scrutiny he has faced over issues such as Russia and Syria, claiming he has been misquoted, misconstrued and generally hard done by.
In truth, they should celebrate that scrutiny. It is proof that people, politicians and media are all paying proper attention to Mr Farage and his views.
Like it or not, a politician whose greatest selling point is that he is outside the political system is becoming part of it.
That is a real victory for him, but one that will not come without cost.
Document DT00000020140403ea430006l
