{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2320"}
____
  
FINANCE
Cable: workers need 'right to request' fixed hours contracts
By Louise Armitstead Chief Business Correspondent   
305 words
20 May 2014
14:17
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Business Secretary says zero hours contracts "define the problem of insecurity" in the UK labour market, which is "too flexible"
Vince Cable wants to introduce a workers “right to request” fixed hours contract after he warned that Britain’s labour market has become “too flexible”.
While he dismissed Labour’s idea to ban “zero hours contracts”, the Business Secretary argued that the Government had “a role” to play to avoid “the American experience” of wages that “stagnated, even in a period of economic growth”.
“We have to confront the possibility that labour markets may be coming too flexible,” Mr Cable said in a speech at the Resolution Foundation. “Too much flexibility, and we undermine the incentive to be more productive.”
Mr Cable said “zero hours contracts” had come to “define the problem of insecurity” in the labour market. But he said he disagreed with Labour’s proposals to force employers to offer fixed-hours contracts since there are “a lot of contexts where zero hours contracts work for the employee and the employer.”
“Where I think we ought to be going is looking at the right to request a fixed contract, building on the model which we already have for flexible working,” he said. He added: “Indeed I am looking at how we can best do that.”
Mr Cable argued that the financial crisis and recession had exposed significant structural problems in Britain’s labour market. He said the Government had helped produce a “strong and sustain, broad-based recovery” together with impressive employment levels. But he argued that wages had failed to rise, in part due to “quite astonishing increase in labour supply”, from older workers staying in the market to changes in welfare payments and immigration.
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e004jy
