{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"932"}
____
  
NEWS
British National Party's Twitter account hacked by 'Anonymous'
By Keith Perry   
352 words
3 May 2014
09:25
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A hacker claiming from Anonymous broke into the party's official twitter account late last night and left a series of lewd comments
Nick Griffin, the leader of the British National Party and MEP, has had his Twitter account hacked by campaigners claiming to be part of the hacking group, Anonymous.
Someone claiming to be affiliated with Anonymous hacked into the party's official account late on Friday night.
The hackers did not appear to be trying to send out a particular message and didn't appear to know much about the far-right party, but were simply trying to cause trouble for the BNP.
"What are you actually going to do with the account now you've got it? @bnp" one user tweeted to the hacker.
"No sure, any ideas? I don't really give a ****. It was just a random target. I'm not even from GB," the hacker replied.
The user responded:"Wow. OK well it's a far right anti immigration highly racist organisation you've just hacked. Perhaps reverse their policies ;)"
Surprised by this information, the hacker then suggested he pass control of the account over to the better informed user instead, who declined.
The header image for the account was also changed by the hacker to a screen grab of a message sent to leader Nick Griffin.
Anonymous is a loose group of "hacktivists" who came to the fore in 2010 in the wake of the emergence of Julian Assange's Wikileaks website.
Anonymous began by aiming DDoS (distributed denial-of-service) attacks on websites, like the credit card firm Visa, who had withdrawn services from Wikileaks.
But it has gradually changed into a grouping which claims to battle government surveillance and attempts to police the internet.
Last month Anonymous claimed to have disrupted access to the Home Office website and defaced almost 500 websites in China.
A message put on the hacked sites said the attack was carried out to protest against the Chinese government's strict control of its citizens.
Document TELUK00020140503ea530012x
