{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"909"}
____
  
News
Good new for the Tories: they can win
440 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
25
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Our latest poll brings David Cameron some good news: the Tories are only one point behind Labour. Coming just 12 months before the next election, Labour's rapidly diminishing lead ought to give Mr Cameron encouragement. He can win.
We have asked our political columnists to make predictions about 2015 and they, too, offer reasons to be cheerful. Five out of eight say that Mr Cameron will triumph. Everyone thinks Boris Johnson either will be in Parliament, or should be. There is some dispute as to how important Ukip will prove. Fraser Nelson's tip for a likely "star" of the campaign is "an old lady in a shopping mall who clearly, and succinctly, explains to [Ed] Miliband why his policies would be a calamity for Britain".
But a true-blue tomorrow is still far from guaranteed. All those columnists predicting a Cameron win reckon that the majority will be small, which reflects Labour's inbuilt advantage in seats and the mixed experience of economic recovery. Indeed, there is a growing North/South divide, suggesting that standards of living are perhaps not rising equally as fast across the country. Our poll shows that the Tories have nudged ahead in the South of England but are behind by six significant points in the North.
Philosophical conservatism is not the problem: previous polls of Northern voters have shown enormous support for controlling immigration or making sensible savings in the welfare bill. The divide might be down to varying degrees of consumer confidence. A housing boom in the South could be engendering a happier spirit than that found in the North. The perennial challenge of the Tory image problem could also be at play - the idea that Mr Cameron just does not care about those living north of Watford. Of course, that impression is nonsense. Conservatism is truly "one-nation", in the sense of being above class and sectional interests and acting to serve the needs of all the people, wherever they might live. The Conservatives might bridge their North/South divide if they start floating ideas that will help as many people as possible to benefit from the recovery, as Matthew d'Ancona suggests in these pages.
We have long made the case for tax cuts that would have the benefit of giving workers more control over the money they earn, helping the economy to grow, and showing that voting Tory reduces the cost of living. That strategy is also far better than Mr Miliband's big-state approach - as Mr Nelson's "old lady in a shopping mall" would doubtless tell us.
Document STEL000020140504ea540007h
