{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3329"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Working–class vote is up for grabs as it was in the 1980s
Duncan Barkes   
939 words
14 May 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
CHAMPAGNE corks will be popping at Conservative party HQ with the news that for the first time in more than two years the Tories have taken the lead over Labour.
Critics may dismiss this as a blip but two polls in the past 48 hours show a marginal lead for the Conservatives. The ICM poll places the Tories on 33 per cent, with Labour behind at 31. Separate research for Lord Ashcroft, former Conservative deputy chairman, puts his party on 34 per cent and Labour on 32.
These results are based on people's voting intention in next year's general election as opposed to next week's European election.
David Cameron may well get the sense the tide is starting to turn. This will be some much needed good news ahead of what many believe will be a battering at next week's Euro poll at the hands of Ukip.
Both the Labour and Conservative parties have drafted in election strategists to help them win a decent majority in 2015 but they are neglecting a vital chunk of the electorate – the working–class vote. This support is going begging and one of the keys to success next year will be not only to gain this vote but to nurture and continue to own it.
Margaret Thatcher achieved this in the 1980s, particularly with her policy of selling council houses, but none of today's parties has managed to speak to those voters in the same way.
WE ARE talking about people with aspirations and who want social mobility. They also crave to be recognised for the contribution they already make to society through their work and taxes. They want fair policies on immigration and welfare, as well as being rewarded for what they have already achieved.
Occupations include electricians and postal workers; retail cashiers and plumbers; catering staff, nurses and care workers; customer service operatives and bar staff; van drivers and cleaners.
The working–class vote exists in what many would call the "blue collar" sector. It is also to be found with many "white collar" workers too. Who speaks to these voters and which party will ultimately get their support? For the Conservatives to maintain their lead over Labour and harness this vote they need to be doing a lot more than chucking around the overused phrase "hardworking families". But there are a number of Conservative MPs who already recognise this and have set up a group called Blue Collar Conservatism.
Co–ordinator Clark Vasey sums it up nicely: "Growing up in a working–class family in the North of England showed me how working people have been let down time and again by Labour, as the party which favours control over empowerment. It was my mother's belief in self–reliance which shaped my values and led me to become a Conservative. I remain convinced that it is the Conservative party which will best serve the interests of bluecollar voters."
Blue Collar Conservatism contains some solid names and faces such as Wirral West's Esther McVey. A scouser by birth and currently a minister, Esther has talent that David Cameron needs to be using to a greater extent. The same goes for Philip Davies, MP for Shipley, and John Stevenson, MP for Carlisle – these men connect with voters who feel today's Conservative party does not fully represent them.
Davies spent a big part of his life working for a supermarket chain in customer services and marketing before entering politics. It is this kind of background that David Cameron needs to embrace in order to shed the Tories' "toff" image.
Ukip is currently doing well in mopping up the workingclass vote. By–election results in the North of England have seen Ukip come second to Labour in areas such as South Shields, Wythenshawe and Sale East (Greater Manchester) and Barnsley Central.
One of Ukip's stars is deputy leader Paul Nuttall. Born on a Merseyside council estate in Bootle he instinctively understands the frustrations and challenges facing people every day. It should come as no surprise that Ukip is coming second in by–elections but it should greatly concern Ed Miliband as it is eating into what was once Labour's core vote.
Labour peer Lord Glasman has already said his party's working–class support has "died" and he believes that Labour has become "very middle class".
IREMEMBER working in Liverpool in 2009 and sitting in a pub when the man next to me struck up a conversation about politics. In fact it was not so much a conversation, more a diatribe about how he felt let down by a party that he had supported all his life. I have never forgotten the words of this ex–docker: "The Labour party is no longer the party of the working man."
Ed Miliband talks a good game which is clearly designed to appeal to the working–class vote. His "cost of living crisis" narrative should tick all the boxes but it always appears to be delivered without any real conviction or understanding.
A token mention should go the Liberal Democrats but, as with the Green party, I can see little on offer to secure signifi–cant working–class support.
The working–class vote is up for grabs. None of the parties are doing enough to make it theirs which is a gross oversight with less than a year to go to the general election.
Duncan Barkes is a presenter on LBC Radio
'Even Labour has become middle class'
Document THEEXP0020140514ea5e0003e
