{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1315"}
____
  
Features
"Wine is social networking for civilised people, Facebook for those who want a life"
4,197 words
1 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
28,29,31,32,35
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
On a road trip through Napa and Sonoma, Sasha Abramsky observes the Silicon Valley set at play in a land of fine wine, boutique hotels and great American restaurants. Plus, further south, Celia Walden and Piers Morgan uncork the pleasures of Santa Barbara's vineyards
I view it as a sort of miracle," said Sir Peter Michael on the phone, when I asked him about the landscape surrounding his winery in Knights Valley, northern California. "You sit with a glass of wine in hand, looking at the sunset. It is absolutely stunning territory."
Days later, as my claret Nissan Altima hybrid – a fashionable choice, as I was soon to learn – came gliding to a halt in the parking area, I could see what he meant. His main office is a white shingle–and–timber building with a charming little bell tower poking up into a brilliant blue sky. Mount St Helena soars above deepgreen foothills ribbed with vines and, on hot days, eagles can be seen turning tight circles in the thermal currents.
I'd imagined this area of Sonoma County, an hour's drive north–east of San Francisco, to be familiar and somewhat tame, a subtler twin to Napa County, with its faux chateaux and coachloads of wine tourists. But there is nothing tame about Sonoma. Wild and beautiful, it recalls the paintings of Gregory Kondos, with their sunbrowned valleys, curvaceous hills and expanses of water in exuberant Mediterranean blues. Deer congregate near the huge solar panels that provide the estate's energy.
And, where deer hang out, fearsome mountain lions hunt.
Brown bears are also known to frequent these hills, as do skunks, possums and coyotes – a who's who of the wildlife headliners of the great American West.
Sir Peter Michael is something of a headliner himself and, like California's natural wonders, is larger than life. A British technology venture capitalist, he discovered the beauty of Sonoma–Napa in 1972 on weekend trips north from the California headquarters of his Quantel high–tech company. In the early 1980s, he bought hundreds of acres and planted vines on what was originally cattle–ranching land on the Sonoma side of the mountains. His aim was to create a world–class winery and a family retreat for generations of Michaels to come. In both, he succeeded.
Back in England, his legacy is The Vineyard (see "Sonoma, Berkshire", page 35), a five–star hotel with an exceptional collection of Californian wines. They come not only from the Peter Michael Winery but also from a select group of suppliers including Schramsberg, world–famous for its sparkling wines, Charles Heintz, Honig and Rudd.
Most of these estates are open for tastings, though often by appointment only (see "How to live the Californian dream", page 35). Together, the wines in Sir Peter's cellars represent the cutting edge of Californian winemaking.
With The Vineyard as my unofficial wine concierge, I set off on a three–day trip with a friend to experience the very best of the region's wine, food and lodgings. Starting from Sacramento, where I have lived for the past decade, we headed south–west through Davis, Dixon and Vacaville to Fairfield. The colours became more extreme as we left the I–80, one of America's great cross–country roads, and drove west to the town of Napa itself. In late spring, the burned grass of the hillsides was as golden–brown as a Van Gogh haystack, while the green trees and vines took on ever–deeper hues.
The noises of urban life began to dissipate. It was an absence of sound that first struck me when we stopped for a capuccino at the Small World Cafe in Napa. In the window were dozens of model vintage cars, of the throaty sports and supercar variety. By contrast, many of the vehicles on the streets were muted. The Prius hybrid is the best–selling car in California these days – and the higher an area's income, the more eco–friendly the traffic.
In Napa, the Tesla electric car is more of a status symbol than a Rolls–Royce, cruising silently past the salons and upscale clothing stores, the Quent Condair Fine Art gallery and Joey's Bakery, with its delightful cakes.
Half an hour after finishing our coffees, we were deep in wine country. Napa County has just four per cent of California's wine–producing acreage, but it accounts for a third of the dollars generated by wine sales. Sonoma County is larger and its vineyards grow a wider variety of grapes. The scenery is more dramatic, the hills higher.
There is a sense of menace, almost, to some of its densely wooded slopes. Where Napa's broad valleys are sun–drenched, Sonoma's are hemmed in by high hills. It is a mountain–biker's paradise.
Most visitors come to Sonoma–Napa not for the adventure sports but to eat in some of America's finest restaurants, including The French Laundry in Yountville, where reservations have to be made months in advance.
More accessible are the Michelin–starred restaurant at the Auberge du Soleil resort, and Morimoto Napa, in the town of Napa itself, serving the delicate sushi creations of the chef and television star Masaharu Morimoto.
Fine restaurants require fine wines, which the Peter Michael Winery has been happy to supply. Virtually every Michelin–starred restaurant in America stocks the vineyard's cabernets, says sales manager Peter Kay, including the signature Les Pavots (see review, opposite), and several stock its pinot noirs and chardonnays, too.
That success is due to an extraordinary attention to terroir. Sir Peter's team measures variations in the mineral content of the volcanic soil, and the moisture, sunlight and wind to which different parts of his land are exposed, then plants the grapes accordingly. In Sonoma County, famous for its micro–climates, planting a couple of thousand feet apart can result in very different conditions.
The result is a set of superior wines, with delicate variations in texture and huge aromatic shifts from label to label. One can practically smell, touch and taste the earth's varying qualities in each glass. Over lunch at the winery, Peter Kay chose wines to match our food. The first course, scallops, was accompanied by a La Carriere chardonnay. The second course, wild boar terrine, came with a glass of Ma Danseuse pinot noir, made from grapes grown on the estate's Ma Danseuse vineyard. Sir Peter named it as a love note to his wife, Maggie, whom he met at a dance school in Croydon in the late 1950s.
In the 1976 Judgment of Paris – a one–off blind tasting competition organised by a British wine merchant – California chardonnays and cabernet sauvignons ran away with the top prizes, proving to the world that Californian wine had arrived. That was the year that Sir Peter, entertaining business associates at the Fairmont San Francisco hotel, tasted a top–end Chateau Montelena from Napa and was hooked. Yet even today, relatively few Californian wines are sold in Britain – something the pioneering winemaker is keen to change. "Wine," he insists, "is social networking for civilised people; it is Facebook for those who want to have a life. The story begins in the vineyard, and after the bottle is opened, people tell their friends. The two greatest products to come out of the Golden State are technology and wine."
Our next stop was Schramsberg, the second–oldest winery in California. Situated just over the hills, on the Napa County side of the mountains, it is set in a landscape of lily ponds and has a fascinating history. In 1862 Jacob Schramsberg, a German immigrant, planted a vineyard up in the hills. A few years later he hired unemployed Chinese labourers, left stranded by the completion of the transcontinental railroad, to hand–dig a series of caves through the hillsides, in which to store his wines.
Fast forward 150 years and those caves, in which the pick–marks of those labourers can still be seen, have been expanded. Inside are 2.7 million bottles of top–notch cabernet sauvignons as well as some of California's best sparkling wines: an oenologist's Fort Knox. One sparkling wine, the 2005 JSchram ($210/£130) was listed by the American Robb Report magazine as one of the top 18 wines in the world.
Since 1972, when President Nixon took several cases to China on his breakthrough visit to meet Chairman Mao, the brand has been a White House favourite. The Prince and Princess of Wales drank Schramsberg with Ronald Reagan in 1985; Queen Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh shared a Brut Rosé with George W Bush in 2007; and the Obamas have served Schramsberg at a number of state functions.
Having sampled a few of the wines myself, I spent the night at Auberge du Soleil in the hills above the little Napa town of Rutherford. Its rooms, in adobe bungalow style, are scattered up the hillside; its landscaped gardens, planted with semi–tropical flowers, are dotted with metal sculptures placed discreetly among the trees and shrubs.
One thing you notice in Napa County is an obsessive attention to detail, with an emphasis on absolute numerical precision – as befits a wineland so intertwined with the fortunes of high–tech high–flyers. At Auberge du Soleil, the pool is maintained at exactly 27 degrees. In the acclaimed restaurant, presided over by chef Robert Curry, $175 gets you an ounce, to the dot, of caviar.
My dinner there comprised lobster, a shot glass full of creamy fennel soup, halibut, squab (with a far from local Chateauneuf du Pape), steak pavé the rich purple of a Roman imperial toga, and dainty chocolate dumplings encircled by vanilla ice cream and drizzled with olive oil.
The great Californian essayist Joan Didion once wrote that "great hotels have always been social ideas, flawless mirrors to the particular societies they service". Auberge du Soleil's society is the Google–and–Facebook crowd – wealthy but casual, as reluctant to turn up for a $500 dinner in a jacket and tie as to show up driving a Rolls– Royce. They wear jeans and drive Subarus or Teslas, and they expect to be given a wine menu on an iPad, not on printed paper. At Auberge, they are not disappointed.
Next day we visited the Rudd estate, owned by the family behind the Dean&DeLuca deli chain. Its entrance is formal, wood–panelled and old–worldly, but underground all is modern. The cellars are antiseptically clean, lined with concrete and containing smooth, giant concrete eggs in which some of the wines are fermented.
Visitors pay $80 for a food–and–wine tasting that often includes produce from the Rudds' own gardens. In those gardens stand eight ancient olive trees, each brought by helicopter from Humboldt County, 200 miles away.
Rudd produces a terrific set of reds, including the noted Rudd Oakville Estate Red (see review, page 32), but my favourite was Samantha's Cabernet Sauvignon, named after proprietor Leslie Rudd's daughter. Having just been shown around the estate by Samantha, it seemed only polite to have a drink in her honour.
The final winery on my list was the Honig estate, a casual, family–run affair noted for its environmental sustainability. The Honigs don't use fertilisers or pesticides, and instead rely heavily on bringing in birds to eat pests that threaten the vines. In German, Honig means honey – hence the bee logo on the estate's bottles. My favourite here was a dessert wine made from sauvigon blanc grapes, grown near the Napa River and affected by the botrytis fungus which lends the wine a delicious honeysuckle flavour.
It would be the perfect partner to foie gras, said winemaker Stephanie Honig, our host.
On our final evening in Napa County, we stopped in the town of St Helena. It was far too hot to go hiking in the hills, too hot even to stroll through town. We passed half an hour sampling olive oils out of shot glasses at Long Meadow Ranch, including the pricey but delicious Prato Lungo, made from olives grown on ancient trees and, with its peppery kick, ideal for dipping bread in before dinner.
That took place at Solbar, the Michelin–starred restaurant at Solage Calistoga. They seated us outside, next to a long fire pit and opposite an Olympic–size pool ringed by palm trees. I ordered salad followed by duck confit, with yet another fine local cabernet. Dessert was an over–the–top bread pudding, with a dolphin–shaped scoop of vanilla ice cream and an apple crisp on top.
My friend looked up. "That's Joe Montana," he said quietly. And it was. There at the table next to us was America's most famous footballer. We raised our glasses and toasted wine country. It was time to head back to the real world.
Bon Voyage (0800 316 0194; bon–voyage.co.uk) is offering a five–night stay in California from £5,995 per person.
The price includes return Virgin Upper Class flight from London Heathrow to San Francisco, b&b accommodation at Auberge Du Soleil for three nights, and at Solage Calistoga for two nights, plus transfers, tours and tastings at the Schramsberg, Honig and Rudd wineries.
ART OF THE STATE
Ultratravel's pick of the finest Californian wines
Schramsberg 2010 Blanc de Blancs
This 100 per cent chardonnay sparkling wine is a White House favourite, offered to guests by Presidents from Nixon to Obama.
It opens with fresh aromas of green apple, pineapple and ripe grapefruit, with nuances of fresh–baked brioche and lemon tart. Price: £25.94.
Peter Michael Winery 2010 Les Pavots
Made mainly from cabernet sauvignon grapes, this signature red graces the tables of countless Michelin–starred restaurants.
Extremely full–bodied, it makes rich, ripe fruit impressions on the palate and the nose. Price: £157.72.
Honig 2012 Sauvignon Blanc The fruit for this crisp, fresh, medium–bodied white comes from Honig's sustainably farmed vineyard in Rutherford, among others. It has aromas of honeysuckle, peach and grapefruit and tropical flavours of mango, kiwi, lemongrass and grapefruit. Price: £14.52. Waterstone 2011
Chardonnay Carneros
Made from grapes grown in dense clay soils close to the sea in the Carneros region of Napa, this chardonnay has bright, concentrated citrus, pear, apple and nectarine flavours, softened by fermentation in French–oak barrels. Price £14.52.
Rudd 2009 Oakville Estate Red An autumn of long, warm days allowed all varietals (cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc, petite verdot, malbec) to be picked at the same time and cofermented together, making the 2009 layered, sweet and sensual with aromas of mocha, cloves and violets. Price: £130.41.
All wines are available from The Vineyard Cellars (01635 528770; vineyardcellars.com).
HOW TO LIVE THE CALIFORNIAN DREAM
WHERE TO TASTE
Honig, Rutherford The winery is famous for its environmental ethos: solar panels, bluebirds (which eat destructive insects) and barn owls (which eat gophers), rather than herbicides or pesticides. Tours are by appointment only and cost $15/£9.20 per person, waived with every $35/£21 purchase.
Details: 001 707 963 5618; honigwine.com
Peter Michael Winery, Knights Valley Specialises in cabernet sauvignons and chardonnays, using grapes from the on–site vineyards, as well as two other properties owned by Sir Peter Michael. Tours are by appointment only and will be personalised by James Hocking, director of wine for The Vineyard Group. There is no charge, but visitors are expected to have bought PMW wines before or to do so shortly after their visit.
Details: 01635 589414; email jameshocking@vineyard cellars.com
Rudd Estate, Oakville
Tours incorporate not only the vineyards but also the gardens where fruit and vegetables are grown for the restaurant. Tours are by appointment only and cost $80 per person.
Details: 707 944 8577; ruddwines.com
Schramsberg, Calistoga Best known for its sparkling wines and cabernet sauvignons, the estate also produces a flavourful Brut Rosé. Tours of the winery are by appointment only, with five scheduled each day, and cost $50 per person.
Details: 707 942 4558; schramsberg.com
WHERE TO STAY
Auberge du Soleil, Rutherford One of California's top hotels, with rooms that are singlestorey adobe–style units. The pool, with a quiet bar, is a perfect place to relax before dinner at the resort's Michelin–starred restaurant.
Rooms from $700 per night.
Details: 707 963 1211; aubergedusoleil.com
WHERE TO EAT
Solbar, Calistoga Offers everything from duck confit to wild pecan–crusted soft–shell crab. Main courses cost from about $15, and wines range from table wine to Harlan Estate cabernet sauvignons for $1,200.
Details: 707 226 0850; solagecalistoga.com
Long Meadow Ranch, St Helena Offers wine and olive–oil tastings, as well as tasting menus prepared with produce from the ranch and wines from its two vineyard estates.
Wine tastings cost $10, lunch with wines $85, and tasting menus $65.
Details: 707 963 4555; longmeadowranch.com
SONOMA, BERKSHIRE A TASTE OF THE GOLDEN STATE BACK HOME
To sample and learn about Californian wines without leaving Britain, join one of the courses at The Vineyard (the–vineyard.co.uk), Sir Peter Michael's five–star hotel in Stockcross, Berkshire. Its monthly Wine Schools, led by the hotel's experts James Hosking and Alan Holmes, cover the basics and cost £30 (£144.50 with an overnight stay and breakfast). The next one takes place on March 5, from 6.30pm–8pm.
For those who want an internationally recognised qualification in wine, there are three courses endorsed by the Wine and Spirit Education Trust (WSET). Level 1 lasts one day and covers wine styles, food and wine pairing and the correct way to store and serve wine, and includes a three–course lunch with wines and a tour of The Vineyard's 30,000–bottle cellar. The course costs £150 and runs on selected Sundays: April 6 and May 18.
Level 2 lasts three days and covers grape varieties, wine regions, food pairing, spirits, sparkling and fortified wines, and includes lunch with paired wines and a tasting of 44 wines and four spirits. The course costs £385 and runs on Mondays: March 31, April 7 and 14, May 19 and 26, and June 2. The more detailed Level 3 course costs £675 and runs across five days in April: 1, 2, 8, 15 and 29.
For information, bookings and packages combining courses and accommodation, call 01635 589407.
MR&MRS MORGAN
They fell for each other over fine French wines. But bathing in Californian cabernet doesn't have quite the same effect
HE SAYS
My father has given me only two pieces of advice in his life: "Always be nice to policemen" and "Drink the best French wine you can afford". I have focused considerable energy on nurturing both tips for the past 48 years, successfully maintaining both my liberty and a high–grade Bordeaux and Burgundy–enhanced palate.
American wine has never held the same allure. It can be very good, but never quite as good as its French counterparts. The same applies to its cheese, fashion sense and gun laws. But that brilliant movie Sideways made me at least want to try to be persuaded. So Celia and I drove the 90 minutes from Los Angeles to Santa Barbara, where it was filmed, for a weekend of self–indulgent barrel–guzzling.
Everything in Santa Barbara, you quickly discover, revolves around wine. They produce it, drink it, enthusiastically debate its merits, and even scrub you in it here. I'm not sure what Utopia looks or feels like. But I now know what it smells like. My wife arrived back from her spa treatment at the enchanting El Encanto hotel, exuding a strong aroma of the delicious pinot noir she had been massaged in. "A magnificent vintage!" I exclaimed, unfortunately forgetting that the only time Celia wants to hear the word "vintage" is when she is shopping for clothes.
Tucked up in the hills overlooking this quaint little city, the El Encanto is an oasis of high–class serenity. Our suite was spacious and well equipped, and the service friendly and efficient. Our meals, whether scrambled eggs and smoked salmon in bed for breakfast, fresh oysters by the infinity pool for lunch, or dinner in the absurdly romantic candle–lit, sea–view terrace restaurant, were consistently good. But I viewed the hotel merely as a very pleasing port in a storm of alcohol. On the second day, we drove an hour into wine country, to a family–run winery called Grassini.
It was a spectacular journey through miles of vineyards (Sideways saw the number of winemakers in the area rocket), until we arrived at our location, a delightful wooden winery tucked away in an area appropriately named Happy Canyon.
Grassini produces more than 2,000 bottles each harvest, and the family samples every single one, then grades them into four categories to sell to the public. We tasted each of the four, over a sumptuous lunch by the vineyards, then had a surprisingly fascinating tour of the winemaking process.
Later that day, I took our daughter Elise to Santa Barbara zoo, where she out–stared a gorilla, giggled with the giraffes, and ran away from a roaring lion. Then Celia and I spent the evening sampling a few fun bars down by the sea. But everything here eventually comes back to the wine. Before we left, Celia went for a second pinot scrub and came back with lust in her eyes. "Sorry," I said, sadly, "but I think you're corked."
SHE SAYS
Wine has always been the leitmotif of my relationship with Piers. I was wooed with magnums of Chassagne–Montrachet, rendered limp and compliant by a fine Gevrey Chambertin on the night of our engagement, and kept in a lightly soused state by my husband for the whole first year of our marriage presumably in order to delay the inevitable "Oh God what have I done?" moment of sobriety.
Then I got pregnant, moved to LA, became a mother none of which are conducive to heavy drinking and took a break with the wine. Which is why wandering around the grounds of El Encanto in Santa Barbara (possibly the only city in California where wine is considered a pleasure not a moral and ethical violation) in a bathrobe and waffle slippers, with a glass of pinot noir in my hand, feels like coming home.
It helps that I stink of wine. That every pore on my finely exfoliated body is exuding a rich cabernet–like scent, and that my hair smells like it has been rinsed through with pinot grape elixir, which of course it has. I've just had the pinot and cabernet crush sugar–scrub at the hotel spa which I recommend doing after an afternoon at the vineyards.
When I say "vineyards", I mean "vineyard". Piers, who has the attention span of an ADD–affected gnat, did his usual thing of asking our ebullient tour guide, Matt Cooper of Coastal Concierge, "What's the best one to see if you could only see one?" (He does this in museums, too, to the obvious consternation of the staff.)
So off we went to the Grassini Family Vineyards, where we sampled a whole series of merlots and petit verdots over a sumptuous picnic lunch. Spitting out the wine, I'm glad to find, isn't done here, which is why, when we're driven back through "Happy Canyon" to the hotel, we're both feeling pretty damned happy. It's a state only heightened by a brisk 50 lengths in the infinity pool overlooking the Pacific, an hour–long scrub and vinotherapy massage, and more pinot, along with a cheese plate, on the terrace of our luxury suite.
By eight o'clock I am so pinoted–up that my husband is just a blurry, full–bodied shape extended in front of the flat–screen TV on the California king–sized bed. "Sorry," he grins, "but I think you're corked." Frankly, I don't know what is sadder: that he interpreted my pie–eyed gaze as libidinous or that he has spent the past 48 hours thinking up that line.
Piers Morgan and Celia Walden were guests of El Encanto (0845 077 2222; elencanto.com) in Santa Barbara, California. Prices start at £316 per night, based on two sharing a Superior Bungalow. A 50–minute pinot and cabernet crush sugar–scrub in The Spa at El Encanto costs £96 and the Classic Wine Country Tour, with Coastal Concierge (001 805 265 6065; sbcoastalconcierge.com), costs from £301 per person.
There is an extraordinary attention to terroir. One can practically smell, touch and taste the earth's varying qualities in each glass
'Everything in Santa Barbara revolves around wine; they even scrub you in it here. I'm not sure what Utopia looks or feels like. But I now know what it smells like' PIERS
Document DT00000020140301ea31000g4
