{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2867"}
____
  
Features
Dr Johnson, I presume?
Nicholas Shakespeare   
1,574 words
29 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
22,23
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
BOOKS
Super–geek turned lexicographer Jonathon Green has defined slang for our age. As he explains in a new memoir, it's not just a load of bullocks. By Nicholas Shakespeare
Odd Job Man: Some Confessions of a Slang Lexicographer
by Jonathon Green
336PP, CAPE,T£15.99 (PLUS £1.35 P&P) 0844 871 1515 (RRP£17.99, EBOOK £9.99) ***
Language! 500 Years of the Vulgar Tongue
by Jonathon Green
432PP, ATLANTIC,T£20 (PLUS £1.35 P&P) 0844 871 1515 (RRP£25, EBOOK £9.95) ****
Slang represents humanity at its most human," writes Jonathon Green in one of his signature declarative sentences, which leave a slight sense of the author looking around, whiskers a–quiver, to see if anyone is going to yell out "scuzzball" or "swamp–breath", before he plunges on to supply us with a further definition: slang is the lexis of "our less admirable but absolutely unavoidable selves".
Slang's first compilers were chippy individualists, routinely beset by financial worries and complex marital lives. They were never grandees like the 70–odd team beavering away still on the Oxford English Dictionary in Great Clarendon Street (less than 30 yards from where I live in Oxford). They numbered Francis Grose (1731–91), the son of a Swiss jeweller, who was so fat that his servant had to strap him into bed every night; Pierce Egan (1772–1849), a boxing journalist and editor of Real Life in London; and John William Hotten (1832–73), a workaholic pornographer (The Romance of Chastisement) who died from a surfeit of pork chops, and was remembered, unfairly, by the phrase: "Hotten: rotten, and forgotten". Even so, they shared many characteristics of lexicographers like William Chester Minor (1834–1920), one of the OED's founding fathers, who was, quite conclusively, bonkers. As one of Jonathon Green's mentors, Anthony Burgess, cautions: "The study of language may beget madness."
Super–geeks (from geek, meaning fool) to a man, slang's lexicographers tend to be self–appointed guardians who, while cheerfully plagiarising each other in their project to demonstrate the importance and scope of slang, have yet to agree on a definition of what, precisely, slang is, or was – or even its origin. Hotten believed slang to be a gipsy term for the gipsies' secret language; the Oxford philologist Walter Skeat attributed it to the Icelandic slunginn (cunning), while Eric Partridge (1894–1979), a New Zealand ex–soldier, ex–publisher and ex–bankrupt, believed it was the past participle of the Norwegian/ Old Norse verb sling, so giving the concept of a "thrown" language. Into this tradition, Green (from greens, meaning sexual intercourse, b 1948) fits seamlessly. "What goes in a slang dictionary and what does not is often a matter of individual choice," he writes. "Ultimately slang seems to be what you think it is."
Odd Job Man purports to be the autobiography of a "grossly solipsistic" only child who, professionally and emotionally, has spent his life in the margins of slang, and who probably would not demur with his publisher's definition of his life's work, the eponymous three–volume Green's Dictionary of Slang (2011), as "the most comprehensive and authoritative ever compiled".
The lineage of his autobiographical tract may be first glimpsed in Groats– Worth of Witte (1592), the memoir of the cant collector, playwright and possible model for Falstaff, Robert Greene (1558–92), whose life, writes Green, "was a mixture of rackety self–indulgence and hard, productive work". Yet Green's kinship with Greene is largely a linguistic one, since, rather like the roots of slang itself, "thanks to history, I know nothing of my lineage".
Green was not Jonathon's family name ("unless it was Gryn as found in Poland"), more likely some immigrant's compromise made by his Jewish grandparents when they fled Europe from Poland, Germany, Russia or Lithuania. "I have no past," he writes, "and thus must start not at an ancestral beginning but merely at my own." His compulsion to seek out the roots of a word ("it must have origins") is a compensatory reflex. Among the words he hates are wholesome, earnest, joining in and the adjectival use of family.
"Slang is my family," he declares.
And later: "All slang is the calling of names. (And as its recorder I, who am still wondering what my own surname might have been, spend my time giving names to others.)" Green is right to warn us that his is not a conventional memoir.
Restless, unable to sit still very long with himself (variously described as "I", "You", or even more distancingly as "One"), he cavorts around the central theme, the id defined by Freud as "the dark, inaccessible part of our personality", getting willingly lost in the decorations – in Green's case, books: "I read, perhaps because burying oneself in the thoughts of others is the best way of escaping from one's own."
One of his thoughts is that "nothing is 'unsayable': such is the message of slang. Mine, too, at least professionally." In fact, Green uses his memoir rather as its practitioners employ their vernacular; as a carapace, a defensive shield to duck and dive behind – and very much to avoid himself. Just as in rhyming slang, it's the rhyming half that is always left unspoken, so do we learn remarkably little about Green's private life, beyond the odd tossed morsel.
His father was at Dunkirk and managed a chain of clothes shops in Lincoln. Jonathon went to prep school, where he was one of the only Jews, and to Oxford (college not mentioned), where he was the "first Jew" for a surprising number of his friends. He grows his hair long, smokes dope, tries heroin, writes a porn novel ("Diary of a Masseuse") and, just like Grose and Hotten before him, does his apprenticeship in counter–culture publications such as Rolling Stone, Oz (he edited three issues) and Kung–Fu Monthly (as Jo Nat Hon). Today, he lives in Paris and Clerkenwell, doesn't drive, does cook, has some sons, and has used a computer since 1984. And that's about it.
If we don't learn a huge amount about him from Odd Job Man, we do learn about his love affair with "the vulgar tongue", and of the eureka moment c 1970 when he read in Eric Partridge that nafka meant "whore" and was derived from East End Yiddish. But even as Green devoured Partridge, he realised that Partridge in his Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English (1937) had failed to include any American slang. Just as all novelists write not only in response to life, but also in reaction to other novelists – from a grub of dissatisfaction – so with the makers of dictionaries. "I entered this world because I felt that he had failed on modernity, failed on teenage, failed on drugs and the rest of the so–called counter–culture."
Doing his obsessive utmost to fill in the gaps, Green describes his job as the best he can imagine. "We tell people what words mean, where they come from, and when they arrived in the language" – which makes it sound like trainspotting.
In his companion history of slang, Language! 500 Years of the Vulgar Tongue, we learn that testacles first entered the lexicon in 1425, the f–word in 1508, vagina in 1682 and sexual intercourse in 1753, that is to say three years before the first accepted use of slang.
Monitoring the nuts and bolts of this vernacular via Australia and America, right up to the TV series The Wire ("We got a decomp floater was John Doe for three weeks"), Green observes the same themes being addressed repeatedly – and offers up yet another definition.
"Slang is as much a collection of synonyms as anything."
To be aware of the pitfalls is not necessarily to avoid them.
"Etymology is prolix." Where one word will do, Green chooses five ("This is the crux. The core, the pith, the marrow. The medulla…").
Grose's first slang dictionary of 1785 had 4,500 headwords; Green has expanded this to 110,000. He lists 272 synonyms for nonsense (including ballocks, boogie–joogie, bullshit, fairydiddle, how's–yer–father, Jackson Pollocks, pishery–pashery and whim–wham) – which is more, say, than for anger, obesity and vomiting, but not as many as for crime, money and sex. Being the province of the cynical, the amoral and the libertine, slang has not a single word for "love" (or indeed for "cherishing" or "neuroscience"), but 1,740 for "making love" (from action to zot), as well as 1,351 terms for the penis (aaron's rod to zubrick) and 1,180 for the vagina (abc to zum–zum).
If slang were an animal, it would be a rat, decides Green – emblematic of the urban gutter and of the criminal and the victimised.
With a whiskery nostril for anything that smacks of the marginalised, he trawls through the lower depths of popular culture to surface again and again with gleaming linguistic ephemera. In his relentless campaign to drag slang out of the sewer and brothel and into the drawing–room and academy, Green has no rival. He is the Dr Johnson of slang, its Putin, its Mr Toad, its Dickens.
We learn that 'testacles' first entered the lexicon in 1425 and the f–word in l508
Document DT00000020140329ea3t0001z
