{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"1647"}
﻿News
Out of the frying pan, into the election fire
TIM ROSS   
1,214 words
20 April 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; Eire
9
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
"I'M A friendly, affable bloke, but there are limits," warns Grant Shapps.
The Conservative chairman has just fired one of his deputies, Michael Fabricant, for rebelling against the Government's plans for the High Speed 2 rail project and a series of comments on Twitter which were deemed "unbecoming" of a party vice-chairman.
"It was probably the friendliest sacking you'll ever see," Mr Shapps says. "But in the end I wasn't prepared to have somebody as part of my team who is in Parliament working against the Government's own policy."
As the official responsible for overseeing the Conservative campaign, and recruiting activists to the cause, Mr Shapps is not for taking prisoners and Tory rebels should beware.
His neck is on the line as much as anyone's if Ed Miliband wins power at next year's general election.
But Mr Shapps has a more immediate battle on his hands. In one month's time, voters across the UK will elect Members of the European Parliament, along with councillors in 161 English local authorities. A poor showing for the party on May 22 could cost Mr Shapps his job well before the general election contest begins.
Most commentators expect the European elections to be grim for the Conservatives, and for Right-wingers in the party to go into a tailspin in the aftermath of a heavy defeat.
In the week after Maria Miller's resignation over expenses, the chairman is in no mood to compromise.
The Sunday Telegraph's ICM poll today discloses the scale of defections the Tories face - one third of voters who backed the Conservatives in 2010 plan to vote for Nigel Farage's party next month. Why is the UK Independence Party so popular?
"I'm not here to commentate on polls," Mr Shapps responds. "My job as party chairman and a member of the Cabinet is to let people know what the election is about and what is at stake. This election is about Britain's future relationship with Europe. We have to win it on the arguments."
But surely it is essential to understand why Conservative voters are deserting the party in favour of Ukip, or does he no longer care about winning these people back? "I'm just not engaging in the speculative side of this," comes the blunt reply.
What about Mr Farage, whose pintswigging appeal has turned Britain into a four-party country?
"I leave Farage's message to him."
The refusal to discuss how to beat Ukip, which even those close to David Cameron privately admit is the Tories' biggest challenge, seems perverse, given the current state of the polls. Eventually, Mr Shapps reveals a small glimpse of his plan to neutralise the Ukip offer of curbing immigration and cutting Britain's ties with Brussels. "If you care about some of the things Nigel Farage says he cares about, the way to get them is to vote Conservative," he says.
Some MPs believe the party's chances would be improved by Boris Johnson running for Parliament at the general election, and ultimately replacing Mr Cameron as leader. Even the Prime Minister envies the Mayor of London's ability to "defy political gravity", which means that no amount of trouble in his private life seems capable of denting his wide public appeal.
"It's entirely up to Boris what he does. He is a big boy, he can make up his own mind," Mr Shapps says.
However, the party chairman is clear that the mayor would get no special favours if he chose to stand for Parliament in 2015. "These seats come and go and he would have to win one. He would have to apply for a seat.
"I think Boris is great," he adds, quickly. "It would be great to have him back in Parliament."
Are there not already too many "posh white boys" running the Conservative Party? "This obsession from exactly which bit of society we all came from is an obsession only with the press and Labour," Mr Shapps claims.
"Actually, people are more interested in where people are going to, not where they came from."
None the less, image is important in politics, and senior Tories including Michael Gove, the Education Secretary, have noted critically that Mr Cameron's inner circle is dominated by Old Etonians and Oxbridge graduates from similarly gilded backgrounds.
Mr Shapps turns back to Baroness Thatcher, the grocer's daughter, and Sir John Major, a Brixton lad, to show that "we all come from different backgrounds". "I went to a state school. This idea that we are all only from one background - some people are, and good luck to them - but I don't think we should hold it against people because they went to a posh school."
In Sajid Javid, who replaced Mrs Miller as Culture Secretary, the party can now boast Britain's "first male Asian in Cabinet".
Does this mean it's "job done" for broadening the Tory image? "Not job done at all, but it's progress, isn't it?"
Nando's - his choice of venue for the interview over lunch - could be viewed as part of the image Mr Shapps has sought to cultivate as a Tory in the Major and Thatcher tradition: ordinary boy made good. Not for him, the Michelin-starred dining beloved of the political elite. His order of half a flamegrilled chicken, with corn and rice, washed down with two large colas will have been replicated by thousands of office workers around Britain.
State-educated, he set up his own printing and design company more than 20 years ago, which is still running successfully. The business made him rich and he flies his own plane.
But his story has been far from easy.
He survived cancer and a car crash that left him in a coma for a week. Mr Shapps is better placed than some Tories to empathise with the struggles of ordinary families and businesses.
These "hardworking people" are the voters the Tories want to recruit in the 13 months between now and the election. Their best hope of doing so is to ensure families feel the benefit of the economic recovery in their daily lives.
Unemployment continues to fall, and figures last week marked an "important moment", Mr Shapps says, when wages began to rise faster than the price of household goods.
With a year to go until the general election, do people feel better off yet? "I think we still have some way to go," he says. "Labour took us to the biggest bust in 100 years and the truth is it's taken a long time - with no help from them - to get this economy back on track."
As chairman of the party, Mr Shapps has good reason to be treating next month's European and council elections deadly seriously. The Prime Minister is due to reshuffle his Cabinet for a final time in the summer and some in Westminster think Mr Shapps will be a casualty.
"The job of the chairman is to have big broad shoulders and impenetrably thick skin," he says.
'The job of the chairman is to have big broad shoulders'
Document STEL000020140420ea4k00005
