{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3285"}
____
  
News
Fewer Bulgarians, fewer Romanians: the truth about Ukip’s ‘flood’
NIGEL MORRIS DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
1,166 words
15 May 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
4,5,1
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News | * Number of migrants from new member states has actually fallen since restrictions were lifted in January Ukip pressed for apology after fall in Romanians and Bulgarians
The numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians working in Britain have fallen since visa restrictions were scrapped on 1 January, confounding predictions that the controversial move would trigger a dramatic surge in new arrivals from the two countries.
The UK Independence Party (Ukip), which has campaigned on forecasts of a rush of Romanians and Bulgarians heading to Britain, faced widespread accusations of scaremongering following the publication of the statistics.
Ukip predicted the “floodgates will open” and produced posters saying 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians would be allowed to come to Britain, while the pressure group Migration Watch forecast 50,000 arrivals a year from the two nations.
However, the Office for National Statistics reported yesterday that 140,000 Romanians and Bulgarians were in employment in the first three months of the year – a fall of 4,000 on the previous quarter when controls were still in place.
The number marked an increase of 28,000 in the Romanian and Bulgarian workforce over the last 12 months.
The drop since 1 January caught politicians and analysts by surprise. Analysts suggested it could have been caused by negative headlines in Britain last year about the countries, with workers deciding to head to other EU nations, such as Germany, which lifted transitional controls at the same time. Senior figures in the Conservative, Liberal Democrat and Labour parties queued up to lambast Nigel Farage’s party for its mistaken forecasts.
Damian Green, the Home Office minister, said: “They started scaremongering in the run-up to 1 January. They were proved wrong and they have decided to go for broke and continue scaremongering.” Danny Alexander, the Liberal Democrat Chief Secretary to the Treasury, said: "The very modest numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians coming to work in Britain this year is in stark contrast to the inflammatory rhetoric of earlier this year."
Keith Vaz, the chairman of the Commons Home Affairs Select Committee, demanded an apology from Ukip and others who "promised the end of the world". Mr Vaz, who went to Stansted airport on New Year's Day to assess numbers of new arrivals from the two countries only to encounter just a handful of passengers, said: "The committee viewed for itself how the supposed flood of immigration from Romania and Bulgaria was little more than a trickle."
Dr Ion Jinga, Romania's ambassador to Britain, said: "The Romanians' flood to the UK is over even before it started."
Ukip played down the quarterly fall, pointing out that the statistics did not include dependants or non-workers. It preferred to cite separate figures showing numbers of foreign workers in Britain have risen by 292,000 over the last year.
The party's leader, Nigel Farage, said they showed Coalition policy was an "abject failure". He said: "Far from controlling immigration, this government has shown it has absolutely no control over Britain's borders."
Dr Tommy Tomescu, a Romanian dentist and London MEP candidate for the Europeans Party, which campaigns against anti-migrant prejudice, said he was not surprised by the figures.
"I've discussed it with a lot of people from my country and they weren't coming here because of what was happening in the press. Some people are, because of the press, seeing the UK as having a racist attitude, even though I know that is not true."
Ahead of the lifting of visa controls, and under pressure from Conservative MPs, the Government rushed in changes to welfare rules designed to deter "benefit tourism". David Cameron has also called for new rules on "freedom of movement" for new EU member states.
Considering reasons for the unexpected fall, Tim Finch, the associate director of migration at the IPPR think-tank, said Romanian and Bulgarian workers could have come to Britain before the seven-year transitional controls were lifted - or the quarterly figures could simply be a blip.
"There were other countries that Romanians and Bulgarian workers could go to, with Germany also lifting restrictions at the same time as us," he said. "More likely is that we had a 'winter silly season' in which a story was whipped up for political reasons around a policy change on a particular date and that, in reality, migration surges rarely happen."
Peter Wilding, the director of the British Influence pressure group, said: "These figures, which relate to people who are in work and pay taxes, and actually show a drop in numbers, are the exact opposite of the 'invasion' and the 'opening floodgates' Nigel Farage predicted when transitional controls were lifted.
"As recent defections by Ukip's rising stars show, even Ukip's supporters are finding harder and harder to stomach the party's relentless and base-less anti-foreigner rhetoric."
However, Sir Andrew Green, the chairman of Migration Watch UK, said: "These quarterly statistics always fluctuate. The latest annual figures show an increase of 28,000 in a period when restrictions were in place for nine months.
"We believe they are consistent with our estimate of a 50,000 population increase from Romania and Bulgaria for each of the next five years."
Meanwhile a minister admitted yesterday the Government would not hit its target of reducing net migration to tens of thousands. Anna Soubry, the Defence minister, said: "At the moment we don't seem to be on course." The latest figures showed net migration running at more than 210,000. New figures will be published next week.
Additional reporting by Natalie Gil
CASE STUDY
‘IT’S A VERY GOOD LIFE’
Larisa Stanciu, 24, moved to the UK in September, before the EU restrictions were lifted. Stela Ciobanu, 24, moved to the UK on 1 January. Both are from Craiova in southern Romania and were attending an event for the Europeans Party yesterday, which was established by immigrants and is putting candidates forward for the EU elections next week, campaigning against discrimination.
The pair trained as nurses in Romania but now work as cleaners at the Hilton hotel at Heathrow. Reacting to news that the number of her compatriots working in the UK had fallen, Ms Ciobanu said it was possible others were put off from coming to the UK by negative press coverage here.
“There are people making a bad image about us,” she said. Asked whether any other friends were planning on coming here, Ciobanu said: “Yes, but not very many.”
Speaking through a translator, Ms Stanciu said the most difficult thing about her move has been obtaining a national insurance number. And while she now believes it will be easier to get one, she is yet to receive hers. However, Ms Ciobanu’s impression of British people is that they are “very nice”. She said: “It’s a very good life in this country.”
BY NATALIE GIL
Document IND0000020140515ea5f00026
