{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"2245"}
____
  
News
DANNY VS VINCE
516 words
9 March 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
4
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
Young pretender Alexander in power struggle with Cable over who succeeds Clegg as leader
BY SIMON WALTERS AND BRENDAN CARLIN
LIBERAL Democrat Cabinet Minister Danny Alexander was accused last night of positioning himself to succeed Nick Clegg after he appeared to initiate a power struggle with Vince Cable.
Business Secretary Mr Cable is furious that Treasury Chief Secretary Mr Alexander is demanding to be the party's main economic spokesman at next year's General Election.
Lib Dem MPs have accused Mr Alexander, 41, of using the issue to further his ambition of taking over in the event that the party flops at the polls and Mr Clegg is forced to resign.
Colleagues believe that Mr Cable still harbours leadership ambitions. He regrets not standing against Mr Clegg in 2007, but opponents say that he has left it too late.
At 70, Mr Cable is nearly 30 years older than Mr Alexander. There is an even bigger gulf in their politics.
Mr Alexander is a robust ally of Chancellor George Osborne and was recently embarrassed by a Tory MP's suggestion that he had abandoned his Lib Dem roots and 'gone native' since joining the Treasury.
By contrast, Mr Cable has attacked Mr Osborne's 'austerity' cuts, led demands for a mansion tax and applauded the rise in immigration.
At the Lib Dem spring conference in York yesterday, Mr Alexander took to the stage to say that, if the party is still in power after the Election, he will raise the annual income tax personal allowance from £10,000 to £12,500.
And in an apparent attempt to rebuff claims that he is too close to the Tories, Mr Alexander told activists that the Lib Dems had fought the Conservatives to provide tax cuts for working people.
He boasted that Mr Clegg had already picked him to lead the Lib Dem team which will, if necessary, conduct fresh coalition talks with the Tories.
But on Friday, Mr Cable won a standing ovation from Lib Dem supporters in York after making a passionate speech about his political roots.
The Vince-versus-Danny feud threatens to overshadow Mr Clegg's attempts to portray the Lib Dems as Britain's only genuine pro-Brussels party and stave off humiliation at European elections in May.
One Lib Dem MP said: 'It's obvious that Danny's now on manoeuvres and sees himself as a future leader. He's positioning himself as Clegg's replacement if we come unstuck at the Election.
'He knows he has been damaged by claims that he is George Osborne's patsy but it will take more than a couple of speeches on cutting tax for the low-paid to change that.
'No one denies that Vince went through a bad patch last year, when he seemed to lose his touch. But he is back in the game and has not given up hope of getting the leadership.'
A Lib Dem peer said: 'Vince is a household name and widely respected. No one has ever heard of Danny Alexander.'
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140309ea390001a
