{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"740"}
____
  
CULTURE
A pint and a fag with Nigel Farage
By Michael Deacon   
867 words
5 April 2014
10:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage performed his “PC gone mad, couldn’t make it up” routine with his usual cheery aplomb, in a Channel 4 documentary about the Ukip leader, says Michael Deacon
At the current rate, by May 2015 there won’t be a programme on British TV that Nigel Farage hasn’t appeared on. Experts at Guinness World Records calculate that he needs only The Voice, Match of the Day 2, Jamie’s 15-Minute Meals and Rastamouse to complete the set. This week he competes in the final of The Great British Sewing Bee, and a week later he plays a semi-retired actuary in Midsomer Murders .
I’m not complaining. I like watching Nigel Farage. He’s an entertaining man, an eloquent speaker and a smart politician, with a gift for persuading likely voters of all kinds of things – not least that he isn’t really a politician at all, just your ordinary bloke in the street daring to take on the Establishment (he went to the same public school as PG Wodehouse).
Last week, as well as taking part in the second of his televised EU debates with Nick Clegg, he starred in a documentary about himself, Nigel Farage: Who Are You? (Monday, Channel 4). It was fun, particularly the sequence in which he took the TV crew on a tour of the European Parliament in Strasbourg and got lost. (I want to believe this was genuine, and not a contrived ploy to make a point about the labyrinthine nightmare of EU politics.)
REVIEW: Nigel Farage: Who Are You?, Channel 4
In almost every shot he was shown guzzling a pint or smoking a cigarette. He performed his “PC gone mad, couldn’t make it up” routine with his usual cheery aplomb. At one point, he chortlingly deplored the proliferation of “blimmin’ speed cameras”. Speed cameras eh, guv? Honestly. What kind of country are we living in, where a man can be penalised merely for breaking the law.
The programme was made by Martin Durkin, who identified himself as libertarian. Theoretically Ukip are libertarian too, but, as Durkin noted, Ukip’s demands to slash immigration are protectionist – the opposite of libertarian. I’d have liked to hear him ask whether Ukip’s views on immigration are matched by their views on emigration. If it’s wrong for millions of foreigners to come and live in Britain, it must be wrong for millions of British people to go and live abroad, and the estimated 800,000 British settlers in Spain should pack up and come home at once.
READ: Nigel Farage is not up to the job of Ukip leader, says Godfrey Bloom
To dismiss Ukip as fruitcakes, though, is wrong, because it ignores their political skill. They’re terrific at getting across their key message – which is not about leaving the EU, although of course they do want to do that. Their key message is about personal responsibility – and why, if you’re their sort of person, you don’t need to take any. Because everything that’s wrong in your life is someone else’s fault.
Less well-off than you’d like? Dissatisfied with your lot? Don’t blame yourself – blame foreigners, Muslims, liberals, feminists. Blame benefit claimants, posh people, gay people, the media. Blame people richer than you, and people poorer than you. Ukip offer resentment as a kind of reassurance, and fear as a kind of comfort.
All political parties use this type of message to some extent. Ukip simply do it better. They encourage people in the comfortable majority (white, English-speaking, British-born) to think of themselves as a persecuted minority. And, as next month’s European elections will show, it works very well.
If you share Ukip’s thesis that both ’elf ’n’ safety and PC have gone mad, you’ll have enjoyed Alexander Armstrong窶冱 Real Ripping Yarns (Thursday, BBC Four). Not only because it reflected fondly on the Boy’s Own Paper, which from 1879 to 1967 pumped British schoolboys with patriotism and a love of manly vigour. But also because, when Armstrong went to recreate a scientific experiment it published generations ago, he found he wasn’t allowed to show viewers how it was done.
The experiment involved blowing up model spiders. We were permitted to watch the explosions, but not to know how they were caused. Dangerous stuff, information. I’m sure it was for our own good.
The Trip – or, as it’s now titled, The Trip to Italy – returned on Friday on BBC Two. Essentially it’s the same show: Steve Coogan and Rob Brydon, playing caricatures of themselves, talk rubbish and swap impressions in restaurants. It’s very funny.
Now and again it threatens to turn into a deeper, more mature sort of programme, about Coogan and Brydon’s relationships with their families.
Personally I’d rather it didn’t. I could easily take half an hour of solid nonsense from them. There’s almost no plot, but in the interests of more nonsense I’d accept less.
</br>READ: RESTAURANT CRITIC MATTHEW NORMAN ON THE TRIP TO ITALY
Document TELUK00020140405ea45001e4
