{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1089"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
The human touch beats the click of a mouse
Alice Thomson   
935 words
7 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
From supermarket checkouts to cruise ships, interaction is the vital ingredient of life - particularly for elderly people
"You Just can't differentiate now between a robot and the very best of humans" — Isaac Asimov, I, Robot Nearly a third of workers fear losing their jobs to robots and computers, according to a poll published this week, which also found that 38 per cent believe the rise of machines threatens the human race.
Luddites they may be but in some ways they are right. For centuries the replacement of humans by technology has been seen as progress. At the start of the 19th century, 40 per cent of Britons worked in agriculture; now it is only 2 per cent. Instead of becoming a shepherd, my great-great-grandfather became a human calculator, working at the Greenwich Observatory with hundreds of other boys sorting astronomical data. By the next generation the aspirational working classes were beginning to move into service industries. Now even these jobs are becoming superfluous: we don't need as many bookkeepers, bank managers, travel agents, estate agents, librarians or police officers. We can shop for everything from milk to mansions at the click of a mouse and bank online. Even the police force is increasingly made up of computer analysts. Google has created driverless cars.
Only yesterday Cobal Light Systems announced that they have a machine that can scan the contents of bottles at airports. Soon we can do away with the security workers insisting we throw out our toiletries at Heathrow and Gatwick. When everyone has iris recognition at passport control we won't need as many immigration officials.
According to Erik Brynjolfsson, the co-author of The Second Machine Age and a professor at MIT, "It's one of the dirty secrets of economics — technological progress does grow the economy and create wealth but there is no economic law that says everyone will benefit."
There is an uneasy sense that we are going too far and that the withdrawal of human beings won't always be seen as an advance. Social interaction is important, even vital, in many industries and prevents our society becoming a lonely place.
Take supermarket checkouts. One of the few reasons for visiting a shop when it is easier to order online is the personalised service or the outing itself. Supermarkets increasingly expect us to use self-service tills but 84 per cent of shoppers still prefer staff to help them.
People crave contact. More than 40 per cent of elderly people — equivalent to four million pensioners — say that their TV or pet is their main source of company, according to a survey for Age UK. They may interact with their grandchildren on Facebook, their children may phone at the weekend, but they can no longer have a quick natter with the butcher or baker.
They probably see a different doctor each time they have an illness and the hairdresser may provide their only regular encounter with another individual. Loneliness in old age is twice as bad for your health as obesity, scientists have warned.
One cruise ship operator explained to me: "I think the reason we are now so popular is that the elderly go on cruises not to travel, but to recreate a community. They like the chance to have a natter with the beautician, talk to the waitresses and build up a few relationships."
It sounds old-fashioned but companies that recognise this need for human interaction are starting to reap the benefit.
The big four supermarkets are struggling against discount stores but Waitrose has bucked the trend by being people-friendly. My parents shop there for the free coffee and because my father, who has memory problems, has been given a personalised shopper to help him round the aisles. Waitrose has signed up to become a dementia-friendly company and as a result is a haven for the elderly.
Lloyds and Nationwide are working on how to tackle forgotten pin numbers, and establish a "dementia-friendly protocol" for elderly customers — a set of principles that it is hoped all banks, building societies and insurance companies could follow.
Pret A Manger is another leader in this field. The sandwich chain only employs "people who are friendly and lively". Pret staff aren't required to have GCSE maths and English often isn't their first language, but they do need to "treat customers as if they are guests in their own home". The American sociologist Arlie Hochschild calls this "emotional labour", and it has proved successful for Pret.
Human contact is the new luxury. "Our retailers are suffering not just because of price but because, too often, their workers don't seem to care," says Octavius Black, CEO of Mind Gym.
The same applies in healthcare and education. New technology can now diagnose some ailments using artificial intelligence techniques but reassuring nurses will always be important for a patient's recovery. Schools increasingly use whiteboards and online lessons but teachers will still be in demand to inspire and encourage.
Children should be taught empathy as well as IT in the classroom. People skills and good manners should be considered as important as maths or creativity because they will lead to jobs where they can show they are indispensable. As John F Kennedy said when the first robots came off the production lines: "Man is still the most extraordinary computer of all."
We don't need bank managers, estate agents or librarians
Reassuring nurses and inspiring teachers will always be in demand
Document T000000020140507ea5700030
