{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3741"}
____
  
NEWS
Prince Charles 'Hitler' row 'risks triggering international scandal'
By Gordon Rayner Chief Reporter and Roland Oliphant   
586 words
21 May 2014
17:28
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Prince Charles’ comparison of Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler risks an ‘international scandal’ a Russian newspaper warns, as Nick Clegg defends heir to the throne
Nick Clegg has defended the Prince of Wales over his comparison of Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler, saying the heir to the throne is 'entitled to his views' despite warnings from a Russian newspaper the remarks could “trigger an international scandal”.
The Prince caused controversy when he told a woman in Canada that the Russian president "is doing just about the same as Hitler" in annexing Crimea in the Ukraine.
Popular Russian daily paper Moskovskij Komsomolets (MK) said the comment risked complicating already "not unclouded" UK-Russian relations.
"The heir to the British throne, Prince Charles, risks triggering an international scandal and complicating the already not unclouded relationship between Britain and Russia," it stated.
But the Deputy Prime Minister told BBC Breakfast: "I have never been of the view that if you are a member of the Royal family somehow you have to enter into some sort of Trappist vow of silence. I think he is entitled to his views."
He also said: "I’m not going to start comparing one period of European history to another, but Prince Charles is able, I would have thought, to be free to express himself. I don’t know exactly what he did or didn’t’ say in that conversation because he thought it was a private conversation.”
Putin's spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, declined to comment on the issue when approached by journalists.
The Prince made the comment during a visit to a museum of immigration in Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he met a woman who had lost relatives in the Nazi holocaust.
Other commentators have likened Russia's handing of the Ukraine crisis to Hitler’s takeovers of Poland and Czechoslovakia and have criticised Mr Putin's use of special forces in disguise to stir up tension in disputed areas.
The Prince of Wales is due to meet Mr Putin at the D-Day commemorations in France on June 6. So far the Kremlin has not responded to his comment.
Not every MP was as sympathetic to the Prince as Mr Clegg. The Labour MP Mike Gapes, a member of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, said: "If Prince Charles wants to make controversial statement on national or international issues, he should abdicate and stand for election.
"In a constitutional monarchy, policy and diplomacy should be conducted by Parliament and government. Monarchy should be seen and not heard."
A spokesman for Clarence House said: "We do not comment on private conversations. But we would like to stress that the Prince of Wales would not seek to make a public political statement during a private conversation."
The comments are not the first time the Prince has commented on political affairs.
Letters he wrote to a number of government departments between 2004 and 2005 are the subject of a long-running legal battle over whether their contents should be disclosed.
In February the Prince spoke out about the winter flooding on the Somerset Levels, calling it a "tragedy" that "nothing happened for so long".
And in 2010 he attracted criticism for expressing strong opinions on a multimillion-pound plan for Chelsea Barracks in London, telling the prime minister of Qatar - who was chair of the developers - that his "heart sank" when he saw the design by architect Lord Rogers.
Document TELUK00020140521ea5l002e8
