{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2624"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Labour paves way for higher Scottish taxes
Simon Johnson   
771 words
19 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
1
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Labour pledges more power for MSPs over tax
BETTER–OFF Scots face higher taxes on their income and homes under plans unveiled by Labour yesterday to devolve more financial powers to Holyrood after a No vote in the independence referendum.
Johann Lamont, the Scottish Labour leader, said MSPs would be permitted to increase – but not cut – the 40p and 45p income tax rates without touching the basic rate.
Unveiling a report by the party's Devolution Commission, Ms Lamont said Labour would also replace council tax with a mansion tax–style system that would charge Scots in the largest properties more.
She argued that the income tax plans would prevent the Nationalists undermining the Union by creating tax competition with the rest of the UK.
Speaking six months before the September 18 vote, Ms Lamont denied that the proposals would drive better–off Scots towards a Yes vote.
Labour's plans, to be included in the party's 2015 general election manifesto, would make Holyrood responsible for raising around 40 per cent of its £30billion annual budget. The Barnett formula, which gives Scots around £1,300 per head more in public spending than the UK average, would survive but would be used to calculate a lower percentage of Scottish spending.
A series of other taxes would remain the responsibility of Westminster but control over £1.7billion of housing bene– fit would be devolved, allowing Labour to abolish the so–called bedroom tax.
The SNP said the document represented a "huge watering down" of Labour's original proposals following the threat of a "boycott" from Scottish MPs hostile to further devolution .
Ms Lamont argued that transferring even more powers to Scotland would undermine the purpose of the United Kingdom, which the commission's report said was to "pool risks and share our resources". She said Labour's proposals would increase fairness by "reversing Tory tax cuts for the rich" and confirmed that her party wanted to reform the property tax system "to ensure that the richest pay a fairer share".
Denying that she was driving middleclass Scots to a Yes vote, Ms Lamont said: "I've heard people saying that people end up fleeing the country because of the tax policies. All of the evidence is that economic growth is limited by higher levels of taxation, but a low tax economy does create greater inequality. My aspiration is for Scotland not to become a tax haven."
With opinion polls indicating that the largest number of Scots want to remain part of the UK with further devolution, all three of the main unionist parties have pledged to set out plans for the extra powers that would follow a No vote.
The Liberal Democrats have already backed Holyrood raising about twothirds of its revenues. The Tories will publish their proposals in May.
Labour and the Lib Dems agree Holyrood should gain more control over income tax and that more power should be devolved to local government, with the Tories expected to concur.
Under powers already coming to Scotland in 2016, all income tax rates will be cut by 10p in the pound and MSPs given responsibility for setting their own rate depending on their spending plans.
If they wanted to retain parity with the rest of the UK. , the Scottish rate would be set at 10p. The variation would increase to 15p under Labour's plans, thereby making Holyrood responsible for raising more of the money it spends.
The commission also recommended that MSPs be allowed to increase the higher and additional income tax rates, currently 40p and 45p, without touching the basic rate. But the Scottish Parliament would not be permitted to cut the two top rates only without also reducing the basic 20p rate by the same amount .
The commission rejected devolving control of the state pension and a series of other levies, including national insurance, capital gains tax, inheritance tax, North Sea oil taxes, VAT and national insurance. The findings will be debated at the Scottish Labour conference in Perth this weekend.
Staying and going The proposals
Devolved to Scotland
Power to vary income tax by 15p across all rates. Power to increase – but not cut – the higher and additional rates. Housing Benefit. Railways. Crown Estate (to be managed by local communities). Employment tribunals. Health and safety rules. Equalities legislation.
Remaining at Westminster
Financial and economic matters including currency, interest rates, VAT, corporation tax and NI Foreign affairs. Defence. The Civil Service. The core of the welfare state, including the state pension. Immigration. The constitution. North Sea oil taxes.
Document DT00000020140319ea3j000ap
