{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"2214"}
____
  
Observer In Focus Pages
Stuck in the middle - but with who? Lib Dems tread a fine electoral line: In his party's spring conference, Nick Clegg must try to claim credit for coalition achievements while distancing himself from the Tories - and keeping lines open to Labour. By Toby Helm and Daniel Boffey
973 words
9 March 2014
The Observer
OB
28
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
Addressing the Liberal Democrat spring conference in York yesterday, Nick Clegg extolled the virtues of further coalition government. Ruling again with the Tories, or for the first time with Labour, would not be an option on the ballot paper in 2015, he said. But a Labour-only government or a Conservative-only government would be "very bad indeed for the country".
One of Clegg's key messages these days is that his party should continue to be in a coalition, as it has been for almost four years, because it has all been a great success - and because the bigger parties cannot be trusted to run things on their own.
With the Lib Dems sharing power, things have gone well, he says: pupil premiums have been delivered for children; there is a new life without any tax for millions of low earners; and more bounty is to come soon for everyone as the income tax threshold looks set to be raised still higher in this month's budget - thanks to the Lib Dems.
But, with his party way down in the polls and facing the possible loss of all 12 of its seats in the European parliament, Clegg has at the same time to perform a more urgent task: that of quickly finding a way of differentiating the Lib Dems from the Tories, with whom they claim to have been so successful, by attacking them whenever he thinks he can.
Yesterday, there was plenty of Tory-bashing on show in York. Chief secretary to the Treasury Danny Alexander accused the Conservatives of trying brazenly to claim credit for the Lib Dems' successes on tax thresholds, while Vince Cable, the business secretary, said the Conservatives were "fanning the flames of prejudice" over immigration.
Clegg went for both Tories and Labour on immigration, saying that their language was "truly dispiriting".
As they try to portray themselves as distinct from, and not puppets of, the Tories, the Lib Dems flirt with a tactical danger, however. When lurching away from the right, they have to be careful not to creep too close to Labour because to do so would threaten their strategy of remaining, in theory at least, equidistant from the other two parties, one of which is certain to be the largest after the next election.
It is difficult being a Lib Dem these days. In pre-government times, when they were merely the protest party, they could say almost anything that would get them votes. Now, with coalition in play, it is all about positioning between two polar opposites while trying at the same time not to lose the party's own identity.
As well as knocking the Tories, they go for Labour and for Ukip. Clegg's forthcoming debates with Nigel Farage on the EU will give him a chance to position the Lib Dems as the most pro-European party, a message that will resonate with core backers. Again, this is about definition - so much more difficult as the smaller party in coalition than when powerless but independent.
In essence, what Lib Dems are saying is that only they can save the nation from unalloyed Tory or Labour government, and that - given the ills of the other parties - coalition is actually the best option.
Senior figures say that when analysed in detail, the argument is sound because we live in an imperfect world and disagreement can be creative. But by positioning themselves as the safeguards of everything decent, the Liberal Democrats place themselves on a moral pedestal that many would say ill befits the party now, given their record for going back on their word on tuition fees and the post-election VAT rise, and because of the way they have always campaigned in every election to date.
The difficult path that Lib Dems have to tread these days is neatly encapsulated in a document given to the Observer this weekend by rebel Lib Dem MPs, peers and council leaders from the north of England, angry about a lack of investment in their constituencies. It praises the coalition yet tries to damn the Tories.
"Jobs in the private sector are being created," they applaud, only to add: "However in the north-east the loss of public sector employment almost cancels out private sector jobs growth, the public sector jobs being better remunerated".
The document exemplifies the difficulty of criticising the government, in particular the Tory side, in an attempt to reap the dividends on northern doorsteps, while trying to grab some credit from the last four years.
Talking to the Observer yesterday, Alistair Carmichael, Scottish secretary and former chief whip, recognised that some might see a difficulty in attacking the excesses of Labour and the Tories while also making the case for a coalition in which one of those two evils necessarily must play a part - and the larger part.
Ingeniously, he said that all governments were coalitions of interests, and that where the antagonists were different parties in coalition, the divergences at least provoked debates rather than internecine warfare; better, for example, than Labour under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown. "There was a coalition of sorts when Blair and Brown were in government," he said. "It is a more honest coalition when there are two parties. It is a better way of governing."
Captions:
Looking both ways: Nick Clegg's pitch to voters at the election is likely to be that coalition with either party is preferable to unalloyed Labour or Conservative government. Photographs by Martin Argles for the Observer
Document OB00000020140308ea3900020
