{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"1748"}
____
  
News
Moyes deserved more time
487 words
24 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
45
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
£50 LETTER
STEPPING into the shoes of Sir Alex Ferguson was never going to be easy - so I feel sorry for David Moyes.
If directors and fans expected him to carry on where Sir Alex left off at Manchester United, they were always going to be disappointed.
He should have been given one season at least to make his mark.
JUSTINA COOPER East Finchley, N London
SO the prima-donna players at Man Utd have got their way and had Moyes fired.
The team would have been in the same boat with Ferguson in charge. He knew what he was doing when he retired. He left Moyes with a team of overpaid geriatrics.
JOHN GUNNING Llanarmon, Mold
WHO would want to be manager at Man Utd? David Moyes, pictured, took over a team where a lot of the players were past their best.
It is abundantly clear that the club needs to be rebuilt — and without Sir Alex looking over the new manager's shoulder.
PAUL NOTT Southampton
I FEEL sorry for David Moyes getting the boot for not getting the job right.
Why don't they sack some of the players for not doing what they are supposed to do, like Wayne Rooney on £300,000 a week?
PETER COOK Bury, Gtr Manchester
THE sacking of David Moyes clearly shows the dangers of allowing business to take over the running of our sports clubs, solely for profit.
Admittedly, Moyes was appointed to manage a proud and successful club, a task he sadly was unable to perform. However, the players on the field are the only ones who can provide the results.
They must shoulder the majority of blame for the demise of such a prominent club but I doubt they will.
GERALD IRWIN Alton, Hants
HOW is it David Cameron and George Osborne can find £36billion for infrastructure rebuilding and £11.5billion for overseas aid before a General Election, yet the country has been living on a pittance for four years.
It's as though the pair have been hiding cash away only to then magically pull it out of a hat so they can further their own goals.
PAUL NELSON Amble, Northumberland
I AM appalled by the suggestion Brits pay an extra one per cent on National Insurance contributions to plug a £30billion hole in the NHS — as suggested by Frank Field.
What planet is he living on?
Why should people who have paid in for years continue to pay when the reason the NHS is crumbling is because mass immigration has allowed a free-for-all foreigners.
LINDA JACKSON Wirral Merseyside
STAFF at the BBC complain that milk from Yew Tree Dairy delivered to their offices reminds them of Jimmy Savile. What else do they want - everyone named Jimmy or James to be fired?
Grow up and stop complaining over things that are not important.
JILLY BOWLING Winchester, Hants
Document THESUN0020140424ea4o0006y
