{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"10"}
____
  
Features
True liberals should be wary of open borders
Melanie Phillips   
812 words
24 March 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
18
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Mass immigration can do great damage to progressive societies. The numbers do matter
Even now, it is still the issue that dare not speak its name. The Conservative Party has acknowledged that it ignored public concerns over it. Former Labour Cabinet ministers have done public penance for allowing it to happen. The BBC has admitted it was wrong to keep it off the airwaves.
Yet mass immigration is still something on which only one view is considered socially acceptable: that there is nothing wrong with it.
Inconvenient truths pointed out by Migration Watch, such as that at current rates the country will have added by 2028 the wholly unsustainable equivalent of the populations of Birmingham, Leeds, Glasgow, Sheffield, Bradford, Manchester, Liverpool, Bristol and Oxford, cut no ice whatever. Epithets such as xenophobe, Little Englander, racist, bigot and of course rightwinger are hurled against anyone rash enough to point such things out.
A new group of Tory MPs has been formed to restrict ministerial rhetoric on immigration. Its leader, Mark Field, says the Government can't cut immigrant numbers because of EU membership and the operation of human rights law, so it should just shut up about it.
Otherwise, he says, the tone of debate risks suggesting that there is "no middle ground between rabid, drawbridge-raising rightwingers and soft liberals bent on scrapping immigration controls".
Well, he's probably right about the practicalities. Far from the Prime Minister's pledge to reduce net immigration to under 100,000 per year, recent figures show it is 212,000 and rising. Governments are bound to fail on this because open borders are a foundational EU principle. Similarly, promises to reform human rights law sound hollow because nothing less than its whole raison d'être of supposedly universal values arbitrated by judges is the problem.
Where Mr Field is wrong is in his view that criticising mass immigration not only risks being seen as nasty but really is nasty.
I have my own sensitivities about this. My family were Jewish immigrants escaping poverty and oppression; my father's parents came from a village in Poland, my mother's grandparents from a village in what is now Belarus. The iniquity of the 1905 Aliens Act, which heavily restricted Jewish immigrants and refugees in a climate foul with the claim that they were criminals, prostitutes and vagrants, is burned into my consciousness — and my conscience.
But the numbers of Jews, along with the Huguenots, Irish or Afro-Caribbeans who variously arrived on British shores, were minuscule compared with the immigration rate today. And numbers do matter.
This is because a shared national story provides the glue that keeps a society together. If the numbers are too great, that glue comes unstuck. The majority culture becomes just one diminishing voice in a decibel auction of competing groups.
All of the above is given extra bite when it comes to Muslim immigration. For while many Muslims want to adapt to the values of Western society, a significant number want Britain instead to adapt to Islam. The resentment caused is compounded by branding those concerned about this as bigots. Some of them undoubtedly are. But most simply want this liberal society to enforce its own rule: that it welcomes minorities, provided they sign up to the values of the host culture. If minorities either refuse to play that game or become so numerous that they fragment the host culture, the country will eventually become neither liberal nor a coherent society at all. For unless there is an overarching cultural story in the first place, there will be nothing to which minorities can attach themselves.
These concerns are not extreme or "rabid". They are widely shared throughout Europe. A YouGov poll has shown that people in Sweden, France and Germany have similar concerns to Britain about immigration levels. The relaxation in migration controls that has provoked this reaction stems from the belief that the nation state itself is racist and illegitimate — precisely because it is the vehicle through which a culture expresses itself, through its laws, customs and traditions — and needs to be replaced by transnational institutions.
Institutions such as the EU or human rights law must therefore trump national parliaments, while boundaries restricting migration are seen as oppressive.
But such universalism is not progressive at all. By undermining the nation, it encourages tribalism. It is only the nation that can deliver self-government and guarantee freedom and real human rights.
It is the universalists who seem to be enacting the belief that there is no such thing as society, only citizens of the world. Those who oppose mass immigration are not narrow-minded drawbridge-raisers. They are instead defending democracy, the nation and the ties that really do bind.
People's resentment is compounded by their being called bigots
Document T000000020140324ea3o0006x
