{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"703"}
____
  
CULTURE
The Walk Home by Rachel Seiffert, review
By Elena Seymenliyska   
462 words
4 April 2014
08:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A riveting domestic drama illuminates grand political themes
What Jozef and Marek are doing in Glasgow is clear. Like plenty of Polish people before them, they have come to the UK to make their fortune: enough, at least, to build a new life in a new place and even employ their own Polish nannies one day. Failing that, they can always head back to Gdansk to build their own houses there, after learning the tricks of the trade making home improvements for the British.
But what’s Stevie, their newest, youngest recruit doing in their midst? A native of Glasgow, he keeps himself to himself. The bedroll under his arm, the scuffed trainers on his feet and the patch on his knee of the Red Hand of Ulster all make his building crew uneasy. Jozef can tell a hard worker when he sees one, but he’s wary of this boy. He has enough worries on his shoulders, what with the job overrunning, and his fiancée already back in Poland, tired of waiting for their real lives to begin.
Yet Stevie isn’t as abandoned as he seems. He has family across town in Drumchapel: his Gran, his Da, his uncle, all waiting for him to find his way home. Ever since his mother left, Stevie has been running, from Glasgow to London and back again. What pushed her away was Stevie’s dad going back to the drums and the Orange Order, the very “papes and prods” business that had made her bolt from Northern Ireland in the first place.
 Rachel Seiffert窶冱 first novel, The Dark Room  (2001), was shortlisted for the Man Booker prize. The Walk Home is her third novel, a moving account of a modern family split by an age-old sectarian divide. Yet, despite its grand political theme, this is a very modest book, operating on the domestic scale. It can become claustrophobic at times – there is little room to breathe in these small rooms with their narrow horizons. But while the conflict in which her characters are trapped might be ugly, the men and women are captivating.
The contemporary twist of the Polish immigrants struggling with their own issues of identity and belonging adds another layer of symbolism, and is further proof of Seiffert’s enviable talents as a writer. Her meaning is clear: journeys back are never simple. When Jozef asks Stevie: “Why don’t you go home now?” Stevie shoots back: “Why don’t you?”
 The Walk Home 
Rachel Seiffert
Virago, 294pp, Telegraph offer price: £12.99 plus £1.35 p&p (RRP £14.99). Call 0844 871 1515 or see books.telegraph.co.uk
READ: AN INTERVIEW WITH RACHEL SEIFFERT
Document TELUK00020140404ea44000xj
