{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3088"}
____
  
NEWS
Couples left childless by default after avoiding the subject of parenthood
By John Bingham Social Affairs Editor   
634 words
25 April 2014
08:15
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
As many as four in 10 childless couples have only ever discussed the possibility of having children either briefly or not at all, research suggests
Large numbers of couples are ending up childless by default because they never fully discussed the possibility of having children, a study suggests.
Research presented to the British Sociological Association found that as many as four in 10 childless couples either had only had one conversation about the possibility of having children or none at all.
In some cases the conversation took only seconds because both parties felt there was little to discuss while others said they only spoke about it because of pressure from family or friends.
Edina Kurdi, a lecturer in social policy at Middlesex University, conducted surveys and face to face interviews with a sample of women, either married or in long-term relationships who had chosen not to have children.
She said that overall what was surprising was the “negligible” amount of discussion many of the couples involved had apparently had.
Among the responses, one woman explained: “It never really got said, it was just realised by our actions – we had a two-seater car.”
Another added: “We didn’t discuss really, just mutually agreed - there was no issue to discuss.”
A third said: “There is no discussion - I don’t want kids and I would never bother to pursue a romantic relationship with someone who did, it would be a pointless endeavour.”
While Britain has been experiencing a baby boom in the last five year, in part because of significant immigration of young adults from overseas, the number of couples choosing not to have children is also rising.
A study published by the Office for National Statistics last year showed that the number of childless women had doubled in a generation.
Just one in five 45-year-old women in England and Wales had not had children, compared with only one in 10 a generation earlier.
The ONS said the shift could reflect changing lifestyles as well as career pressure to put off starting a family until it is “too late”.
“Not having children is obviously a very important decision, and what was interesting from the research was the negligible amount of discussion that couples engaged in – many are agreeing not to have children in one conversation, or in an unspoken way,” said Miss Kurdi
“One possible reason that couples did not need to talk about the issue much is that they could accurately sense their partner did not want children from their beliefs and lifestyle.”
She added: “Very little attention has been paid to the negotiations within romantic relations about not having a family, even though developed countries are facing a general decline in fertility combined with an accelerated rate of childlessness.”
Justine Roberts, founder of Mumsnet, the parenting site, said that the evidence from online forums suggested that even where women have seemingly only discussed important matters briefly with their partner, this did not mean they had not given the matter serious thought and discussed it with friends.
“Very often they have thought about it and possibly discussed it with others elsewhere, perhaps even online anonymously,” she said.
“Our busiest and biggest forum is a forum called ‘Am I being unreasonable?’, very often people trying to get some sense of validation of their emotions and what they are feeling about things.
“That ranges from very serious subjects to less serious but often it involves going into the minutiae of a conversation that may take a few seconds in real life.
“The subsequent unpicking of what it all means can be easier to do online anonymously and very often people want to do so before.”
Document TELUK00020140425ea4p00106
