{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"3606"}
____
  
News
LABOUR MP'S DEVASTATING ATTACK ON MILIBAND
BY BRENDAN CARLIN POLITICAL REPORTER   
676 words
23 February 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
53
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
ED Miliband's Labour leadership was ripped to shreds last night in a devastating attack by an MP from his own party.
Simon Danczuk made clear he thought Mr Miliband had got it wrong on everything from immigration to his campaigns on 'One Nation' Britain. And he suggested Mr Miliband's team was feeble compared to Tony Blair's.
Outspoken Mr Danczuk added that Mr Miliband's cost-of-living campaign was now 'at the end of its sell-by date'. The Rochdale MP added:
l Labour must toughen up on welfare, saying: 'I know people who won't work - and should work.'
l Mr Miliband's cherished One Nation slogan is 'over-used and hackneyed'.
l Labour had 'got it wrong' on immigration and been ineffective in how 'to send people back'.
l Mr Miliband's Shadow Cabinet is 'one-dimensional' compared to Mr Blair's team of winners.
To add insult to injury, Mr Danczuk praised Prime Minister David Cameron and his Coalition deputy Nick Clegg, saying the were 'doing some good'.
In an interview with Total Politics magazine, Mr Danczuk poured scorn on Mr Miliband's 'cost-of-living' slogan, saying: 'It is probably coming to the end of its sell-by date, isn't it? People get turned off by it.'
He also stepped up his attack on Mr Miliband's One Nation crusade, the much vaunted centrepiece of his leader's 2012 Labour conference speech.
Mr Danczuk, who last month suggested the crusade was 'vacuous', said 'significant' Labour figures did not like it. He said: 'One Nation isn't tied to anything, is it? It was a great speech, but it's over-used, hackneyed.'
The MP ridiculed spin-off Labour campaigns on 'One Nation Social Security' and 'One Nation Banking'.
'For goodness sake! If I went round talking like that on the doorstep, I'd get short shrift. You'd see doors being slammed in your face.'
The MP warned Mr Miliband not to oppose all the Coalition's welfare reforms - and said Labour should be far tougher on benefits reform.
Politics that allows endless benefits spending was 'too comfortable, too easy for people on the Left', he said, adding bluntly: 'Where's the money going to come from? I know people who won't work and should work.'
In a jibe apparently aimed at the Labour leadership, he continued: 'If a politician doesn't know anybody like that, then they need to get out more because they're not in touch with reality.'
But he singled out the Coalition for praise on welfare.
'They [the Coalition] are doing some good . . . I welcome some of that. You can't just throw the baby out with the bathwater and say everything they're doing is bad.'
Mr Danczuk was just as scathing about Labour's failure to speak out on immigration. 'The Labour Government were far too relaxed on immigration . . . We've never had a system that's been effective in sending people back. We should've been much more on the ball. We got it wrong,' he said.
Implying that Mr Miliband's Shadow Cabinet was not a patch on Mr Blair's line-up, he said the former PM 'built a team around him that played to their strengths which made Labour more electable' while Mr Miliband's was too 'one-dimensional'.
Mr Danczuk attacked Gordon Brown, Mr Miliband's predecessor as Labour leader, over the notorious 2010 Election campaign incident involving Rochdale Labour pensioner Gillian Duffy. Mr Danczuk's campaign was almost derailed when Mr Brown branded Mrs Duffy a 'bigoted woman' in a conversation between him and an aide recorded on tape after she questioned him over immigration.
The MP claimed Labour aides wrongly blamed him for the incident.
'He [Mr Brown] hasn't apologised to me at any stage,' said Mr Danczuk.
'You'd have thought he would. I'd have said sorry if I were him,' the MP added.
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140223ea2n0002f
