{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"569"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Support for Ukip is growing in the Labour heartlands
Leo McKinstry   
908 words
7 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
NIGEL FARAGE'S overwhelming victory in his two debates against Nick Clegg has transformed the political landscape. Through his barnstorming performance Farage has not only brought new credibility and popularity to the UK Independence Party but has also given a highly articulate voice to large swathes of the public who feel betrayed by our arrogant metropolitan elite.
The impact of Farage's triumph was revealed in opinion polls at the weekend that showed a surge in support for Ukip. One, looking at voting intentions for the European Parliamentary elections next month, put Ukip on 30 per cent, neck–and–neck with Labour. There is little doubt that Ukip could emerge the biggest party in the Euro contest, a remarkable outcome for an organisation with no seats at Westminster.
Conventional wisdom holds that it is Cameron's own Conservatives who will suffer the most damage from the rise in Ukip, particularly at the general election in 2015. In this fashionable narrative Farage's followers are portrayed as disgruntled, Right–wing Home Counties Tories, spluttering into their gin–and–tonics at the follies of the coalition and the European Commission.
In fact most are workingclass and have never voted Conservative. That's why Labour's complacency is so misguided. Labour strategists have seen Ukip's rise as a welcome development that will destroy the Tory vote and sweep Ed Miliband into Number 10. But that could be wishful thinking for it now seems the Ukip insurgency could be just as big a threat in Labour's heartlands.
RESEARCH by academics Matthew Goodwin and Robert Ford shows of the 10 most "Ukip–friendly" constituencies, eight are held by Labour. And "the largest concentrations of core Ukip supporters are not found in Tory seats in the shires but in Labour fiefdoms such as Miliband's in Doncaster North."
Ukip's populist message resonates most strongly with those neglected or marginalised by the political establishment. All the points Nigel Farage made so forcefully against Clegg could have been directed against Miliband. The Liberal Democrat and Labour leaders are the Tweedledum and Tweedledee of progressive orthodoxy, obsessed with mass immigration, multi–cultural diversity, European integration and the green agenda. Behind a deluge of weasel words Miliband is as opposed as Clegg to a referendum on Britain's EU membership. Neither truly believes in democracy or in trusting the public.
Miliband's ideological stance shows how Labour has abandoned its grassroots. The party was founded more than a century ago to represent the working class but now, in the grip of its pro–EU, diversity–fixated dogma, regards traditional supporters with contempt.
While the nanny–employing, restaurant–using, propertyrenovating classes squeal with delight at cheap foreign labour, British workers find themselves squeezed out of the job market or forced to endure lower living standards, while public services, especially housing, the NHS and schools, are put under intolerable pressure.
Protest at this social revolution and they are treated as reactionaries and extremists. That shameful attitude was exemplified by Gordon Brown in the 2010 general election as he called Rochdale pensioner Gillian Duffy "a bigoted woman" for daring to voice concerns about mass immigration.
Disdain for the traditional working–class now runs through the Left, mixing snobbery with brute intolerance. So Yasmin Alibhai–Brown, one of the progressives' favourite commentators, called them "the always wretched and complaining classes" sneering that "taxpaying immigrants past and present keep indolent British scroungers on their couches drinking beer and watching TV".
It's no coincidence Alibhai–Brown has become so concerned about Ukip that she wants our democratic traditions of free speech overturned. "The media has to be kind of controlled in terms of how often Farage gets to rule the airwaves," she said last week.
THIS oppressive, totalitarian outlook led Labour–controlled Rochdale Council in 2012 to take three Eastern European foster children from their adoptive family because the parents were members of Ukip so "not the right cultural match".
Metropolitan Labour and the Left have betrayed the working classes in a host of other ways, such as their finger–wagging puritanism over smoking, drinking and diets. In contrast Farage's appeal is that he has no time for this moralising interventionism. Pint in one hand and cigarette in the other he wants people to take responsibility for their own lives.
Similarly Farage is fascinated with our heritage while the Left derides the working class's instinctive patriotism, the noble impulse which helped win two world wars against tyranny. "British history has to be revised, rethought or jettisoned," proclaimed the Labour government's Commission on the Future of Multi–Ethnic Britain in 2000, summarising the Left's instinctive self–loathing.
Labour tries to cover its attacks on the working class with endless anti–Tory, toffbashing rhetoric. But this class war language is deeply hypocritical, for Labour is awash with privilege. Leading frontbenchers Ed Balls and Tristram Hunt went to private schools while Miliband is a property millionaire who went to Oxford. Labour deputy leader Harriet Harman, niece of the Countess of Longford, was sent to St Paul's, while Paul Nuttall, Ukip deputy leader, was educated at a secondary school.
Enveloped in politically correct ideology Labour can no longer claim to be the party of the people. That is why Miliband should be terrified of Ukip's rise.
'Ed Miliband should be very afraid of Farage'
Document THEEXP0020140407ea4700040
