{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1793"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel Farage takes his message to the country
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
770 words
23 April 2014
12:20
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip leader embarks on tour of townhall rallies to embrace the 'people Labour betrayed'
"We've got to take the fight to Labour, a party that used to stand up for working class people, and has now turned its back on them... What the Labour party did in government was to betray working-class people."
With those words Nigel Farage began his tour of Britain last night as he addressed a public meeting in Sheffield. In a month's time Britain will vote in the European elections. Mr Farage predicts he will win, driving David Cameron's Conservatives into third place.
He thinks he can do it on the back of working class voters, many of whom have never voted Tory, angered by immigration and disaffected with politicians who speak a language they don't recognise.
Academics have dubbed Ukip’s base the “left behind” voters – typically older, typically male, typically northern, less likely to be university educated, who feel they no longer recognise or have a role in modern Britain.
Mr Farage chose Sheffield, the former steel capital of Britain that now has a large student population, for his starting point because it is the constituency of Nick Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister who challenged him to two televised debates last month. "I returned the complement by coming here," he said.
But it is also, Farage points out, the constituency of David Blunkett, who as Labour home secretary oversaw the immigration policy which - as Farage puts its - left the door open to 400 million Europeans. Now Mr Blunkett warns that the influx of Roma into the city could trigger riots.
Tonight Mr Farage will speak at Gateshead, a Labour seat since 1945. On Thursday its the Free Trade Hall, Manchester, where Labour took 69 per cent of the vote at the last election. Then Dudley (Dudley North is narrowly Labour, Dudley South held by the Tories). Next week its Portsmouth (held by Liberal Democrats and Tories), Bath (solid Lib Dem) and Swansea (both seats Labour). The week after, Derby (both seats Labour), St Ives (Liberal Democrat, it's become a holiday home for the rich, but much of Cornwall has high levels of deprivation) and then London.
Public meetings with party leaders are increasingly rare and hard to get into, the seats filled either by the employees of supportive companies in the case of David Cameron's Q&As, or (often) party activists in the case of Ed Miliband's. The audience in Sheffield last night treated Farage to endless cheers, applause, whistles and guffaws at every joke, and queued up to shake his hand.
"Where other parties depend upon the media to spin their messages, we are the only party that still believes in hosting public meetings and taking our argument straight to the voter," says Patrick O'Flynn, Mr Farage’s press officer.
The party's spring conference was in the retirement town of Torquay, and last year's autumn conference (the one when Godfrey Bloom described women as "sluts") in a Methodist Hall opposite the Commons. This year Farage will put his tanks on Ed Miliband’s lawn, and hold it at Doncaster Racecourse, on the edge of Ed Miliband's constituency.
Asked what he thought about Hermann van Rompuy, the President of the European Council, staying at Chequers with David Cameron. "Isn't it wonderful? I'm in Sheffield, out campaigning to get the Labour vote, and he's best mates with Dave. The timing is absolutely delicious."
Mr Farage has intentionally framed this election as a battle between the Eton-and-Oxford-educated Westminster Elite (his words) and the rest of Britain, who ask the questions only Ukip will honestly answer.
That is why he terrifies Tory MPs, and that how he yesterday brushed off the protests of Mike Gapes, the Labour MP for Ilford North, who said his poster campaign was designed to "sow fear, animosity and hatred towards immigrants". (Mr Gapes went to Cambridge.)
But not everyone agrees. Ukip supporters entering the Sheffield Mercure hotel last night were met by dozens of protesters, none of them visibly members of the Political Establishment, with placards reading: "Ukip out: immigrants welcome here."
Farage on the road: tour dates
April 22 The Mercure Sheffield
April 23 The Sage Gateshead
April 24 Free Trade Hall, Manchester
April 25 Dudley Town Hall
April 28 Guildhall, Portsmouth
April 29 The Forum, Bath
April 30 Liberty Stadium, Swansea
May 1 The Riverside, Derby
May 2 Burgess Hall, St Ives
May 7 Emmanuel Centre, London
Document TELUK00020140423ea4n0025u
