{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3434"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Ukip's record: One in 12 of the Ukip councillors elected last year have quit seats: Breakthrough candidates plagued by controversies: Supporters 'alienated and pessimistic', research finds
Patrick Wintour and Rowena Mason   
1,003 words
15 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
13
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Ukip has lost a dozen of the county councillors who won their seats when the party made a breakthrough at last year's local elections, research by the Guardian has found.
The research also shows that Ukip voters are more distrusting, angrier and pessimistic than other voters and reveals the extent to which resentment of immigration dominates the concerns of the party's supporters.
Of those planning to vote for Nigel Farage's UK Independence party in next week's European elections, 67% are more likely than the average Briton to say they feel alienated, 47% more likely to feel ignored and 35% more likely to be angry. They are 47% less likely to feel hopeful. Only 3% of Ukip supporters say that they trust politicians and only 10% trust the government, compared with 8% and 15% respectively for other people.
The research, by Opinium for the Guardian among 2,000 voters last week, showed 92% of those planning to vote Ukip in the European polls agree with the statement "mass immigration is making parts of the UK unrecognisable and like a foreign land" while 81% believe that immigration from Europe has been bad for the UK.
Immigration remains the dominant issue for Ukip voters at the European election; 74% of Ukip voters say immigration is an important issue compared with 47% of all voters. Three-quarters of new Ukip supporters cite immigration as the chief reason for Farage's party, and not Europe. On average, Ukip supporters believe that 38% of the UK population are immigrants.
Ukip voters believe that immigration from the EU has had a negative impact on virtually every aspect of UK life, from housing (87%), welfare (85%), population (84%), health (80%), education (80%), jobs (80%), crime (79%) and values (78%).
A year on from the May 2013 poll, the party is down by 12 county representatives out of the 139 who were elected.
The majority of the new Ukip county councillors appear to have been working actively in their communities over the past 12 months, with statistics showing they have the best attendance record of any party at more than 92% of compulsory meetings. In many areas, they have fought to limit councillor allowances and perks, campaigned against HS2 and mounted protests against EU flags being flown in town halls.
However, the band of newly elected councillors also appears to have been plagued by a disproportionate number of controversies. They include Peter Lagoda in Cambridgeshire, who has pleaded guilty to benefit fraud amounting to almost pounds 25,000; Matthew Smith in Norfolk, who was charged with electoral fraud earlier this year; and Peter Georgiou, also in Norfolk, who resigned after admitting to shoplifting from Poundstretcher
Among those who have held on to their jobs is Victoria Ayling in Lincolnshire, now a parliamentary candidate, who was filmed saying she would like to "send the lot back". Ayling claimed she had been referring to illegal immigrants.
Others to have left include the Worcestershire councillor Martin Jenkins, who resigned in protest at the party's anti-gay marriage stance, and a Somerset councillor, Nigel Pearson, who had "irreconcilable differences" with his local party. A Worcestershire councillor, Tony Baker, died after just five weeks in office and the seat was retaken in a byelection by a Conservative.
Over the year, the party has gained new councillors through defections on a district, borough and town level, with 19 coming from Labour and the Conservatives in London alone. However, its county council losses during the year are many times higher than the other parties, with overall levels of Conservative and Labour councillors remaining almost stable.
Dr Matthew Goodwin, a politics expert at Nottingham University, said this would not undermine Ukip's support and, in fact, the controversies may add to its appeal.
"While it is tempting to think the performance of radical right councillors or members of the European parliament might impact on their support, it clearly does not," he said.
But Ukip has been accused of peddling scare stories after its core European campaign message was damaged by statistics showing the number of immigrants from the Balkans had fallen since labour restrictions were lifted in January.
The party has insisted that lifting border controls on 27 million Romanian and Bulgarian citizens would lead to a flood of new migrants to the UK, but instead the number fell by 4,000 in the first quarter.
The Conservatives and Liberal Democrats both mounted fiercely worded attacks on Ukip with Anna Soubry, junior defence minister, accusing Ukip of making "wild and absolutely offensive claims".
Damian Green, police minister, claimed Ukip was increasing its scaremongering. Vince Cable, business secretary, said the figures vindicated those calling "for calm about scare stories of plane loads of Bulgarians arriving". A Liberal Democrat video highlighted racist Islamophobic statements by Ukip supporters, asking: "Are you going to let these people win?"
According to the Guardian poll, institutions that Ukip supporters are most likely to trust are the monarchy (56%) and the NHS (48%). However, with the exception of the monarchy and tabloid newspapers, Ukip supporters are less likely than the average Briton to trust a range of institutions, including trade unions (35% less likely to trust than average Britons), the judiciary and courts (34% less likely), banks (29% less likely) police (24% less likely) and UK universities (17% less likely). The polling is based on a sample of 2,027 adults interviewed on 7-9 May .
The Guardian research comes as an Ipsos-Mori poll showed Farage's own personal satisfaction ratings have fallen back by seven points since April, with a net dissatisfaction rating of -11, only two points better than David Cameron.
Captions:
139
Number of Ukip county councillors who were elected in May 2013. Since then the party has lost 12 of these representatives
Document GRDN000020140515ea5f0002d
