{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1253"}
____
  
NEWS
Migrant workers essential for care system, says health minister; Norman Lamb says that young British people don't have the skills to fill jobs in the sector and calls previous training a "massive failure"
By Georgia Graham political correspondent   
403 words
28 February 2014
11:44
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The care system would collapse without migrant workers because British young people do not have the skills to fill jobs in the sector, a health minister has said.
Norman Lamb said that foreign workers were propping up the system because training British people for such roles had been a "massive failure" in the past.
His words come as the government was accused of losing its grip on immigration policy after figures from the Office for National Statistics showed net migration - the difference between those coming into Britain and those leaving rose by a third in the 12 months to the end of September.
It now stands at 212,000 compared to 154,000 the previous year leading Vince Cable, the Business Secretary, to claim David Cameron's pledge to bring net migration down to the tens of thousands "unworkable."
Mr Lamb, the Liberal Democrat minister responsible for care, said that, in the past, giving youngsters the right skills to compete had been a "massive failure."
He told the Eastern Daily press that "balanced view" should be taken of figures which showed some 24,000 Romanians and Bulgarians arrived in the year to September 2013 - nearly three times the 9,000 who arrived in the previous year.
The ONS said around 70 per cent came to work, while 30 per cent came to study and Mr Lamb said young people in Britain often didn't have the skills to do the jobs that migrants were coming to do.
He said: "I'm acutely aware, for example, in my own area of interest that the care system in Norfolk, let alone everywhere else, would collapse without workers from other countries.
"The vast bulk of people who come to this country come to work and we benefit from that," he added.
"What we have been clear about is that our youngsters need to have the skills to compete for jobs... It is very tempting to claim that these people are coming into our system to take our benefits, but most are doing pretty vital jobs in care, in the hotel and hospitality industry. Most of these people are working very hard and contributing to our economy."
Document TELUK00020140228ea2s003pj
