{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1927"}
____
  
News
Young people are giving up on democracy
By Tim Wigmore   
790 words
7 March 2014
09:06
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
In the history of universal suffrage in Britain, young people have never been less important. No wonder that voting holds so little appeal: young people vote less in Britain than anywhere else in the European Union.
Just 38 per cent of Brits under 25 have voted in any election in the past three years, according to Eurobarometer. That's 18 per cent less than the EU average – and half as many as in Malta. And only 39 per cent of under-25s think that voting is a civic duty, compared with 80 per cent of over 65s.
These are the roots of the generational imbalance in British politics: young people don't vote, so politicians have no incentive to improve conditions for them. It's always fashionable to belittle the youth of today and imagine that they are worse than previous generations. The facts mostly tell a different story: today's young are less inclined to use drugs and get drunk than previous generations, and under-18 pregnancy is now at its lowest level since 1969. But it's no myth that young people have never been less inclined to partake in party politics. In 2010, over 65s were 23 per cent more likely to vote in the general election than under 25s. This "generation gap" didn't exist in 1964; as recently as 1992, it was only 12 per cent.
Expect it to be even worse in 2015: the main reason for the modest spike in young voting in 2010 was a surge in support for the Liberal Democrats, who now hope that the young will only remember the tuition fee increase as "that thing off Newsround" come the next election, as one MP put it to me. The Conservatives point to doubling apprenticeships in Government – but under-25 unemployment remains over 900,000, while the party is prone to indulging in unworkable suggestions like scrapping all housing benefit for under-25s. Labour has proposed a youth jobs guarantee to curb unemployment, and has high hopes that the community organiser Arnie Graf can increase turnout among the young, but only 28 per cent bothered to vote in the recent Wynthenshawe and Sale East by-election. All three parties make delusional noises about replicating the effects that social media had on Barack Obama's victories. Pull the other one: the three main parties have a combined 400,000 likes on Facebook; the US president has 40 million. The young see nothing they like in Ukip, either: only five per cent of under-25 voterswould plump for purple.
The effect of the disillusioned young is simple: it is expedient for politicians to ignore them and focus on those who actually vote. An ageing population also means that the electoral bounty of the young is less than in the past. The combination inevitably results in policy that favour elderly voters over young non-voters; to give one example, the average working-age income is less, in real terms, than it was in 2003, yet the average pensioners' income is 3,000 higher.
In The Last Vote, Philip Coggan's book on the threats to Western democracy, the author concludes with a call for all people to vote. It's not one that young people are heeding, which has led to a radical suggestion by the IPPR: that it should be compulsory to vote in the first general election after becoming eligible. This would make it harder for politicians to ignore the young – and would also make it harder for the young to ignore politics. The comments from someone I encountered in Doncaster – “Politicians don't care about me, they really don’t. I don't vote for anybody"- embody the problem. The young see no point in voting and disengage from politics for life. And when politicians aren't compelled to address people's concerns, they don't. Turnout in the UK fell from 77 per cent in 1992 to 65 per cent in 2010. Compulsory voting could improve matters – not just because of more first-time voters but by making voting a habit for life. Research shows that voting in one election increasesthe probability of voting in a subsequent election by 13 per cent.
Compulsory voting for the young would amount to a profound change to the nature of British democracy. But at least the suggestion comes from askingthe critical question:what can be done to make young people vote? It's one that shamefully few politicians are concerned with.
More by Tim Wigmore:
Rising interest rates will mean much more debt
Tories will regret their reckless immigration pledge
Can the Conservatives win without ethnic minorities?
Follow @TelegraphBlogs
Document TELUK00020140307ea37002h1
