{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2"}
____
  
News
Thatcher would be 'secretly cheering Farage'
Hannah Furness   
461 words
24 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
9
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
She leant towards Ukip but would still vote for Tories, says Aitken
BARONESS Thatcher would be "secretly cheering on" Nigel Farage and the UK Independence Party if she were alive today, her former colleague Jonathan Aitken has said.
Mr Aitken said Lady Thatcher would have had "a lot of leanings" towards Ukip policies, with Mr Farage expressing a lot of her own views.
Arguing Ukip ideas on immigration, the European Union and Brussels domination were closely aligned with Lady Thatcher's own, he added she would not publicly admit voting for Ukip but would be cheering their successes.
Speaking at the Oxford Literary Festival about his biography, Margaret Thatcher: Power and Personality, he was asked what Lady Thatcher would have made of Mr Farage.
"I think secretly she would have cheered him on," he said.
"I think he voices a lot of her prejudices.
"She would never have said I vote for Ukip, I vote for Farage. But a lot of the views Nigel Farage expresses … on immigration, on the idea [that] Britain can manage as a worldleading nation without relying on the European Union, and above all she was really fed up [with] centralism and liberalism and Brussels domination.
"I think she would have had not just a sneaking sympathy but a lot of leanings towards Nigel Farage, without ever quite coming out for Ukip."
Mr Aitken, who was jailed for perjury in 1999, served as a Conservative MP from 1974 and is a former chief secretary to the Treasury.
His thoughts echo the comments of Mr Farage himself, who last year claimed his party was the "true heir" to Lady Thatcher's ideas on Europe.
He told the Parliamentary Press Gallery: "Who is the heir to Thatcher? Is it David Cameron? Good God, no. Most certainly not. She was about leadership. He appears to be far more about followership."
Mr Aitken dated Lady Thatcher's daughter, Carol, for three years as a young man, before breaking up with her. The then prime minister reportedly told colleagues she was "damned if she was going to give a job to a man who made Carol cry."
Speaking of his memories of Lady Thatcher, Mr Aitken said she had "precious few regrets" but both "human and political feelings" towards those whose lives she affected.
"The bigger the issue, the more magnificently she tended to respond," he said. "She could be brutally unkind to people her own size, but she was never rude to doormen or secretaries."
He added Lady Thatcher had been "often insecure" and tended to look favourably on any man she found goodlooking. "She had a definite weakness for people she thought were, in a male way, vaguely attractive," he added.
Document DT00000020140324ea3o0003q
