{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2126"}
____
  
Guardian Family Pages
Family: FamilyLife
Christine Seal Lydua Dalitso Sarah Holmes   
1,270 words
17 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
6
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Snapshot My 1950s rockabilly dad
It's 1958, I'm six years old and posing in our backyard with my rockabilly dad while my mother operates the Brownie camera that commits this image to our family history. Dad has just come home from work in this photo. This is his usual look: very stylish, a typically 50s hairdo with a pompadour at the front and a DA down the back. Perhaps uncommonly, for the 50s, he took care of his physique by weight training, boxing, cycling and swimming.
Dad is a working-class chap, becomes a big union supporter and shop steward in his local chapter. But he's not a teddy boy and he doesn't hang out with a gang attacking immigrants. He's on shift work at United Dairies so he works nights some weeks and I don't see him very often. He even works on Christmas Day, so I open my presents at about 4am so that he can see me before he leaves.
We live in a basement flat in north Paddington, London where, despite the damp, we are fortunate to have a decent landlady and a fair rent as we are sitting tenants. Nearby, the infamous landlord Peter Rachman, owns much of the housing and is notorious for his abuse of tenants, many of whom are newly arrived from the Caribbean. The whole area is troubled with undercurrents of racial unrest. There is hostility among the white working classes towards the new West Indian community culminating in race riots just down the road from us in Notting Hill.
I'm blissfully unaware of this racial tension as my friends in the street are a mix of Irish, Nigerian and West Indian as well as white British. We all rub along just fine - I eat their food in their houses and receive invitations to their birthday parties - and vice versa. Round the corner live a beatnik couple. They worry my parents as they are long-haired (therefore dirty) and always wear black. I have no idea what a beatnik is, but they look arty, intelligent and interesting.
There is a vast amount of music around me. Our West Indian neighbours throw open the windows on a Friday evening and the partying begins to the rhythm of the Blue Beat. I can see the dancers inside upstairs and others spill out on to the front steps. Upstairs in our house there is an Irish family in residence, a band of four brothers and their singing sister, Biddy - they treat us to traditional Irish songs into the early hours or until my dad asks them to wind it up if it's a school night.
Where music is concerned, my rockabilly dad is no exception. He plays a mean harmonica and jew's harp and plays on an improvised drum kit. We love the rock'n'roll and skiffle of the 50s so I grow up on a diet of Elvis, Little Richard and Buddy Holly followed by Cliff, Tommy Steele and others. It's great fun having young parents who dance and sing. We like the harmonies of the Everly Brothers and the Dallas Boys. Sometimes, in our backyard, we have our own skiffle band and we sing and play Lonnie Donegan-style numbers, like Tom Dooley and Cumberland Gap. We play a washboard with a thimble and a double bass made from a tea chest, broom handle and a piece of string.
If I had to put my finger on it, I'd say that the strongest influence from my 50s childhood led me to become a beatnik - or a hippy, as it turned out. Sorry, Dad . . .
Christine Seal
Playlist A dreadlock holiday in France
Something More by Groundation
"Behold the night sky brings us a new star today / Catch it before it passes away / For all those thought wise become fools today / Rally round the table so I man can pray"
Truth be told, I fancied Guillaume's best friend Maxim first when I met them both at an Irish-French summer camp in Northern Ireland as teenagers; but it was with Guillaume that I stayed up late chatting over MSN in the weeks after summer camp had finished.
Guillaume was a 17-year-old French boy whose blond dreadlocks reflected his enthusiasm for reggae. Always keen to share his passion for music with others, he even left me his entire CD collection when he came to visit me in Ireland the following school holidays.
He was probably relieved he did not have to wait long to see his CDs again as I soon returned them on a visit in France. By this stage I had become a reggae convert and even asked Guillaume to make a few dreadlocks in my hair. Our mutual love of reggae grew into a love for each other and despite being only 15 and 17 we started a long-distance relationship between the south of France and Northern Ireland.
More than seven years later and thanks to understanding parents, budget airlines and an array of communication technology, a considerably less dreadlocked Guillaume and I are still doing a long-distance relationship.
Over our years together, countless songs earmark meaningful moments and memories. However, the first time I visited Guillaume in France we went to a concert of American roots-reggae band Groundation and their song Something More marks the beginning of all the wonderful years together that have since unfolded.
The intended meaning of the lyrics has always been somewhat lost on me, wrapped as it is in symbolic reggae references. Still, as the band repeated the song's "something more" refrain Guillaume gave me a tight squeeze and we shared a smile, which served as a wordless understanding of how we felt about each other.
Despite the difficulties presented by a long-distance relationship, there was a real sense of something special, something more between us that would make the challenge upon which we were about to embark completely worthwhile.
In a few months. I will be moving to live with Guillaume in France.
Lydia Dalitso
We love to eat
Snappy sausages
Ingredients for four
Onion, chopped
Sausages, sliced into bite-sized pieces (we use a pack of vegetarian sausages pre-cooked in the oven and then cut up)
Potatoes, chopped into 2cm cubes (waxy ones, pre-boiled but not too soft)
Frozen mixed vegetables, cooked for a few minutes in boiling water
Large tin of pineapple chunks in juice
Black pepper
Precook the sausages, potatoes and mixed vegetables as above. Cook the onion in a large frying pan or wok. Add the potatoes and then the sausages and the mixed vegetables, and finally the pineapple and its juice, and cook through for a few minutes until all is warm. Top with black pepper.
This is a recipe my sister and I learned from a cookery demonstration in our local library in Harrogate when we were junior-school aged in the early 1970s.
I remember painstakingly writing it down afterwards in my vinyl-covered wipe-clean cookery book (sadly long gone) and it became one of the most exciting teas in my mum's repertoire, and a favourite for me, my brother and sister.
My sister has been making it for her children for years, and more recently I have made it for my own teenagers. It still passes as an exciting tea 40 years later (I think the pineapple has something to do with it) and leads to clean plates all round.
Sarah Holmes
Document GRDN000020140517ea5h0000l
