{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1693"}
____
  
News
Fly the Union flag, schools told
Chris Riches   
475 words
18 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
23
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
SCHOOLS in one of the most multi-cultural towns in Britain are being urged by their local council to fly the Union flag and sing the National Anthem.
The move by Bolton council was approved by members of all parties who voted 34 to 4 in favour of the idea as a means of promoting national pride and helping immigrants integrate into British life.
Local Tory councillor Mudasir Dean, 42, urged his colleagues to back his proposal, saying: "Some of us feel English, some of us Scottish, Irish, Welsh, some a bit Lancastrian and some even a sense of European.
"But if there is one lone symbol, one flag, that ties us together I believe it is Great Britain and the flag would be the Union Jack. Throughout my teens and growing up in Bolton, I've seen less and less of the Union flag.
"It's been hijacked by the far-Right and it's time we take that symbol back into mainstream British life."
Bolton council will now write to all schools in the area and ask them to consider flying the flag and incorporating singing God Save The Queen into the school day.
Mr Dean added: "We hear complaints from people who come to this country and don't settle, and some of it is our own fault.
"If we were more patriotic — if we sang our National Anthem and flew our flag — and instilled it in our younger generations, they would do.
"I think it's a win-win situation. It's not rubbing anyone up the wrong way. It's a symbol of all the things we are proud of as British citizens."
Left-wing activists at the Labour-run authority tried to torpedo the idea by dismissing the proposal as "American" and "un-British".
Labour councillor Chris Peacock said: "Who will pay for these new flag poles and flags? Schools' budgets are already stretched.
"In the already-packed school day, is there time for the National Anthem to be sung?" But last night Tory MP Philip Davies said: "I fully commend this idea. I think it will be great for community cohesion.
"People can belong to any religion or background but we should all be able to unite behind the Union flag and the National Anthem.
"I hope schools will take it on board and I am sure it will prove a massive boost for community relations in Bolton."
Married father-of-four Mr Dean said the idea was inspired by the memory of his grandfather Ahmed, the first Indian immigrant to settle in Bolton in 1923.
Mr Dean told the Daily Express: "My grandfather was a proud Boltonian, proud of the Union Jack. He came here in his late teens and stayed because he fell in love with Britain."
Document THEEXP0020140418ea4i0005t
