{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1935"}
____
  
NEWS
Number 10 silent on whether David Cameron helped his nanny get British citizenship; Number 10 has refused to answer repeated questions about whether David Cameron helped his Nepalese nanny become a British citizen.
By Christopher Hope Senior Political Correspondent   
325 words
7 March 2014
13:35
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Number 10 has refused to answer repeated questions about whether David Cameron helped his Nepalese nanny become a British citizen.
Downing Street disclosed on Thursday night that the Camerons’ nanny Gita Lima, who has worked for the family for a number of years is now a British citizen.
However the Prime Minister’s deputy official spokesman refused to answer detailed questions about the process which led to Miss Lima becoming a British national.
The spokesman said at this morning’s Lobby meeting: “I am not going to get into those details. The point is that the PM’s nanny is someone who has come here, worked hard, wants to get on in life and is now a British citizen.
She said she was “not aware" and would “not get into those details" about whether Mr Cameron had written a supporting letter to accompany her application.
She added that “Gita still works for" the Cameron family.
She declined to say what steps if any were taken by Mr Cameron to ensure that his position as Prime Minster did not influence her application.
She said: “You can expect the Prime Minister would follow the normal process in the right way.
Miss Lima is thought to be become British in recent months as she was reported to be applying for citizenship in 2011.
Miss Lima was hired by the Camerons in the middle part of the last decade to help care for their disabled son Ivan, who died in 2009.
She moved from the Camerons’ home in Notting Hill to Downing Street with the family after the general election in 2010.
Miss Lima was hired from a charity called Kalayaan, which helps immigrants seeking to escape abusive employers.
Document TELUK00020140307ea37003pm
