{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1203"}
____
  
Features
books
Kate Saunders   
510 words
22 March 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
47
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Art Forger by BA Shapiro Algonquin Books, 365pp £10.99 * £9.89 Visual art, like music, is notoriously difficult to convey in fiction (look how much time Donna Tartt spent describing her Goldfinch; lucky for us there was a reproduction on the cover).
This elegant thriller, however, keeps the fine description to a minimum and is more concerned with the murkier aspects of the art world.
In 1990, two thieves disguised as policemen steal 13 important paintings from a Boston gallery. Nearly 25 years later, a young artist called Claire Roth — whose career has been hit by a scandal — gets an extraordinary offer.
An influential gallery-owner will give her a one-woman show if she will copy a Degas painting that was stolen in the heist.
When the Degas is delivered, Claire starts to suspect that she's forging a forgery.
There's a fascinating debate about the nature and importance of authenticity, which made me feel agreeably clever.
The Lemon Grove by Helen Walsh Tinder Press, 275pp £12.99 * £11.69 e-book £6.49 To put a middle-class family under a magnifying glass, transport them to a holiday villa in the sun. Jenn and Greg come every year to a house in Deià, on the coast of Mallorca. Jenn is gloomy; they're about to be Joined by Emma, her horribly stroppy stepdaughter who insists on bringing her boyfriend, Nathan. She's madly in love and it has made her worse — Jenn is asleep by the pool when she arrives, and the ghastly girl is furious. "You look common. Really, really common." However Jenn, it emerges, has brought Emma up since she was a baby. She has devoted her life to Greg's child, and now feels reJected. Greg blurts out a secret that shocks and hurts her. And Emma's beloved is disturbingly gorgeous; Jenn can't control her desire for 17-year-old Nate, and the fractured family is poised to splinter. Walsh's writing is beautiful.
The All-Girl Filling Station's Last Reunion by Fannie Flagg Chatto, 347pp £12.99 * £ 11.69 e-book £8.99 It's the Second World War, all the men have gone to fight. Fritzi, a spirited Polish immigrant, Joins her sisters to run an all-girl filling station — on rollerskates and wearing short skirts. Cut to Alabama in 2005. Sookie is exhausted after marrying off the last of her three daughters. Four weddings later (one got married twice), she's looking forward to a little peace with her husband, though she still has to look after her beautiful, barmy southern belle of a mother. However, a registered letter tells Sookie that she was adopted. She has grown up worrying about the genetic "curse" that runs through her mother's family, now she's being told that her real mother is called Fritzi Willinka. Flagg is a writer of great warmth and wisdom; Sookie's voyage of discovery takes her back to the 1940s, and a richly imagined family saga. Kate Saunders
Document T000000020140322ea3m0000i
