{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3001"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
Never again can they call Ukip a racist party
Nigel Farage   
857 words
9 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
18
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Attacks from the left and right are unfounded. Ethnic minority voters are flocking to us
On Wednesday night a quite extraordinary political meeting took place in Westminster. Up to a thousand Ukip supporters gathered and we gave the show over to candidates and members from ethnic minority backgrounds. We set out to prove a point: that Ukip means what it says when it proclaims itself a non-racist, non-sectarian party.
Initially I had been reluctant to do so because I already knew that my party believes in judging people by their talents and not by the colour of their skin and I thought that any fair-minded and well informed person should already know it too.
But so intense has been the assault on us both from the extreme left and from the political and media establishment, and so fixated has it been around this issue of racism, that I decided we had to blow it out of the water. We needed to show that the offensive and racially prejudiced comments of a handful of idiots were unrepresentative of our party.
So our economic spokesman, Steven Woolfe, himself from a mixed-race background, helped my staff to put together our response. I watched from the wings as Steven, Amjad Bashir, Sarinder Joshua Duroch, Pauline McQueen and Winston McKenzie delivered deeply felt and passionate speeches about the real racism they had encountered in their lives and of how in Ukip they had been delighted to be judged on their merits alone.
The reception accorded to them by Ukip members from all kinds of backgrounds was electrifying. I was so proud of my party — a tear in my eye, a lump in my throat, hairs standing up on the back of my neck; yes, there was all of that. Naturally I had thought hard about what I wanted to say. But the key phrase came to mind about 30 seconds before I took to the stage: this was indeed Ukip's Clause Four moment.
I have been noticing for a few months something very encouraging: a surge of support and new members from Britain's ethnic minority communities. In one of my debates with Nick Clegg (bless him) a young woman from an Asian background asked a question about migration and I noticed her nodding as I set out the absurdity of Britain's current immigration policy: to have a open door to more than 400 million people, many unskilled, from more than two dozen countries, while imposing restrictions that made it difficult for a New Zealand surgeon or an Indian engineer to come and make a positive contribution.
During my "Join the People's Army" tour of Britain (I know, the name is bound to have the fragile flowers among the commentariat at The Times reaching for their smelling salts) I have noticed more people from minority backgrounds coming to public meetings and stopping for a chat in the street.
Most are content that Ukip would have a stringent immigration policy because they also know it would be a fair one: based on a comprehensive points-based system designed to ensure that those coming to settle in our country are the most able and public-spirited people from all around the world.
This week there was another agonised report from a right-ofcentre think-tank about the failure of the Conservative party to attract ethnic minority voters. That's largely because they see it, correctly, as a snooty party of and for the establishment, favouring the wealthy, the powerful and the already wellconnected. As a relatively new party on the national political stage, Ukip does not carry such baggage. I predict that within five years we will be getting twice as many votes from ethnic minority communities as are the Tories.
By the time I took to the stage more than 50 candidates and senior members from ethnic minority backgrounds had gathered on it. The biggest roar of the night came when I spoke about the untapped economic and trading potential of the Commonwealth nations.
If there is a rump of racially prejudiced members of my party still lurking in the undergrowth, there was a message for them too in that hall: we do not need you and we do not want you.
Winston McKenzie raised the roof when he proclaimed: "I'm black and I'm proud and I'll shout it out loud!" Well, I'm a stockbroker's son and Dulwich College old boy. My family came to Britain as part of the Huguenot influx more than 300 years ago. And I'm proud of that too.
Winston and I have something important in common beyond a shared appreciation of the exploits of Crystal Palace FC. We believe we are on the brink of achieving an election result so extraordinary that Messrs Parris, Aaronovitch et al may be forced to contemplate the possibility that they have got Ukip wrong.
Nigel Farage is the leader of Ukip
A message to racists: we do not need you and do not want you
Document T000000020140509ea5900055
