{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2872"}
____
  
Features
in short
Iain Finlayson   
517 words
29 March 2014
The Times
T
1; National
13
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Little Failure: A Memoir by Gary Shteyngart £16.99 Hamish Hamilton, 368pp £* £13.99 e-book £8.49
Gary Shteyngart was coached in self-sabotage as a kid in Brooklyn by his Jewish Russian immigrant mother who, inventively hybridising English and Russian, called him "Failurchka" — Little Failure. Ever since, as a hyped-up humorous novelist and Manhattan-dysfunctional New Yorker writer getting by in the world, he has learnt to beat his rivals and those he has offended by parodying them in fiction by whacking himself first. And a lot of people, including his own parents, have been waiting in line to pop him one. A memoir "full of dysfunction and hammer-armed assassins", he says, "needs an adult in the room". Someone to tell the hero that he has to change: a psychoanalyst. Then Shteyngart writes his successful first novel, The Russian Debutante's Handbook and later writes this memoir as a belated love letter to himself.
Running Free: A Runner's Journey Back to Nature by Richard Askwith Yellow Jersey, 304pp £16.99 * £12.99 e-book £17.72
Show Richard Askwith an open road at dawn and he's high-tailing down it like a dog let off a leash. Indeed, he writes lyrically of voluntarily running as the quarry for a Northamptonshire hunt, pursued by hounds. This is the second book he has written about running and in this one he goes off-piste to run wild, run fast, run free and especially run beyond the merchandising that has infected the sport. You don't need shiny new kit — suitable footwear, a pair of shorts, a head full of thumping Janis Joplin songs and a stretch of open country will do just fine. Askwith is honest enough to admit it can be damn cold, bloody wet and usually muddy, so why flirt with hypothermia? One good reason: running keeps a person sane. His prose is as easeful and exhilarating as his energy and attitude.
A Little Piece of England: A Tale of Self-Sufficiency by John Jackson JJ Books, 222pp; £12.99 * £11.69
The traditional beliefs and attitudes of John Jackson, a founder of the Countryside Alliance, were set in literary aspic 35 years ago in a book that took its title, A Bucket of Nuts and a Herring Net, from the only two things Jackson required to round up sheep. As a boy in Dorset in the 1930s he learnt early to forage winkles from the beach, to look after himself and to value the community that came together to work the land. With a change of title, this book still gives the reader what it says on the tin. As a memoir of running a smallholding in rural Kent and feeling lucky to do so, Jackson is neither a literary Laurie Lee nor a lyrical Richard Mabey, but in amiable anecdotal mode he is as warmly devoted to his family as he is to his livestock and the land that sustains him, body and spirit, through his care and proper use of it.
Iain Finlayson
Document T000000020140329ea3t000f9
