{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3464"}
____
  
Are David Cameron and George Osborne finally losing their 'posh boy' tag?
By Cathy Newman Presenter, Channel 4 News   
812 words
22 April 2014
12:55
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
As David Cameron and George Osborne share a platform on Tuesday for the first time in four years, in a sign that Downing Street finally feels comfortable with the idea, Cathy Newman asks if the duo can ever defy their 'posh boy' tag
The man or woman on the Clapham omnibus struggling to pay the rent or the mortgage might not be too impressed by the sight of a couple of posh boys splashing their cash around. No doubt that’s why Downing Street strategists have kept David Cameron and George Osborne apart in public ever since the 2010 election.
But today, they’ll make their first joint appearance to trumpet the creation of 150,000 jobs being created by £36bn of infrastructure projects in the pipeline this year.
On the face of it, it’s remarkable the two most senior men in the government have appeared in public so infrequently. Even Tony Blair and Gordon Brown rubbed shoulders, or at the very least gobbled a few ice creams, with each other more often – and they hated each other.
But even before the Tory MP Nadine Dorries described the PM and chancellor as 窶徼wo arrogant posh boys窶with “no passion to want to understand the lives of others”, it was simply too toxic to have two public-school educated blokes who’ve never been short of a bob telling you how they’re spending the money you’ve earned.
So why the change of heart today? Well, the double-act suggests a growing confidence among Conservatives that the economy has turned the corner and that voters are starting to credit the Government with the turnaround. Tory leads on managing the economy and tackling the deficit have grown (from 15 per cent to 21 per cent, and from 22 per cent to 29 per cent respectively), according to the latest YouGov polling. And more people blame the last Labour government than the current Tory one for the fact that incomes haven’t (until figures last week showed) kept pace with price rises.
While it must be pointed out that real average weekly earnings are still 10 per cent below their peak, wages have now outstripped inflation for the first time since Cameron and Osborne last appeared in public together.
And a report over the weekend found that more middle-class ethnic minority votes could help the Tories win an election. If "upwardly mobile" ethnic minorities are more likely to vote Tory than Labour, as the Demos study suggests, does this mean the 'posh boys' are losing their 'posh-boy' image and appealing to more people? The report suggests that second or third generation immigrants could lose their "reflex" support for Labour.
That’s not to say posh is no longer a problem for the Tories. Labour still plans – against the better wisdom of some of its lieutenants – to put the cost of living crisis at the heart of the election campaign, though that may change as the economy recovers still further. A sense that the wealthy men who run the government don’t feel voters’ pain could still come back to bite the Tories.
Although prime ministerial holidays are nearly always off limits when it comes to political attacks, Labour must be hoping the Camerons’ swanky Easter break won’t have gone unnoticed by people in marginal seats sacrificing their one foreign holiday for the nth year running. (The family’s holiday villa at the Casa Tomaren complex in Lanzarote costs £200-a-night, and Sam Cam treated herself to a holistic 窶 shiatsu窶  massage for a ‘whole body’ experience.)
So yes, Dorries’ original assault on the public-school bias at the heart of government still packs a punch. And Number 10 remains highly sensitive about the issue – apparently giving Michael Gove a “right royal bollocking” for describing the number of Old Etonians surrounding the PM as 窶徘reposterous窶.
But it’s always been about the economy, stupid. If voters begin to taste the fruits of the economic recovery – and fast – it matters less if the chancellor went to St Paul’s or a secondary comprehensive of the same name. Competence is all.
That’s why there was such a panic in Number 10 when it looked like the flooding crisis was getting out of hand earlier this year. And why the apparent indecision over the culture secretary Maria Millerwas so damaging. Being posh is a bind in politics, but being incompetent is terminal.
Are George and Dave still a pair of posh boys? Or do you think they're finally losing the 'Old Etonian' tag? Do you care if those in power are posh, as long as they run the country well? Join the debate and tweet @teleWonderWomen and @CathyNewman your views
Document TELUK00020140422ea4m002bi
