{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1856"}
____
  
News
James Brokenshire's thesis: 'Immigration is out of control, and it's all your fault, voters'
By Dan Hodges   
1,425 words
6 March 2014
14:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Congratulations to James Brokenshire. Today he has delivered his first speech as immigration minister. And with that single ministerial intervention he is already able to claim the prize for most stupid, intellectually bankrupt and vacuous address of the year.
Most ministers wait years, decades even, to come up with a speech as daft as this. Mr Brokenshire has managed it at the first attempt.
It’s politically illiterate. It’s economically illiterate. It’s socially illiterate. In fact, it could not have been more illiterate if he’d had it typed out for him by a rhesus monkey. Though having looked again at the advanced briefing of the speech, I’m starting to think it may well have been.
Brokenshire’s thesis is this. Immigration is out of control. And that’s all my fault. And your fault. If you happen to employ a Bulgarian cleaner. Or a Polish plumber. Or, if you run a business. Any business. Well, not any business. Just any business that has ever employed someone who isn’t British. In other words, every major business in Britain.
The Telegraph’s David Barret, who fortunately is fluent in rhesus monkey, has manfully managed to decipher Brokenshire’s actual words. Here they are:
For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services – but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country.
Here are some more:
In the past year net migration from the EU has doubled, and this figure is – frankly – just too high … Some have tried to claim that this rapid increase is somehow 'good’ for the country. Well, just like the Home Secretary, I disagree.
And some more:
Uncontrolled mass immigration can force wages down and house prices up and put pressure on social cohesion and public services. And let me be clear – it can also cause displacement in the labour market.
Let’s deal with Brokenshire’s attack on the middle classes first. I am a proud member of the metropolitan elite. As is Brokenshire himself. The horny-handed former grammar schoolboy may have spent many long hours slaving away at the coalface of the international law firm of which he was a partner. But he’s not a member of the Workers' Party yet.
Indeed, the only reason he’s in his job is because his predecessor, Mark Harper, was forced to resign because he’d been availing himself of the services of an illegal cleaner. When Harper resigned, David Cameron wrote him a very nice letter saying he’d “taken an honourable decision". I read the letter again. I couldn’t see anything about him being an elitist who was undermining social cohesion.
More on immigration
• Worrying about mass immigration is not racist
• Cameron has failed on his immigration promise
• We need a calm conversation about immigration, not a row
But OK, Brokenshire had decided to sell his fellow metropolitan elitists down the river. Fair enough. A guy’s got to eat.
So let’s look at the core of his argument. Brokenshire claims those of us who employ the services of – entirely legal – migrants are driving down the wages of “ordinary, hard-working people". Right. I employ my Polish cleaner at 9.50 an hour. Actually, I pay her when I’m on holiday and at Christmas, even though she doesn’t come in, so it’s probably closer to 10 an hour.
The National Minimum wage is currently 6.31. The recommended level of the London Living Wage is 8.80. Precisely how much does James Brokenshire want me to pay for a cleaner? 12 an hour? 15? 20?
Is this now official government policy? We should all pay more for our services just so we can price the immigrants out of the market and British workers back in? Great idea. It would certainly help with social cohesion. Especially among your average British brickie or plumber.
Why stop there? Why not ask everyone who is a member of the “metropolitan elite" to simply look up the address of their nearest British registered tradesman and stick a cheque for a hundred quid through their letter box? Make it two hundred. That would help the economy. And it would help make British workers much more competitive.
This is madness. Opponents of immigration are fond of saying immigration has been used as a backdoor incomes policy. Well, supporters of tougher migration controls are in effect advocating backdoor trade barriers.
This is old-style protectionism. From a Conservative government. Protect the British service sector by literally stopping British consumers accessing foreign competition. Imagine if a minister said, “We need to protect the British manufacturing sector from foreign competition. We’re not going to allow anyone to buy foreign made goods." They’d be dragged off to the funny farm.
What are we going to have next? Union Jack kite-marks for cleaners?
But James Brokenshire’s economics illiteracy is nothing compared to his political illiteracy. Let’s have a read of those words again. ““In the past year net migration from the EU has doubled, and this figure is – frankly – just too high … Some have tried to claim that this rapid increase is somehow 'good’ for the country. Well, just like the Home Secretary, I disagree".
Blimey. I sincerely hope James Brokenshire doesn’t catch up with the people responsible for managing immigration policy over the past year. There’ll be hell to pay.
What is the man thinking? What are Tory strategists thinking? They have been telling us for the past two years they are finally starting to get to grips with immigration. And yet here is their own immigration minister running around telling everyone the flood gates are opening.
When they’re not. Yes, the government isn’t going to hit its net migration target. But it never was. Net migration is down from the levels the coalition inherited in 2010. Yet James Brokenshire seems to think to it’s a good idea to pretend his colleagues have spent their time in office letting immigration run amok.
Then again, Mr Brokenshire seems to have some other strange ideas about how to reach out to electorate. Remember his other offering. “Uncontrolled mass immigration can force wages down and house prices up". OK. Let me get this right. If I vote Tory at the next election Ministers are pledging that they will ensure – through their immigration policies – that the value of my house will fall. Just so we’re clear, that’s now government policy. “Vote Tory and we’ll ensure a return to negative equity".
And to business they’re saying “Vote Tory, and we’ll ensure your wage costs are driven up." Again, this is official Conservative Party policy. Their plan is to use immigration policy to artificially drive up service costs, so those of us that use those services have to pay more, which in turn means we will all demand higher wages, which will in turn ensure those providing services can demand higher prices – and so the spiral continues.
Brilliant. Why didn’t Harold Wilson and the unions think of an economic recovery package like that back in 1975?
Brokenshire is right in one respect. The only people who ever use migrants' services are the middle classes. I mean, it’s not like there are any migrants in the health service, for example. If you walked into an A&E department now the only faces you’d come across would be indigenous Anglo-Saxons.
“How long will the wait be?" “Can’t tell I’m afraid. The surgeon’s just heard James Brokenshire’s speech. He’s gone off to sign up with Acme Cleaners."
Seriously, where does this stuff come from? Has our “open and honest debate" about immigration now plumbed such depths that ministers of the crown are actually being sent out to stand up and deliver this rubbish? What the hell was Brokenshire thinking? What are the Conservatives thinking? And is it too late to call in the rhesus monkey?
More by Dan Hodges
• Labour doesn't need Tony Blair's cash
• Putin has looked at isolationist Britain and sensed weakness
• Ukip is now a racist party
Listen to our weekly podcast:
listen to 窶路ow do you deal with a power-hungry bully like Vladimir Putin?窶  on Audioboo
Document TELUK00020140306ea360043l
