{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2282"}
____
  
Ed Miliband’s own cost-of-living crisis
By Telegraph View   
493 words
21 May 2014
07:20
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage may not be able to organise a carnival but he does connect with working-class voters in a way that other politicians like the Labour leader do not
David Cameron must have been beside himself with glee. On the penultimate day of campaigning for the local and European elections, his two main rivals – Nigel Farage and Ed Miliband – bounced from blunder to blunder. Mr Miliband kicked things off by estimating the price of his weekly shop at something like £70 or £80, roughly £30 below the UK average.
Later, in an interview with Radio Wiltshire, he insisted that Jim Grant was doing an excellent job as leader of Swindon council – despite obviously knowing neither Mr Grant’s name, nor that it was the Tories who actually controlled the council.
As for Mr Farage, a street carnival intended to demonstrate Ukip’s embrace of minorities descended into farce after the steel band pulled out and the event was picketed by those upset about his attitude to Romanians. The Ukip leader himself was a no-show: his local organiser helpfully explained that he could not be expected to appear at a venue – Croydon high street – that was “unsafe” and a “dump”.
Beyond adding to the gaiety of the nation, does any of this actually matter? Ukip’s recent surge will not be undone by one shambolic event; otherwise, the rolling fiasco that was Godfrey Bloom’s performance at its party conference would have torpedoed it months ago. And while Mr Miliband may have put a few noses out of joint in Swindon, his was the sort of lapse that the campaign treadmill is almost designed to provoke.
Yet such vignettes do have an impact when they confirm a preconception. When Margaret Thatcher showed off her skills as a housewife, it helped to foster the idea that she would apply the same scrimp-and-save approach to the public purse. And when Mr Miliband reveals his ignorance of such matters, it suggests that a man who has made the “cost of living crisis” his mantra has no actual experience of those costs. This helps to explain his stubborn failure to connect with voters: neither his personality, nor his brand of “lofty seminar-room socialism” (to quote the New Statesman), resonates with the man on the Croydon omnibus.
Under such circumstances, yesterday’s warning from Mr Miliband’s occasional guru, Lord Glasman, feels especially pertinent. Mr Farage may not be able to organise a carnival, or to win over disgruntled immigrants. But he does connect with working-class voters in a way that other politicians do not. Lord Glasman describes this as “a huge problem for Labour”, with Mr Farage appealing to a “sense of dispossession” in its heartlands. Whatever the outcome of tomorrow’s elections, the disillusionment that Ukip feeds on will endure – as will the challenge it poses to the political establishment.
Document TELUK00020140521ea5l000gp
