{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3346"}
____
  
News
Ukip's 'rising star' is rising no more; she's quit in disgust
Andy McSmith   
627 words
14 May 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
22
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News | The Diary
Back in November 2011, Ukip posted a video on YouTube in which Nigel Farage tried to knock on the head the notion that Ukip was a "whites only" party - propagated, he said, by The Independent and The Guardian - which was peopled by "very angry old men." As evidence, he produced an 18-year-old named Sanya-Jeet Thandi, who had taken that autumn's Ukip conference by storm. "A rising star of the party," he called her.
As such, she was on Channel 4 only this month defending Ukip's immigration policies, on the grounds that Ukip would give equal treatment to all would-be immigrants while the EU favours EU citizens.
But Sanya-Jeet Thandi is a rising star of Ukip no more. She has quit in disgust at the anti-immigrant campaign Ukip is now running. "Ukip is exploiting the stupidity of ignorant anti-immigrant voters for electoral gain," she wrote. "While the party deliberately attracts the racist vote I refuse to be associated with them."
Ukip's garagistes
The events of the past couple of days have also raised questions about how much certain members of Ukip value free speech. Janice Atkinson, who chairs the party in the South-east, thinks protesters who shout "fascist" at Ukip members should be arrested. And an unidentified councillor sent for the police because he objected to a tweet posted by a Green blogger, Michael Abberton, lampooning Ukip policy. Finally, the Camden New Journal recorded a Ukip candidate in West Hampstead, Magnus Neilsen, reflecting that the Reform Acts of 1832 and 1888, which extended the vote to working-class men, may have been a mistake.
But there is a group of Ukip activists who value free expression - their own, if no one else's. Protesting against the treatment of "hard-working, right-thinking, garage-owning Brits", they have been busy in Cambridge decorating the doors of a row of garages with large black vinyl letters spelling out the words "Farage garage" - which they presumably pronounce so that the two words rhyme, though some of us make Farage rhyme with barrage and garage with carriage.
The letters were easily removed without damage to the doors, but when Cambridge News asked Ukip's Cambridge branch chairman, Peter Burkinshaw, what he thought of this stunt, he replied: "I hate graffiti of all kinds. I think these messages should be illegal." Spoken like a true Ukipper.
Where's Benn?
Voters in Croydon, in south London, have noticed an odd omission from an advertisement in their local freesheet. It is from the local Conservatives and lists their candidates in 23 wards in the borough, but not the 24th, West Thornton, although they have three candidates on the ballot paper there. West Thornton is a Labour ward, where one of the Labour candidates is Emily Benn, granddaughter of the late Tony Benn.
Pippa's body blow
What a shock it was to read in the Press Gazette that The Daily Telegraph had dropped its star columnist Pippa Middleton because, allegedly, the readers did not rate her and the columns "ran out of ideas" for subjects that Prince William's sister-in-law could safely cover.
I mean, who could fail to be stirred by Ms Middleton's incisive thoughts on Pancake Day - "savoury versions aren't my first choice. I'm more of a crêpe Suzette girl, especially after a day's skiing"; or the circus - "Of course, the potential for accidents is huge but injuries rarely happen"; or cocktails - "The best thing about learning to mix cocktails is that you get to drink what you make." It's a body blow to contemporary journalism.
Document IND0000020140514ea5e0001s
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:19
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
