{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2364"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
UK has culture of 'in-your-face' sexism, warns UN investigator
Harriet Sherwood   
453 words
16 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
4
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The UK has an in-your-face "boys' club sexist culture" which leads to certain perceptions about women and girls, a UN investigator into violence against women warned yesterday.
Special rapporteur Rashida Manjoo said there was "a more visible presence of sexist portrayals of women and girls" and a "marketisation of women's and girls' bodies" in the UK. "Have I seen this level of sexist cultures in other countries? It hasn't been so in-your-face," she added.
Manjoo, who travelled across the UK during a 16-day fact-finding mission, said she was barred at the gates of Yarl's Wood immigration detention centre on Monday, on instructions "from the highest levels of the Home Office". She told reporters she was deeply concerned at her exclusion "because if there was nothing to hide, I should have been given access".
Manjoo had received reports of violations at the privately run Yarl's Wood centre, near Bedford, before her visit to the UK. Last month a Jamaican woman, Christine Case, 40, died at the centre, which holds about 400 women.
After repeated unsuccessful requests to the Home Office, the investigator attempted an independent visit.
"When I reached Yarl's Wood I was notified by the director that she had received a phone call [saying] I would not be allowed in," Manjoo said. "She indicated that the call was from the highest levels of the Home Office but would not give me a name or share written information on who had given the instruction."
Manjoo suggested there could have been "something I was prevented from seeing in Yarl's Wood". Under the terms of her mandate she should have been offered unrestricted access, she claimed. A Home Office spokesperson said a tour of Yarl's Wood "was never agreed as part of this fact-finding mission".
In her preliminary report, Manjoo said the number of women detained in prisons and immigration centres in the UK was rising, with a significant over-representation of black and minority ethnic women.
"The strong link between violence against women and women's incarceration, whether prior to, during or after incarceration, needs to be fully acknowledged," she said. Among the figures quoted in her report are: 30% of women in England and Wales have reported experience of domestic abuse since the age of 16; 77 women were killed by partners or former partners in 2012-13; and 18,915 sexual crimes against children were recorded in England and Wales in 2012-13.
Captions:
Rashida Manjoo said she was barred from visiting Yarl's Wood detention centre on instructions from the Home Office
Document GRDN000020140416ea4g0006y
