{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"2172"}
____
  
Calm before the storm for Delpy and Hawke
REVIEWS BY LAURENCE PHELAN   
560 words
8 March 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
38,39
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
FILMS OF THE WEEK FILM CHOICE
Friday
Before Midnight
11AM & 10PM SKY MOVIES PREMIERE
(Richard Linklater, 2013) It's one of the themes of Before Midnight that love stories and fairy tales are hardly ever the same thing. Still, two decades after Before Sunrise, the semi-improvised almost-romance in which they first met, Jesse and Céline (Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy, above) are now enjoying a family holiday in the Peloponnese. The first half of this perceptive relationships comedy consists of lively, free-ranging conversations about literature and generational and gender differences, before simmering resentments are brought to a boil and it turns into Gen-X's Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? ****
Saturday
Spring Breakers
10PM SKY MOVIES SELECT
(Harmony Korine, 2012) This film about the behaviour of four young women in bikinis during their college spring break features more sunshine, drugs, guns, neon and naked flesh than Scarface and Grand Theft Auto: Vice City put together. But the action takes place in a woozy, experimental dream-state, and the inscrutability of the film's moral stance makes it at least as troubling as it is exhilarating. ****
Sunday
Dancer in the Dark
1.05AM FILM4
(Lars von Trier, 2000) The concluding part of Lars von Trier's "Golden Heart" trilogy of films about saintly, suffering women stars Björk as an immigrant factory worker in Sixties rural America, saving for her son's eye operation. Her performance and her musical score and songs are all excellently realised, and it's a very potent - albeit self-consciously manipulative - musical melodrama. ****
Monday
Blue Valentine
11PM FILM4
(Derek Cianfrance, 2010) Cutting between the beginning of a love affair and its bitter end, this grungy indie take on Scenes from a Marriage is about how, almost without noticing, people can find themselves living the exact kinds of lives they hadn't wanted to. It is so naturalistic and truthful, and the performances by Michelle Williams and Ryan Gosling are so intense and unguarded, that it almost feels indecent to witness. *****
Tuesday
The Silence of the Lambs
10.30PM ITV4
(Jonathan Demme, 1991) Over-familiarity has lessened the degree to which the serial killer Dr Hannibal Lecter, as played by Anthony Hopkins, is able to be terrifying. But The Silence of the Lambs remains a way above average thriller, and Jodie Foster's performance as the tough-yet-vulnerable FBI agent Clarice Starling deserves to start taking more of the plaudits anyway. ****
Wednesday
The Deep Blue Sea
11.30PM FILM4
(Terence Davies, 2011) The mistake in adapting Terence Rattigan's 1952 play - about a dangerous eruption of passion in postwar austerity Britain; the doomed affair between a respectably married woman (Rachel Weisz) and a boyish RAF pilot (Tom Hiddleston) - would have been to deny its theatricality. But this is a lush and heady period melodrama, no less affecting for its artifice. ****
Thursday
Bullhead
10.50PM FILM4
(Michaël R. Roskam, 2011) Bullhead is a brooding, Oscar-nominated crime film set among the Belgian meat-farming community and amid the black-market trade in illegal growth hormones. It is about brutish men, the commodification of flesh, and how cruelty begets cruelty, and it has the unsentimental eye of a Dardenne brothers film. Matthias Schoenaerts is compelling as the hormone-addled and tortured hero. ****
Document IND0000020140308ea3800075
