{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2856"}
____
  
Guardian Weekend Pages
Weekend: STARTERS: Your view Letters, emails, comments
666 words
29 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
8
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The asylum system depends on it being difficult and dangerous to reach Europe (A Long Way Home, 22 March). If it were not, immigration would be higher and more difficult to sustain. Truth is, we don't have an answer, or even much of a desire genuinely to try to solve global disparities in wealth, individual freedoms, survival rates, resources, democracies or rights. With the world's population and the divide between wealth/resources both growing, and with climate change, threats to ecosystems and oil fast depleting, you'd think we'd be more open to debating genuine and radical ways forward.
Rebecca Gamble
Folkestone, Kent
Alex Bilmes's Am I Dad Enough? (22 March), with its stereotyping, sexism and passive-aggressive attempts at humour was depressing. I am taking additional paternity leave at the moment, loving some of it, hating some of it and quite proud of how my skills as a parent are growing each week. I'm not one end or the other of Bilmes's Top Gear-lite scale; I'm just a parent. It makes me feel crappy that someone looks at me in the park when I'm helping my kids on the swings, and sees me as some sort of threat or lacking in masculinity. Then again, there's a reason I don't read Esquire.
Paul Sherreard
London SW2
Alex Bilmes shouldn't be asking, "Am I dad enough?", but whether he is "partner enough". Just because his girlfriend wants to spend more time with the kids doesn't mean she wants to spend more time putting out the bins. Child-rearing and housework are not the same thing.
Ellen Crozier
Maidstone, Kent
So Alex Bilmes reckons he's not a Wet Wipe Dad because he checks his phone for the football results? Real non-Wet Wipe Dads are at the game.
Alexis Haslam
London SE6
As a new grandmother, I've enjoyed watching my son doing his share of the work involved with a new baby. This honest, realistic article hit the spot. It's just a pity you illustrated it with images of other privileged dads who can afford the kind of help that lightens the load of child-rearing.
Lesley Marshall
Dartington, Devon
Shia Labeouf probably should have cited Daniel Clowes as his source (Get Your Own Ideas, 22 March), yet reappropriation and influence pervades all work. There is much more intellectual property theft by gossip than through artistic reinterpretation.
Simon Cole
Henley-on-Thames, Oxon
It is indicative that the letter from the striking teacher has "Name and address withheld" (Your View, 22 March). Many of us feel intimidated about speaking out and taking strike action. I will also be striking on 26 March, and am pleased for my name to be published in the hope it will encourage others to stand up and be counted for state education.
Max Fishel
Bromley
I sympathise with the Estranged Family Member (What I'm Really Thinking, 22 March), but why has she never responded to their Christmas newsletters by saying she'd love to join in some of their celebrations? She could add, "particularly since my brother is no longer alive", but that might seem rather manipulative.
Mary Lloyd
Southampton
Does Yotam Ottolenghi understand the difference between smoking and griddling (22 March)? The chillies in his "smoky" chilli salsa go nowhere near smoke, so can't be considered smoked. They are griddled, a different process giving a different flavour.
Martin Platt
London SW19
I don't know about "Otto, Almighty One" (Your View, 22 March). In our house, he's Yotam Whatalongalist.
Jerry Emery
Lewes, East Sussex
Write to Guardian Weekend,
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU (weekend@theguardian.com), or comment at theguardian.com. A full name and postal address (not for publication) must be supplied. For inclusion on Saturday, letters should reach us by midday on Tuesday, and may be edited.
Document GRDN000020140328ea3t000gn
