{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3335"}
____
  
News
My Spitting Image puppet would wipe the floor with Alex
MATT BENDORIS   
1,064 words
14 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Scotland
12,13
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
TORY GRANDEE TEBBIT ON SALMOND
TORY warhorse Lord Tebbit today wades into the independence debate — with a bold claim that Alex Salmond is trying to hoodwink Scots.
The former Thatcher henchman doesn't mince his words when he calls into question the First Minister's vision for the country. In The Scottish Sun's England on Indy series — where we quiz figures from south of the border about the historic vote — Lord Tebbit reveals his fears over Scotland's future after a split.
And he also tells MATT BENDORIS how Salmond would have met his match in the Iron Lady — while admitting that the Tories got it wrong over the poll tax ...
DAVID Cameron has refused to face the First Minister in a TV showdown — but Tory tough guy Lord Tebbit reckons his Spitting Image puppet would wipe the floor with Alex Salmond.
The Nats leader has challenged the Prime Minister to a live debate ahead of September's independence referendum. But Margaret Thatcher's former enforcer believes Cameron has nothing to fear.
Norman Tebbit — portrayed as a leather-jacketed henchman on the 1980s satirical telly show — says: "Spitting Image was great for me, because my puppet was always on the winning side.
"He was usually giving someone a whack with a wheel wrench or something like that. He was tough.
'He'd have met his match in Thatcher' "I remember encountering a drunken bunch of Millwall supporters who thought of me as one of their own, saying 'Where's your leather jacket, Norman?' "Sadly, I never bought the puppet. I don't even know where he is.
"But you never know, he might be on a campaign trail, taking a train up to Glasgow or Edinburgh.
"I would like to see Mr Salmond facing him. I reckon my puppet would do well against him."
Lord Tebbit, 83, added: "David Cameron is damned if he does or doesn't. If he doesn't then that's apparently because he's not interested. If he does, then he'll be portrayed as a rich, southern-born Englishman, who Salmond might say, isn't really at home in his own country never mind in Scotland." Lord Tebbit may be joking about his latex lookalike, but he insists the First Minister would have been small fry to the Iron Lady, who passed away last year aged 87.
He says: "He would have met his match with Margaret Thatcher. Whenever there were big topics in dispute, she would look around the table at everyone and say 'Gentlemen should we have the facts first and a discussion afterwards?' And of course Salmond keeps getting sandbagged by the facts. I can't conceive that after 300-odd years of peace and war, tough times and good times, we should part. It doesn't seem to be in the interest of either of us."
The Tory grandee is clearly in a mischievous mood, but he's deadly serious when it comes to keeping the union together.
He says: "Mr Salmond's proposal for Scotland is not independence.
"It's to be a very, very, very small country — a colony — in the big European Union. Mr Salmond would go very boldly to Brussels and no one would listen.
"They'd say, 'Who do you represent? A few million people. You're down there with the little boys.' "So it's not being particularly ethical of Mr Salmond to portray Scotland bravely being out there on its own. Scotland would be under the control of the Brussels commissioners, in every respect from immigration to currency." Born in Middlesex, Tebbit was a financial journalist then a fighter pilot for the Royal Air Force before being elected to parliament in 1970.
He enjoyed a stellar career as minister for employment and Trade Secretary, and party chairman — even being tipped as a future PM.
But in 1984, his life was changed forever by the IRA's Brighton hotel bombing.
He and wife Margaret plunged four storeys and were trapped for hours in the wreckage.
She was left paralysed and has been in a wheelchair ever since. To care for her, he effectively gave up his career in frontline politics.
Last month, he hit the headlines when he said he hoped former IRA commander Martin McGuinness — now Northern Ireland's Deputy First Minister — would be 'shot' for attending the Queen's State banquet. But an unrepentant Tebbit shrugs off the criticism saying: "I probably shouldn't have said it. But I won't go much beyond that."
'The poll tax was a botched tragedy' However many claim the seeds of the independence movement were planted during the Tebbit and Thatcher era. And it was rumoured the Tory PM hated the Scots.
But Tebbit insists: "I don't think that's true. Scotland would have faced some difficult and hard times whoever was in government." But the Tories did introduce the dreaded poll tax in Scotland in 1989, a year before rolling it out throughout the rest of the UK. For the first time, Lord Tebbit admits they 'botched' it.
He says: "By taking it to Scotland first, where we thought it was most needed, it was seen as foisting something on Scotland that wasn't good enough for England. The poll tax was a tragedy. It was badly botched in how it was introduced."
In his spare time Tebbit has taken to writing children's books — with a dark twist. His debut Ben's Story features a hero Labrador who drowns a drugs baron.
He chuckles: "I don't think a bit of violence does kids any harm — as long as it's in the science fiction world or make believe."
But it's the next chapter of the United Kingdom he really worries about. He says: "It's quite possible, we might see a situation in a few years time with Scotland as a colony of Brussels while the rest of the UK has broken free from Europe."
He adds: "Mr Salmond is very skilful, especially at building on grievances, both real and imagined. "But to guide a very small country into the unknown is a tough assignment for anyone to take on."
matt.bendoris@the-sun.co.uk WHAT DO YOU THINK? #englishonindy #yearwego
Split is not in either's interest
Document THESUN0020140514ea5e000dk
