{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"925"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: FEEDBACK
Guardian readers   
664 words
3 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
15
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The pleasures of Pelicans
I can't remember when I've had such a warm glow as after reading your excellent article about Pelican books, and then reading the comments on the website ("The Pelican brief", 26 April). In the early 60s, when the Pelican list burgeoned, I was Penguin's publicity manager, and then through the 70s the marketing director responsible for the education and academic market. It was a huge privilege to be doing such a wonderful job, and all these years later, to see the effect the books had on an informed readership. I left school at 16 with minimum qualifications, but before I'd even joined the firm I bought the books whenever I'd cash enough for the 2s 6d or 3s 6d a time. My house is now stuffed with them and many are like old friends. Thank you for bringing back so many memories.
johnahitchin
From the website
James Fisher's three volume Bird Recognition may not be the fanciest field guide of the dozens on my birding bookshelves, but it is still there, is still referred to, and was the book that inspired me as a 10-year-old to what became a career in biology. The world will be a better place for more Pelicans.
Baldsparrow
From the website
A map, a pipe and a perfect view
It was a real treat to see the old Ordnance Survey one-inch map, illustrated by Ellis Martin, in Rachel Hewitt's heartfelt hymn of praise to paper maps ("Turn around when possible", 19 April). Ellis was my mother's cousin and I remember him from my childhood. As an artist he was entirely a traditionalist, having little time for modernism, but he was also quite playful both in his formal works and in gentle little cartoons. His Christmas card to my parents in 1944 featured one of his favourite map covers, Cleeve Hill in Gloucestershire (clearly visible in your cover illustration of James Walker Tucker's 1936 painting, Hiking). Ellis confided that he'd been able to "wangle a very pleasant week's holiday in Cheltenham to do it one autumn". He'd painted the scene from Nottingham Hill but altered the farmhouse in the foreground to make it a "characteristic Cotswold type". The actual farmhouse was sketched, he admitted, several miles away. In so many of his map covers, Ellis included a pipe-smoking hiker, uncannily like my grandfather, the kind of incidental pleasure that is entirely absent from satnavs, with their robotic instructions.
Giles Oakley
East Sheen, London
Immigration and the BBC
I am surprised that Ian Jack was surprised by my point on immigration in relation to the BBC ("What will happen in 2016", 26 April). As my essay makes clear, the largest part of the BBC's revenue rise in the last 50 years has been down to the shift to smaller households, 29% of which are now single person. Forecasts to 2020 expect the rise in population to be close to the projected rise in household numbers, and for nearly 70% of the population rise to be accounted for by new immigrants and their families. Many public services experience increased pressure as a result of population rises - schools, health, etc - but the BBC is a pure beneficiary: 95% of new households will take out TV licences, but the additional cost of servicing them is zero. Not for a moment do I suggest that BBC editorial is affected by this undisputed fact: but under a subscription system, there could not possibly be any objection to the BBC deriving benefit from a rising population: it is the criminalisation of evasion which seems to give the BBC an advantage over other public services.
David Elstein
From the website
Send letters to Review, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, N1 9GU. review@theguardian.com.
Letters may be edited for reasons of space.
Please include a postal address.
Document GRDN000020140503ea530002w
