{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"716"}
____
  
News
The visa rules are a triumph of politics over common sense
Nigel Morris  DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
608 words
4 April 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
18,19
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News | Home Affairs
There's a palpable sense of optimism among Tory ministers as the economic figures - and their poll ratings - maintain their slow but unmistakable recovery.
But there is one set of statistics which is casting the party leadership into deep gloom: net migration running at more than 200,000 a year.
Falls during 2013 convinced the Home Office that it could hit, or come close to, the Prime Minister's promise to cut the headline number to "tens of thousands" by the general election in May 2015.
Now that the line on the graph has resumed its upward trajectory the department has abandoned all hope of hitting that target.
The levers that ministers have tried to pull - including tougher rules on student and business visas - have had an impact on non-European immigration, but that success has been wiped out by soaring levels of EU migration.
There is precious little the Government can do to stem that influx, which was the key factor in the last rise of 58,000 to 212,000 in the year to last September.
The key question which has now begun to preoccupy Tory strategists is how to explain away their failure to live up to David Cameron's promise to an electorate that consistently places immigration second behind the economy in its concerns.
There is growing support among ministers to admit failure and justify the increase in terms of the UK's economic success and the eurozone's economic woes.
As one Tory source put it: "We could argue that people are coming here from Spain, Portugal and Italy because they are basket cases but Britain has turned the corner. That has to be some kind of tribute to us."
The Home Office is considering reclassifying some visas - perhaps by issuing them for 11 rather than 12 months - to avoid designating their holders as migrants and therefore removing them from the official immigration figures.
This tactic could only reduce the headline figure by about 20,000 and would run the risk of accusations of fiddling the numbers.
However, it could be just enough to get the figures dropping again, enabling Tory ministers to argue that immigration is well below levels they inherited from Labour. What is not going to happen is the abandonment of the Prime Minister's target. A call for such a step from a Tory MP, Mark Field, received paltry public support from his colleagues.
Despite the scepticism of many cabinet ministers, two members hold fast to the commitment. Crucially they are Mr Cameron and Home Secretary Theresa May.
But the Tory consensus on the handling of immigration is fraying, with senior figures dismayed by the stridency of the language used. Treasury ministers fear it could be alienating overseas investors and the Higher Education minister David Willetts fears that the brightest foreign students are being deterred from choosing UK universities.
The former cabinet minister Lord Howell, best known today as Chancellor George Osborne's father-in-law, has protested that current visa rules are a "blot" on Britain's reputation.
Industry and commerce are also discreetly lobbying the Government both for a softening of tone and a relaxation of visa requirements. However, the skill with which Nigel Farage played the anti-immigration card in his latest showdown with Nick Clegg is a reminder of why Mr Cameron's advisers fiercely oppose any change in their message. And when it comes to explaining his missed migration target, he will argue it makes the case for sweeping reform of the European Union.
Document IND0000020140404ea440001d
