{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"2641"}
____
  
Enchanting mix of social comment and magic realism
REVIEW BY LEYLA SANAI   
484 words
20 March 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
44,45
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
THE THURSDAY BOOK Boy, Snow, Bird By Helen Oyeyemi Picador £12.99
Helen Oyeyemi consolidates her position as one of Granta's Best of Young British Novelists 2013 with the publication of her fifth novel, a story about the perception and power of appearances and race, and their potential destructiveness, partly set in the USA in the Fifties and Sixties when segregation still existed in the Deep South. As with Oyeyemi's previous novels, the tale is infused with the magical, and swaddled in layers of story-telling, yet deals with real social issues too.
Previous topics dealt with by Oyeyemi in this fantastical way include the fate of immigrants to Britain, and the misogyny inherent in much thriller fiction, although her political issues never become Issues, dominating the text to the detriment of story.
From the start, the story has the fairy-tale features of the extraordinary. Boy Novak is the fair-haired daughter of an abusive father who works in the suitably ghoulish area of rat-catching. He seems to take pleasure in blinding and starving his rats, and when his physical violence towards Boy takes on similar sadistic qualities, she escapes from Manhattan to a small town in Massachusetts. Here she meets a kindly widower, Arturo, and his startlingly beautiful daughter Snow, who is fair of skin and dark of hair, like her fairy-tale namesake Snow White. Boy doesn't love Arturo the way she loved a boy in her past, Charlie, but she feels secure with him, and the two marry. When Boy's daughter Bird is born, the family is torn apart by a family secret that has surfaced. At this point, abused becomes abuser as Boy banishes Snow from the home.
The main characters are compellingly drawn, especially Olivia, Arturo's mother, who has managed to close her heart to one grandchild while embracing the other. Snow remains somewhat inscrutable, with far less bitterness than one would imagine possible, and the peace-making between her and Boy seems too expediently easy .
Oyeyemi turns the fairy-tale structure back on itself by showing that those who behave atrociously are sometimes not inherently evil but have been the victim of cruelties themselves. Occasionally, the frequent segues into stories related by the characters can distract from the main thrust of the plot, and a mention of Charlie's aunt being sent to an internment camp in Hungary is not explored fully.
For some readers, like this one, the forays into magical realism work best when put down to the imaginations and dreams of characters, but the beauty of Oyeyemi's work is that this can often be comfortably accommodated - one person's magic is another's day-dreaming. An enchanting and captivating book.
Order for £11.69 (free p&p) from the Independent Bookshop: 08430 600 030
Document IND0000020140320ea3k0001g
