{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"41"}
____
  
News
Margaret Thatcher would not have liked Ukip
By Iain Martin   
656 words
25 March 2014
07:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Jonathan Aitken says that Margaret Thatcher would have secretly liked Nigel Farage and his party. The former Prime Minister would, he claimed at the weekend, have voted for the Ukippers, although she would have not admitted it in public.
Even accounting for the impossibility of knowing precisely what a politician 30 years ago would have thought about contemporary events, it is fair to say that Aitken's claim is largely nonsense. While it is true that late-period Thatcher, furious that she had been removed by a plot, was capable of lashing out in a Ukip-style at Brussels and at anyone who disagreed with her, she was for most of her career not remotely interested in the politics of protest. She wanted power for her side. She wanted power so that she could get things done.
Much is made by her defenders – who increasingly can see no wrong in anything she did – of her attachment to principle. But at root she was a practical, pragmatic politician who understood the need to win general elections. Thatcher pre-1990 was always mindful of the electoral cycle and focussed on beating what she always saw (a legacy of her post-war experience) as the socialists in the Labour party.
I suspect the choice at the next election would look quite simple to Thatcher. A Tory leader is up against "Red Ed" from Hampstead. In that context, Ukip, with its attempt to break the party system and its howling at the moon, would have held very little appeal. In addition, Cameron, with his smooth manner, would have been to her a perfectly recognisable Conservative type. A bit wet on some issues, but an obvious shire Tory with a face like that of a young Willie Whitelaw with his oyster eyes.
Thatcher also felt a connection to the Tory party, and to its voluntary wing, very deeply. Again, her experiences in Tory grassroots politics in the years after the war, were formative. It was not all positive. The rejection she faced before she won a seat seems to have taught her that she would have to be twice as tough as the often complacent men she encountered, if she wanted to succeed. Still, she took pride in the Tory grassroots and they loved her in return. The idea of her abandoning those Tory activists that remain to flirt with Farage and a party that can never beat Labour, and can only split the centre-Right vote letting Miliband in, is Ukipper wishful thinking.
Where she might have some sympathy with the Ukip worldview is on the side-effects of globalisation. What is most interesting about the aftermath of Thatcherism is that, having helped unleash market forces and free trade, she then became deeply concerned about the way it eroded the power of the nation state. She never resolved that conflict in her own mind.
Although she was one of the architects of the European single market – a fact rarely mentioned by her fans – she realised too late what had been signed away to Brussels, by her. While Thatcher was deeply worried at various points about mass immigration, she went along with the process which led in time to total freedom of movement for labour within the EU.
As ever, the reality with Thatcher is more interesting than the cartoon. The logic of her free market reforms – freedom of movement of capital, goods and eventually people – cuts right across the prerogatives and powers of the nation state she venerated in other contexts. Perhaps Thatcher would have felt a twinge of sympathy – and recognised the validity of complaints about Brussels – when cornered at a party by a Ukip donor.
But in the end it is quite simple. For almost her entire career Thatcher wanted the Tories to win and Labour to lose. Ukip would not have been her cup of tea.
Document TELUK00020140325ea3p000m9
