{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"896"}
____
  
Features
How UKIP are you?
Josh Glancy's   
847 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
7
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Support for Nigel Farage's party is growing. So, whether it's because of his stance on the EU, immigration or crime, are you a closet Ukipper? Take Josh Glancy's quiz to find out
UKIP's month of April fools is finally over. It's been a bumpy ride. Most recently party donor Demetri Marchessini announced that women shouldn't wear trousers as they "discourage love-making". It was also revealed that the star of the party's anti-immigration poster campaign was a migrant worker.
Then another of its poster boys, builder Andre Lampitt, was suspended as a party member after a brief analysis of his Twitter account revealed him to have strayed somewhat from the path of political correctness with a vile denunciation of Muslims and their faith.
Women and Muslims weren't the only ones in UKIP's sights. One of its MEPs, Tory apostate Roger Helmer, was found to have described homosexuality as "not a valid lifestyle worthy of equal respect". Party leader Nigel Farage also came in for a kicking, as the media raked over his EU allowances and pointed out that he actually employs an immigrant, his German wife, Kirsten Mehr, as his secretary.
But no matter how much ordure so-called Establishment newspapers heap on UKIP, no matter how many gaffes are unearthed, nothing seems able to halt its momentum: it is getting more popular, not less. A poll last week put support for the party in the European elections at 38% — an increase of eight points in the past month. Labour is down three points on 27%, and the Tories are stuck in third on 18%.
Clearly UKIP has wide appeal.
Some of it is the protest vote — those who hate Westminster politics as usual. But for others — whisper it — the party's message is beginning to take root. People who have real concerns about immigration, EU encroachment and where Britain is heading and aren't getting the answers they want from mainstream parties.
So how UKIP are you? Take our quiz and find out.
1) The government has given £100m to a fund for improving education in India. You think ... a) Outrageous. We already gave them cricket — what more do they want? b) Why are we handing out wads of cash to one of the world's fastest-growing economies at a time when frontline British services are being cut? c) I'm pro-foreign aid but this is a bit much. We've only just come out of recession, after all d) Great news. Child literacy rates in Uttar Pradesh are appalling 2) A group of young Romanian men move in a few doors down. You... a) Tell your children to walk home from school the long way round b) Are a bit nervous the next time you use a cash machine c) Wave politely as you walk past and hope that they are able to learn English d) Dust off your old Gheorghe Hagi football shirt and knock on the door with a bottle of tzuika in hand 3) An EU-sponsored wind farm is to be built on the beautiful hills where you like to walk. You ... a) Stick on your LP of Winston Churchill's best speeches and load the 12-bore b) Join a local protest group and start handing out leaflets c) Wonder quietly if we might be better off fracking instead d) Gaze admiringly at the splendour of mankind harnessing nature's bounty 4) Some local hoodies are caught vandalising the playground in the park. They should be ... a) Flogged b) Sent to prison c) Put into some sort of national service scheme d) Given a hug 5) A well-known black comedian says there should be more black and ethnic faces on television. You think ... a) None of them is a patch on the Two Ronnies b) Fine but it sounds suspiciously like a quota in the making c) Fair point — we could do with some more women too d) Yes, and save BBC3!
6) David Cameron makes a speech explaining why Britain should stay in a reformed EU. You think ... a) Same old Establishment guff; it will take an earthquake to get us out of Brussels b) This would be a lot more convincing if he had a pint of lager in his hand c) That's all well and good, but will any of these reforms actually happen? d) I much prefer that Herman Van Rompuy To see where you stand, check the Farageometer opposite MOSTLY D U-blip. This reactionary madness can't last much longer. You oppose UKIP on every front.
MOSTLY C U-dip instinctively away from Farage and company, but you cannot help but feel that maybe they sometimes have a point.
MOSTLY A UKIP through and through. In fact the party may have already gone a little mainstream for you.
MOSTLY B U-tip towards the yellow and purple banner. Perhaps like Tim Rice you are "intrigued" by the party as a political phenomenon.
Document ST00000020140504ea54000yo
