{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"675"}
____
  
NEWS
White British adults 'less qualified' than ethnic minorities; A study by Manchester University finds that adults from ethnic minority backgrounds are more likely to be educated to degree level than their white British counterparts
By Graeme Paton Education Editor   
652 words
10 March 2014
15:45
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Adults from ethnic minority backgrounds are more likely to be educated to a high standard than their white British peers, according to research.
Figures show they are significantly more likely to hold a degree and less likely to have no qualifications at all than their white counterparts.
People from the best-qualified group – Chinese – were around 75 per cent more likely to be university educated than those identified as white British.
The study by Manchester University also found that many ethnic minorities had seen bigger overall improvements in education standards over the last 20 years.
Researchers suggested that the improvements were due to highly-skilled migrants entering the UK combined with an increase in the number of ethnic minorities – particularly women – entering higher education.
But the study revealed that the shift has failed to translate into the workplace, with ethnic minorities more likely to be left in low-paid jobs because of “inequalities in employment".
Kitty Lymperopoulou, from Manchester’s geography department, the report’s author, said: "Over the last 20 years, educational attainment has been increasing among ethnic groups as a result of an improvement in access to education overseas and the increasing proportion of ethnic minority people educated in Britain.
"Though this is good news for ethnic minorities, we need to remember that despite achievement gaps between some ethnic groups and white British people narrowing or even disappearing, ethnic minority groups continue to experience inequalities in education and the labour market."
The study analysed results from the 1991, 2001 and 2011 census to track changes to qualifications over the last 20 years.
Overall, 26 per cent of white British adults held a degree, compared with 40 per cent of those described as Black African, 42 per cent of Indians and 43 per cent from Chinese backgrounds.
Many other ethnic groups made larger improvements over the 20-year period than their white British counterparts.
Between 1991 and 2011, the proportion of Indian people holding a degree increased almost three-fold from 15 to 42 per cent – a 27 percentage point increase. For those from Pakistani backgrounds, numbers more than tripled from seven to 25 per cent – a rise of 18 percentage points.
By comparison, the proportion of white people holding a degree increased from 13 to 26 per cent – up 13 percentage points.
This increase was smaller than for every other ethnic group examined, the study said.
"People from ethnic minority groups were generally more likely than white British people to have degree level qualifications or equivalent," it said.
"In 2011, only people from the white gypsy or Irish traveller, Pakistani, Bangladeshi and white and black Caribbean groups were less likely than white British people to have degree level qualifications or equivalent."
The study found similar trends in relation to people with no qualifications.
In 2011, almost one-in-four white British people – 24 per cent – had no qualifications. This was more than for other ethnic groups, including those who were Black African (11 per cent), Chinese (16 per cent), Indian (15 per cent) and Black Caribbean (20 per cent).
Both Pakistani and Bangladeshi groups had slightly more people with no qualifications – 26 and 28 per cent respectively – but these numbers had dropped considerably between 2001 and 2011.
The researchers concluded: "Historically, ethnic minority groups have been disadvantaged in terms of education compared with the white British group. Many post-war immigrants lacked qualifications or had qualifications that were not directly transferable to employers in Britain.
"Over the last 20 years educational attainment has been increasing among ethnic groups as a result of an improvement in access to education overseas and the increasing proportion of ethnic minority people educated in Britain."
Document TELUK00020140310ea3a003h8
