{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"1346"}
____
  
Features
It is tempting to see a link between our climate and pragmatic culture
Michael Hanlon   
675 words
2 March 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
34
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Does tempestuous weather make for tempestuous people? The idea that the differences between various cultures, nations and societies can be, at least in part, explained by differences in landscape, geology and climate has become unfashionable, but that doesn't mean it is wrong.
It is striking, for instance, how extreme the weather of the United States is, compared to that of the nations that provided the bulk of its early immigrants - places like Britain, Ireland, Italy and Germany. And I have wondered if some of the differences between American and European culture can be, to some extent, explained by this.
The weather is a part of American life in a way we cannot really imagine. In some places, in some winters, walk outside without a decent coat and within an hour you would be in serious trouble, or even dead. It is unsurprising that they devote entire TV channels to it.
The Deep South welters, the West bakes, there are hurricanes, forest fires, droughts and tornadoes aplenty. You will never use the word "heatwave" again if you have stood, as I have, on the floor of Death Valley when the thermometer is nudging 50 degrees and you have to put clothes on to keep cool. If you live in the Bible Belt - a place where every autumn 300mph whirlwinds appear that are powerful enough to fling not only cows but 100-ton railway locomotives into the skies, and which can raze entire towns - it would perhaps be surprising if your thoughts did not turn to the Almighty on a regular basis.
Compare weather records for the United States with that of Britain. Of the 50 states, only two have recorded maximum temperatures lower than the highest ever seen in the UK. Our transatlantic cousins experience more wind, more heat, more cold and a great deal more snow than we ever have to put up with. So how does the weather on our side of the ocean affect our temperament?
It is tempting to see a link between our benign climate and Britain's extraordinarily pragmatic culture. Our islands are not a land of extremes, neither in the climatic nor the political sense.
The fiercest revolutions have been forged in lands of extreme cold, heat or tempest. A trite observation, perhaps, but it is more difficult to imagine serious political ferment breaking out in a place like Britain or New Zealand than in Spain or Russia.
In this country we like to think of ourselves as stoical in the face of meteorological adversity. It is true that, as individuals, we are capable of putting up with a great deal - the recent floods have been accompanied by much fortitude. But collectively we have hysterics whenever the skies turn against us. While the Americans (and Russians) expect dreadful weather, we most certainly do not.
The anthropologist Robert Ardrey once described Homo sapiens as the "Bad Weather Animal", defined by and profiting from unpredictable skies. While we in Britain generally lack truly bad weather, when some does come along we certainly allow it to define us.
Two US states - Alaska and Hawaii-have a top recorded temperature of 38C, lower than the UK's high
Weather changes can affect vehicle tyre pressures. Drivers should check them at least once a month
Audi quattro: perfect driving, whatever the weather
Driving offers limitless opportunities to explore. Whichever route you take — from motorway to rural track — you need a good grip on the road in all conditions. Over 30 years, Audi's quattro technology has evolved, resulting in superior handling you can rely on. A car fitted with quattro reacts to the changing terrain beneath it and delivers power wherever it's needed across all four wheels. Whether you are dealing with a rain-slick motorway, icy Tarmac or loose gravel, quattro ensures a safe, responsive drive every time.
38.5C is the top temperature recorded in the UK - on August 10, 2003, in Faversham, Kent
Document STEL000020140302ea320006j
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	22/02/2014 to 05/04/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or London Evening Standard Online Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,848
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 16:33
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
