{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"1350"}
____
  
Features
Immigration policy must change, says Liam Fox
TIM ROSS   
315 words
2 March 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
3; National
1
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
DAVID CAMERON must ditch the "statistical nonsense" of his immigration policy and adopt a radical plan to reduce the number of migrants moving to Britain if he is to win back voters from the UK Independence Party, a former Cabinet minister says today.
Liam Fox, a former defence secretary, warns that the Prime Minister will be guilty of "dangerous complacency" if he dismisses the threat to the Conservatives from Ukip.
He said that Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, was "personable and reasonable" and that many of his views were shared by "decent and patriotic people".
Writing in The Sunday Telegraph today, Dr Fox, the standard-bearer for Eurosceptic Conservatives, urged Mr Cameron to show voters a "positive vision" for Britain or risk defeat to Labour in next year's general election.
The Tories should abandon their target to cut "net migration", and concentrate on reducing the number of low-skilled migrants and addressing public concern over the impact of immigration on schools and health services, he said.
Without a "clearer narrative" on immigration, the Conservatives would not win back enough voters from Ukip to achieve a Commons majority, he warned.
The Tory leadership has privately conceded that Mr Cameron has no hope of winning more seats than Mr Farage in the European Parliament elections in May.
Many inside the party also fear that there is no chance of Mr Cameron now delivering on his promise to reduce net migration to the "tens of thousands", after figures showed the number of immigrants rose last year.
Dr Fox made the comments as a leaked letter emerged in which the leader of 34 Tory councillors in Guildford accused Mr Cameron of undermining the party's chances of winning the next election.
Stephen Mansbridge told Mr Cameron that the Tories were being "placed in an Continued on Page 8
Document STEL000020140302ea32000a8
