{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1229"}
____
  
NEWS
Baroness Thatcher would be 'secretly cheering on' Nigel Farage and Ukip if she were alive
By Hannah Furness, arts correspondent   
623 words
23 March 2014
14:47
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip ideas on immigration and Europe closely aligned with Lady Thatcher's own, Jonathan Aitken, the former Prime Minister's unofficial biographer, said
Baroness Thatcher would be "secretly cheering on" Nigel Farage and Ukip if she were alive today, her former colleague Jonathan Aitken has said.
Aitken, the former Prime Minister's unofficial biographer, said Lady Thatcher would have had "a lot of leanings" towards Ukip policies, with Mr Farage expressing a lot of her own views.
Arguing Ukip ideas on immigration, the European Union and Brussels domination were closely aligned with Lady Thatcher's own, he added she would not publicly admit voting for Ukip but would be cheering their successes.
Speaking at the Oxford Literary Festival about his biography, Margaret Thatcher: Power and Personality, he was asked what he thought Lady Thatcher would have made of Mr Farage.
"I think secretly she would have cheered him on," he said.
"I think he voices a lot of her prejudices. Despite being wildly disloyal to John Major - quite how dreadful she was to John Major - she would never have voted for Ukip. She would never have said I vote for Ukip, I vote for Farage.
"But a lot of the views Nigel Farage expresses...on immigration, on the idea of Britain can manage as a world reading nation without relying on the European Union, and above all she was really fed up to centralism and liberalism and Brussels domination.
"I think she would have had not just a sneaking sympathy but a lot of leanings towards Nigel Farage, without ever quite coming out for Ukip."
Aitken, who was jailed for perjury in 1999, served as a Conservative MP from 1974 and is a former Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
His thoughts echo the views of Mr Farage, who last year claimed his party was the "true heir" to Lady Thatcher's ideas on Europe.
Speaking in April, he told the Parliamentary Press Gallery: "Who is the heir to Thatcher? Is it David Cameron? Good God, no. Most certainly not. She was about leadership. He appears to be far more about followership.
"What is clear is that Margaret Thatcher from the mid-1990s thought this country should leave the European Union.
"And I cannot believe that a young Margaret Thatcher leaving Oxford today would join the Conservative Party led by David Cameron. I think she'd come and get involved in Ukip and no doubt topple me within 12 months or so."
Aitken, who famously dated Lady Thatcher's daughter Carole for three years as a young man, told an audience he believes she would be less decisive in death than in life.
Speaking of his memories of her, he disclosed she had "precious few regrets" but both "human and political feelings" towards those whose lives she affected.
"The bigger the issue, the more magnificently she tended to respond," he said. "She could be brutally unkind to people her own size, but she was never rude to doormen or secretaries."
He added Lady Thatcher had been "often insecure" and tended to look favourably on any man she found good looking.
"She had a definite weakness for people she thought were, in a male way, vaguely attractive," he added.
Of dining with Lady Thatcher in her latter years, he likened the experience to inviting a "lighthouse to dinner", with moments of darkness punctuated by "great flashes of light".
He wrote his book after being considered alongside three other candidates for the role of her official biographer. The Telegraph's Charles Moore went on the publish the authorized version, with the first installment available now.
Document TELUK00020140323ea3n002bg
