{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1031"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Prepare for a noisy and tight European election
463 words
19 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
21
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
Thursday's European elections could prove to be nail–bitingly close. They feel partly like a referendum on Ukip, an assessment of its every triumph and gaffe. Today, Nigel Farage publishes, through an advert in this newspaper, an open letter in which he insists there is nothing racist about fearing the consequences of mass immigration from Romania. On the one hand, his refusal to duck the issue reflects the abrasive honesty that has endeared him to many voters. On the other, the letter is a tacit acceptance that Ukip has, in the eyes of equally as many voters, appeared at least to flirt with xenophobia. Under these conditions, he has to do very well indeed – – any result that could be judged to be disappointing would return Mr Farage's party to the fringe from whence it came.
Of course, the vote is also about the issue of Europe. Over the weekend, the leaders of the three main parties laid out their stalls. The Lib Dems have decided to play the europhilia card, presumably in the hope of stealing votes from Labour and preventing a wipeout. Ed Miliband continues to preach to his base and to attack the Government on the cost of living, trying to portray the choice as being between Labour's experiment in populism and the Tories' supposed elitism.
David Cameron, however, insists that the key issue is safeguarding the condition of the economy – – and with unemployment falling and growth rising, he has the chance finally to take deserved credit for real achievements in office. On the subject of Europe, Mr Cameron's pledge to renegotiate our relationship with Brussels and to use the outcome of a future referendum as leverage in negotiations places him between Left–wing adoration of the European project and Ukip's desire to leave as soon as possible. Mr Cameron dominates the centre ground on this matter, as on so many others.
But the political character of Britain may change if Mr Farage's party places first on Thursday, compelling everyone to take his people's army a little more seriously. It is thought that some 40 per cent of votes have already been cast by post; many people had made their minds up before the various controversies of last week, lessening perhaps their likely impact upon Ukip's performance.
Moreover, this Right–wing insurgency does not seem to play by the normal rules of politics. Its support is loud and committed and often appears unaffected by negative headlines. The mainstream parties and the pundits may have to brace themselves for a noisy, tight election this week – – one that has generated far more interest than matters European generally enjoy.
Document DT00000020140519ea5j00095
