{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2094"}
____
  
News
The fight for Downing tweet
DAVID WOODING   
1,244 words
18 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Ulster
16,17
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
4 leaders give short, Twitter-style answers to the big questions
VOTERS go to the polls for the European and local elections this week — and the stakes have never been higher.
The three main party leaders ALL risk getting a bloody nose as Ukip boss Nigel Farage storms on to the centre stage.
The self-styled fourth man of British politics is on course to grab seats in the EU parliament and town halls across the country.
Thursday's elections will pile pressure on his mainstream rivals with less than a year until the General Election.
Europe will be a key battleground as it impacts on hot issues including immigration, jobs and the economy.
David Cameron, Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband all agree that employment is the best thing about the EU. Mr Farage disagrees — he says there is nothing good about it.
Only the PM guarantees an in/out EU referendum with no conditions but the Ukip leader calls it "jam tomorrow".
The Sun on Sunday asked all four leaders to cut the waffle and give short, Twitterstyle answers to ten hot topics. The three main leaders set out clearly where they stand on tax.
David Cameron tweets that he will cut the deficit by cutting spending and not putting up taxes.
Labour''s Ed Miliband vows to cut taxes for the lower paid — by bringing back the 10p starting rate — but to hike them for the better-off.
And Nick Clegg makes it clear there will be NO promise from the Lib Dems not to raise taxes.
Here, the four men who want your votes get right to the point.
Name one thing about Britain you would most like to change.
Net immigration is still more than 100,000 year. What will you do to curb it further? What is your plan for the economy? What will you do to end the "something for nothing" culture? Will you guarantee a European referendum in the next Parliament? Will you pledge not to raise taxes to pay off the deficit after the next election? What is the best thing about the EU? What is the worst thing about the EU? Would you be happy to see more countries join the EU? Closer ties with EU or closer ties with the US? I want more people to have secure futures for themselves and their families. We've made progress with 1.5million more in work but there's more to do.
a We've cut non-EU net immigration by a third and are doing more to tackle illegal immigration and benefit tourism.
1. Cut deficit. 2. Cut income tax and freeze fuel duty. 3. Back businesses to create more jobs. 4. Cap welfare and reduce immigration. 5. Better schools and skills.
We have capped benefits so no one claims more on welfare than the average working family earns. The key is to reward work.
Yes. There will be an in-out referendum in 2017 if I'm Prime Minister.
We've set out a plan to clear the deficit by cutting spending instead of putting up taxes.
The single market means British firms can trade with Europe, creating more jobs here and helping unemployment come down even further.
Too much is being decided in Brussels rather than in Britain. That's why getting real change and then a referendum is vital.
Yes but only with proper transitional controls so we do not have a repeat of Labour's past mistakes on immigration.
Strong relationships with both but a better deal for Britain in the EU. We also need to trade more with rising nations such as China and India so we create more jobs.
Tackle the cost of living crisis with an energy price freeze, better childcare and building homes for the next generation.
We want stronger border checks, longer controls when countries join the EU and tougher rules to stop wages being undercut.
Big reforms of banks and apprenticeships - and action on jobs, wages and prices so that our economy works for everyone, not just a few.
A compulsory jobs guarantee for the under-25s, tackling tax avoidance and ensuring all employers pay the minimum wage.
There will be an in-out referendum if power is transferred from the UK to the EU. But my priority if I become PM is the cost-of-living crisis and our NHS, not exiting Europe.
I want to keep taxes as low as possible and we will have a new 10p starting rate of tax and reduce the deficit with a 50p rate on incomes over £150,000.
Millions of British people benefit from the trade and jobs created.
The way money is spent in the European budget. More of it should be spent on creating a better economy.
Yes. But I want fairer rules, such as making people from new countries wait longer before they can work here.
I want close ties with both. Britain should never turn its back on the world.
The weather.
We are building an immigration system which is firm but fair.
But we must do more, which is why I want proper border checks to count people out as well as in.
The Lib Dems are the only party who will finish the job of fixing our economy, unlike Labour, but finish it fairly, unlike the Tories.
We are changing the welfare system to make sure work always pays, those that need help get it - but not benefits with no questions asked.
We are the first Government ever to pass a law guaranteeing there will be a referendum if new powers are transferred from Britain to Brussels.
No. We believe the richest should pay their fair share. But we will carry on cutting taxes for ordinary workers.
Three things - jobs, jobs, jobs.
The farcical monthly trek between Brussels and Strasbourg. The Lib Dems are leading the charge to end this circus. Ukip hasn't lifted a finger.
Only if they meet high standards on the rule of law, democracy and human rights and we keep stronger transitional controls on movement of people.
Both - not either/or. We stand tall in the US because we stand tall in our own backyard. Trade talks between EU and US will bring up to £10billion a year. If we leave, we lose it.
No mystery - I'd like us to become a self-governing country again by quitting the EU.
It's actually more than 200,000! We'd have an Aussie-style points system to control volume and quality. This can only be done outside of the EU.
We need lower taxes and a smaller State. We have to let people keep more of the cash they earn.
My basic principle - young people of able body and mind shouldn't get a subsidy without doing something in return.
I want an in-out EU referendum right now. I'm fed up with being offered jam tomorrow.
Yes. We will set out in our manifesto ways to cut public spending. Taxes are already too high.
Nothing - although many of its member countries are great places.
That it has turned itself into a superstate making most of our laws and undermining our democracy.
I'd be happy if every country left. Under current rules new members just mean more uncontrolled immigration.
Closer ties with the Commonwealth countries that are a great success story of the 21st Century.
Document THESUN0020140518ea5i000ob
