{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3708"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Ukip poised to smash the political order at poll
Sam Coates   
613 words
22 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
1,9
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Anti-EU party Just ahead of the field
Ukip edged just in front of Labour in the last poll before the European election today as the three main parties prepared for the voters to smash the established political order.
A YouGov poll for The Times put Ukip on 27 per cent, one point ahead of Labour. The Conservatives look likely to come third with 22 per cent of the vote — the first time they would have failed to top a European election since 1994.
The Liberal Democrats are set to fall into a humiliating fifth place with just 9 per cent, dropping behind the Green Party with 10 per cent. Labour fears that the elections for 73 seats in the European parliament and some 4,000 councillors in 161 councils, along with five mayors, could be a setback in the party's attempt to build momentum before next year's general election.
Last night senior party sources appeared to concede that Nigel Farage's party would top the poll, although the Ukip lead is within the margin of error, meaning that they are effectively neck and neck.
Despite a sustained Conservative campaign to lower expectations, Tory MPs are still likely to be unnerved by the scale of Ukip's success and mindful that Mr Farage appears to have brushed off two months of intense media scrutiny and criticism.
YouGov projects that Ukip and Labour will both emerge with 22 MEPs, nearly double the 13 they each won in the last European elections in 2009.
The Conservatives will pick up 16 seats, down from the 25 they won in 2009. The Lib Dems will narrowly avoid a wipeout with three MEPs.
Asked how they would vote in next year's general election, the poll put Labour on 36 per cent, the Tories on 33, Ukip on 13 and Lib Dems on 9. Nick Clegg's party was alone in running a campaign primarily focused on Europe. Last night's poll found that Continued on page 9, col 1 Continued from page 1 42 per cent of the public would vote to stay in the European Union if there were a referendum tomorrow, while 37 would vote to pull out.
Senior Labour figures have called the party's campaign a "dry run" for the general election, yet the party has seen its share of the vote shrink from 32 to 26 per cent.
There was growing criticism at the failure to confront Ukip and immigration earlier in the campaign, while key announcements failed to gain traction. A senior Labour source sought to depress expectations last night, claiming that the party hoped to gain up to 200 councillors.
Colin Rallings and Michael Thrasher, polling experts at the University of Plymouth, have suggested that Labour may gain as many as 500. The Labour source said that the party would claim it had had a good night if it received a 25 per cent share of the vote in the European elections. However, the source admitted that European contests had been "historically difficult" for Labour and other centre-left parties across the EU.
"We are now in an era of four-party politics but what we have got to do, and what we hope we are starting to do, is win where it matters in the local elections."
The Lib Dems were attempting to play down the significance of their national position, insisting they were still expecting to do well in areas with existing representation.
YouGov interviewed 6,124 adults online on May 20 and 21. For more details see www.yougov.co.uk
Document T000000020140522ea5m000by
