{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2934"}
____
  
NEWS
Nobel Prize-winning Professor admits he dislikes "ignorant" students
By Keith Perry   
1,017 words
31 March 2014
10:23
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Sir Andre Geim told BBC’s Desert Island Discs: “I don’t like students very much. They come absolutely ignorant and they are not grown up yet as interesting people"
Sir Andre Geim, the Nobel-prize winning physicist has revealed that he dislikes “ignorant” students and doesn’t find them interesting until they have matured.
The Nobel-winning Regius Professor of Physics at Manchester University said it took two or three years of a PhD to make him interested in his young charges.
He told Kirsty Young on BBC’s Desert Island Discs: “I don’t like students very much. They come absolutely ignorant and they are not grown up yet as interesting people.
“But sometimes over two or three years of their PhD they grow exponentially fast, pick up experiences and then they become real persons and after that we become, not like a professor and a student, we become like colleagues and that is a really enjoyable experience.”
Last night a source at Manchester University students’ union said: “He probably shouldn’t have said it but I am inclined to agree with him. I think it is a very funny comment and probably true. When they first come, a lot of students they are more interested in getting drunk than studying.”
Russian-born Professor Geim, 55, who is famous for his work on the conductor grapheme and known for one magnetically levitating a frog in an experiment, said he also believed that students should be exempt from new immigration laws.
The Director of the Manchester Centre for Mesoscience and Nanotechnology said: “As a nation we have to be pragmatic rather than populistic. We should try and draw from the resources outside this country, try and bring the brightest minds to compete in the future world and the future of the country is where the brains are. So if you tap into foreign talent it is very appropriate.”
Born in the Soviet Union, his early years were spent in Sochi with his grandmother, a meteorologist who had a small weather station on the beach who he described as “the cloest friend her ever had” until he was 28 or 30.
The Nobel Prize-winning professor of physics from the University of Manchester received the honour for services to science with his work on graphene with his Manchester University collaborator Sir Konstantin Novoselov.
Sir Andre was also awarded the Copley medal by the Royal Society for his numerous scientific contributions, but in particular for his work on graphene.
The Copley medal was first awarded in 1731, 170 years before the first Nobel Prize was handed out. The accolade has previously been won by Charles Darwin, Albert Einstein and Stephen Hawking.
Graphene is sheets of carbon just one atom thick - a million times smaller than the thickest human hair - and is made of the same material that is used in pencil lead.
However, it also has record-breaking strength and electronic properties."It is the thinnest known material in the universe, and the strongest ever measured," Prof Geim wrote in a 2009 issue of the journal Science.
It was discovered in 2004 and is now regarded as a "super material" because of its potential to revolutionise many industries, including automotive, aerospace and electronics.
Of his research he said: “Being an academic means you spend a lot of time in the lab and you try to make it is much fun as possible. And there are many, many smart people who are doing science professionally.
“And they compete with each other and you need to be in the very, very thin layer at the top so how you compete, you compete in this kind of Sherlock Holmes experience trying to get very little information and then guess the finite answer and then from this finite answer, you try to confirm it. It’s a lifelong game of a detective.”
Sir Andre said graphene could potentially offer uses such as a substitute in computer chips, for very speedy DNA analysis, but said those potentially uses “were so far behind the horizon he could not assess whether they were true or not.”
But he said some applications were “coming thick and fast” such as foldable computer screens and touch-screens for mobile phones. He said he has a mobile phone with a touch-screen made out of graphene.
“We are trying to use graphene to solve the Fukushima contamination crisis. We learned how to make very thin barrier films which are completely impermeable to anything like water and we can make those films even in zones that are not accessible to humans. But this is a very young material. It is less than 10 years old. It usually takes about 40 years for any new material to come from an academic lab to industry, to consumers.”
Sir Andre said his parents were engineers of German descent and well-educated.
In the Soviet Union, he said his ethnicity was always German and “there were problems with not being ethnic Russian or ethnic Ukrainian which marked him out as someone not as reliable as the rest of the crowd”.
His grandfather, father and mother were persecuted during Stalin’s era because of their ethnicity and sent to Siberian gulags and labour camps, which he discovered only after the fall of the soviet union.
He said because he was a graduate from a top technical university in Moscow, he was automatically made a lieutenant in the Red Army when he left which meant he had to go to a boot camp in “some mosquito-infested part of northern Russia” where he was made to march for two hours every day “to kill any free spirit”.
His army record said he was reprimanded for laughing when taking the military oath, he added.
Sir Andre said he was not the best student, had a reasonably high IQ and did not attend lectures. He tried to get “maximum percentage from minimum effort” and won the chemistry Olympiad for memorising a thousand page chemistry dictionary.
Document TELUK00020140330ea3u0048t
