{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1421"}
____
  
NEWS
School admissions: fewer children get preferred place; Local authorities say that fewer 11-year-olds gained places at their first choice secondary school this year following an overall increase in the number of applications
By Graeme Paton and James Edgar   
819 words
3 March 2014
18:17
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The number of children missing out on their first choice secondary school has increased this year amid mounting competition for places, the Telegraph has learnt.
Councils across England reported that fewer 11-year-olds had gained places at preferred state secondaries following a sudden increase in the application rate.
In some parts of London, at least four-in-10 children have been forced to make do with second, third or even sixth choice schools for this September because of the sheer demand for places.
Outside the capital, 30 per cent of pupils missed out on their first choice school in Birmingham – up from 26 per cent a year earlier – while in nearby Sandwell numbers stood at just over 25 per cent, compared with 23 per cent in 2013.
Other cities reported a similar trend.
In Bristol, 23 per cent of pupils were rejected from their preferred school compared with just 18 per cent a year earlier. It was the highest rejection rate in four years.
Manchester Council revealed that 24 per cent of pupils failed to get into their first choice school – up from just 19 per cent 12 months ago.
Many local authorities warned that the overall increase in the rejection rate was driven by a rise in the number of 10 and 11-year-olds in the state education system.
It is believed that rising birth rates seen in the early to mid-2000s – combined with an increase in the number of immigrants in some areas – is beginning to have an effect on secondary school admissions after already leading to more competition for primary school places.
Nationally, it is believed that more than one-in-seven children will have missed out on their first choice school, leading a flood of official appeals.
Siobhan Freegard, founder of the parenting site Netmums said: "Getting your child into a good school is one of the biggest struggles faced by parents.
"There are weeks of stress and worry leading up to admissions day, and for the one-in-seven families who don't get their first choice school, there are further weeks of stress and worry as they go through the appeals system or seek an alternative school."
The Pan London Admissions Board, which represents councils in the capital, said it had witnessed a five per cent increase in applications this year.
Helen Jenner, the board’s chairman, said the secondary education system “cannot create unlimited additional places in schools and not all parents can be offered their first preference", adding: “As demand for secondary places increases so will the challenges."
Some 530,000 children across England found out which state secondary school they had been allocated to on Monday as part of “National Offer Day". Pupils can make between three and six choices depending where they live.
The Telegraph obtained data from 72 local councils – almost half of the total in England.
Of those, two-thirds – 48 – said that fewer pupils in their area had won a place at their first choice secondary school for this September. Only 18 said more pupils had got their preferred place while six remained the same.
It was revealed that children’s chances of getting into their preferred school differed wildly depending on their postcode, with those in inner-city areas facing the most fierce competition.
In areas such as Cornwall, Cumbria, Herefordshire, Leicestershire, Norfolk and North Lincolnshire almost all pupils secured their first choice.
The highest rejection rate was in the London boroughs of Westminster, Wandsworth and Hammersmith and Fulham where more than four-in-10 pupils missed out on their first choice school.
In some other boroughs – Brent, Camden, Ealing, Lambeth, Lewisham, Merton and Southwark – more than a third of pupils were rejected.
But some areas with large numbers of grammar schools reported a sharp rise in the number of children admitted to their first choice. This followed a decision to allow parents to apply to schools after children gained the results of their 11-plus – meaning many failed to place popular grammar schools on application forms if sons and daughters had underperformed.
It meant that 77.5 per cent of pupils in Buckinghamshire got into their first choice school this year – up from just 54.2 per cent a year earlier.
Graham Jones, an education consultant who helps families fight admissions appeals, said: “We have had a steady stream of calls today and expect more over the coming days.
“There appears to be more parents receiving unexpected news; stories of families for whom there was little doubt their children would get a place only to find out that due to local housing developments or other reasons that they did not."
Document TELUK00020140303ea33005vb
