{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"993"}
____
  
NEWS
Ed Miliband should say Nigel Farage is racist, black Labour MP says
By Steven Swinford and Peter Dominiczak   
857 words
19 May 2014
15:53
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Black Labour MP David Lammy says that Ed Miliband is being 'pedantic' and 'unhelpful' by failing to call Nigel Farage a racist
Ed Miliband should admit that Nigel Farage is a racist who has made "deeply nasty" comments and is "stirring up" prejudice and discrimination, a Labour MP has said.
Mr Farage has been heavily criticised for saying during a radio interview last week that people should feel "uncomfortable" if Romanian immigrants move in next door.
The Labour leader has described Mr Farage's comments as "deeply offensive" and a "racial slur" but refused to call the Ukip leader a racist.
David Cameron has said that Mr Farage's comments were "pretty unpleasant" but added that it is for voters to decide whether the UK Independence Party is racist.
David Lammy, the black MP for Tottenham in North London, said that Mr Miliband and other party leaders are being "pedantic" and "unhelpful" by failing to call Mr Farage racist.
He told Daily Politics on BBC Two: "I am from a background where my parents arrived here as immigrants. I remember a context in which some people said you don't want these people living next to you. That was racist. What Nigel Farage said over the weekend was racist. So I am clear he is a racist.
"It's not helpful to get into a pedantic discussion of the difference between a racist slur and racism. He is the leader of a national party, he should not be slurring whole communities of Romanians who come to this country and describing them as somehow bandits, criminals. It's deeply, deeply nasty. "
He said the he does not want to "dismiss" people who vote for Ukip as racist, but said that the party is "stirring" up support with "a degree of prejudice, discrimination and racism because that is in their electoral interests.
Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, also said that she thought Mr Farage's comments were racist. She told ITV News: "It's not racist to be worried about immigration or to want stronger controls, but it is racist to somehow stir up fears about Romanians living next door. So Ukip should say they were wrong on that."
Mr Farage on Sunday said that he regretted the comments and blamed them on the fact that he was “tired”.
Mr Miliband told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: "I believe what Nigel Farage said a couple of days ago was deeply offensive. I said it was a 'racial slur'. I think, though, our politics is disagreeable enough without political leaders saying about other political leaders 'They’re a racist'."
Speaking during a campaign visit, Mr Cameron described Mr Farage’s comments as “pretty unpleasant”.
He refused to comment on whether he believes the Ukip leader is a racist but suggested that voters need to decide if they believe that accusation to be true.
“He has said in recent days some really pretty unpleasant things and he even himself has had to admit that he got it wrong,” Mr Cameron said. “So I’ll leave others to judge [if he’s a racist], but what I’ve heard from some of the candidates, some of the donors to the party is a succession of pretty appalling things.”
The Prime Minister said he felt Ukip's support reflected a very difficult period in Britain after a long recession.
He said: "Families suffered from that, it is taking time to recover, and people want answers, people want action.
"I share and understand their frustration but I hope that whatever happens in these European election results we can focus on the things that will make a difference to make a success for our country and a success for hard-working people."
Mr Cameron said he had a viable strategy for securing reform in Europe, insisting because the eurozone needed reform he could also secure the changes he wanted ahead of a pledged referendum in 2017.
The Prime Minister said he continued to believe Britain's interest was in staying in a reformed European Union.
And he defended immigration policy against challenges it was no longer possible to reduce net immigration to the tens of thousands.
Mr Cameron said: "When it comes to migration from outside the European Union, we have cut that by a third, that's down to its lowest level since 1998.
"If what you're saying is immigration policy on its own isn't enough, you need a welfare policy so it pays people to work and not to stay idle, you need an education policy so you're training people to do the jobs that are being made available, absolutely, I agree.
"This is one of the things that separates me from some of the other parties in this campaign. Our immigration policy is allied with tough welfare reform to make sure it is right for people to work and a real revolution in our schools and skills to make sure we have the best sorts of apprenticeship training."
Document TELUK00020140519ea5j003bi
