{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2165"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Clegg sends troops towards anti-EU gunfire: Leader hopes to present Lib Dems as a principled 'Stop Farage' party
Patrick Wintour Political editor   
1,242 words
8 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
9
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
In perhaps the most cited speech of any Liberal leader, Jo Grimond closed the Liberal assembly in 1963, ahead of the 1964 election, with the promise: "I intend to march my troops to the sound of gunfire".
Nick Clegg, as he faces the European elections in May, has set his party on the same course. Faced with ever growing hostility to the EU, and to immigration, Clegg has decided to present the Liberal Democrats unambiguously as the party of "in" and of openness. He wants to be seen in these elections as the Stop Farage candidate and to make the debate about the very character of Britain. The planned TV debate with the Ukip leader will give him a chance not just to stand up to Farage, but to stand up for a Britain that does not want to hide.
There is an element of calculation in this. In a crowded field the Liberal Democrats risk being ignored and dumped into fourth place with Ukip replacing the Lib Dems as the amorphous party of protest. The Lib Dems may well be the party of in, but also come polling day the party of out, with all 12 of its MEPs expelled from the European parliament. It's not an outcome that Clegg discounts, saying simply if he is to lose any of his MEPs the thing he would hate most is losing them without a fight.
But this stance is also about Clegg as a person. One poll asked people this week to choose a single character trait that encapsulates Clegg: the answer came back simply, "liar". The stain of his U-turn on tuition fees appears to be indelible. The European elections at least give Clegg a chance to prove there are principles on which he will not compromise, no matter what the cost.
In an interview before his spring party conference in York, Clegg puts it like this: "The two main parties in this country no longer have anything meaningful to say about Europe. Labour seems to be enjoying sitting on its hands and in a rather cowardly manner failing to make the internationalist case at all. The Conservatives are deeply divided between a significant part that agrees with Ukip, and another part casting around for ideas to keep them in the EU, so Labour and the Conservatives are split or confused, or completely lost the courage of their convictions.
"When big parties create vacuums like that they get filled and they are being filled by the two other parties. Whether you agree with us or not, at least we have the merit of having clear and consistent views on this."
He argues the conflicting visions being offered by the Lib Dems and Ukip encapsulate a profound new fault line in British and European politics about how to respond to globalisation. "The irony is that you have got the two smaller parties telling the country what the choice is, and the choice increasingly is whether we remain in or not. It is the same choice in Dutch, French and German politics - do you respond to globalisation by being open or closed?"
All this represents a wider trend. "My own view is that the dividing line - open/closed, engaged/disengaged - is increasingly emerging as a more important fault line in contemporary politics than the old language with which we used to slice and dice political parties.
"It used to be left/right, market/state, north/south, the bosses/workers. So in many ways what you are seeing in British politics and elsewhere strikes right at the identity of the nation state. In the footloose, fancy-free world do you think, however difficult it might be, it's better to get stuck in, to be engaged and be open, or do you seek to draw up the drawbridge? That will be the big story after the European elections. What is the general mood in Europe ? Is it one of introversion and chauvinism?"
Although Clegg will descend into the usual knockabout concerning Ukip's voting record in the European parliament, he is absolutely adamant he will not dismiss the well of anxiety from which Ukip draws. Indeed he says that anxiety is logical and "a profound instinct" that he "acknowledges, respects and understands".
"At a time of economic insecurity, in the wake of this massive cardiac arrest we suffered back in 2008, because of all of the anxieties associated with globalisation where people feel their lives are being affected by forces which they can't control, I think it is totally logical actually that some people will find it quite seductive when a politician says, 'it's someone else's fault and all your anxieties can be lifted from your shoulders if only we just shut the door'.
In contrast to David Cameron, he says: "I've never dismissed Ukip as nutters and fruitcakes. I take what they represent deadly seriously and, by the way, I wouldn't be having a debate with Nigel Farage unless I took what he says very, very seriously." But he says his job is to ask people to think through what Farage is offering. However tempting the emotional reflex, the consequence of Ukip "would be much higher levels of unemployment, much higher levels of poverty, much greater levels of insecurity, a hugely diminished ability to deal with things like cross-border crime, to tackle climate change and a massive diminution in our influence in the world".
But Clegg also says he is not going to be cowed into taking Cameron's Trappist vow of silence about Farage's assertion that he finds Britain unrecognisable and is uncomfortable at the lack of English spoken on commuter trains out of Charing Cross.
"Modern Britain should not be a subject of despair, far from it. I think the fact that we have communities which are so diverse and that you can have people squashed together like sardines in the London tube from different backgrounds, different cultures, different skin colours, different traditions, different perspectives and still do so peaceably and generously to each other I think is a great thing. Farage wants to turn the clock back, he doesn't like modern Britain, he wants to dismiss so many of the big modern features of modern life - I want to embrace them."
With 15 months to go, Clegg may feel the die is cast for the general election. He is offering a centrist party in coalition anchoring the Conservatives in compassion and Labour in fiscal discipline. He is also now offering himself as an experienced hand in the ways of Whitehall.
"In the early stages of government, you may decide a bunch of things, government may issue a bunch of press releases, but they don't just necessarily happen. What is really invigorating to any politician is when you actually see the ideas you have been going on about for years happening in practice. That is rewarding."
And that at least is something on which few Liberal leaders either side of Grimond have been able to reflect.
Tim Farron, Julian Huppert, page 31 ≥
Captions:
Nick Clegg believes the issue of Europe presents the Liberal Democrats with an opportunity to show that it is a distinctive, modern, forward-thinking party Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian
Document GRDN000020140308ea380007p
