{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3006"}
____
  
News
Protesting Farage is risk to economy, says Cameron
Steven Swinford   
412 words
9 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
6
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
DAVID CAMERON has warned that Nigel Farage poses a "threat" to Britain's economy and urged people to look to the "politics of answers not anger".
Mr Cameron has admitted for the first time that the Conservatives will have a "tough" time getting their message across in the European elections.
In a visit to an engineering company in Gloucestershire, Mr Cameron said that while Ukip offers "an attractive–sounding protest", the Conservatives offer a "grown–up set of policies and debate".
He said that Ukip would "build fortress Britain" and "give up on the world" while the Conservatives would negotiate for the reform of the European Union before offering the public a referendum.
He said: "We need a sensible, grownup set of policies and debate, rather than a set of slogans with no answers.
"In the end I know people are frustrated with their politicians, sometimes angry that we haven't taken more steps to deal with some of these issues. But what we've got to have is the politics of answers rather than the politics of anger.
"We have got to fix these problems. Fix our welfare system so it rewards the hard–working, fix our immigration system so it benefits the whole of our country, get our taxes down so we see living standards rise.
"It's going to be tough in this European election campaign to get those points across but we need people who have the policies, the answers, the ability to get stuck in and sort these problems out, not simply people who stand up and make an attractive–sounding protest."
Recent polls have suggested that the Conservatives will finish third in the European elections, behind both Ukip and Labour. Mr Cameron urged voters to "give us a chance" to reform the European Union and to be "optimistic" about Britain's future.
He said: "My message to anyone who is thinking about voting for Nigel Farage is, 'Don't give up on Britain in the world. Give us a chance to get in there, negotiate a better deal for Britain'.
"With me in charge you will get a referendum in 2017 when you can decide. Do we stay in this reformed organisation or do we leave?"
Mr Cameron went on: "So, is he [Farage] a threat to our economy? Yes he is, because we are a trading nation and his answer is to give up."
Document DT00000020140509ea590006o
