{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3348"}
____
  
News
Spin doctor forced to step in as Farage gets lost on immigration
Billy Kenber   
608 words
17 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
12
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage's spin doctor attempted to halt a live radio interview yesterday as the Ukip leader struggled to cope with tough questions about his expenses and his views on immigration.
In a gaffe-filled encounter with the radio host James O'Brien on the London station LBC, Mr Farage was accused of "demonising" Romanian immigrants and appeared to suggest that he expected his wife to speak German only in private.
He was also embarrassed when questioned about Ukip's associations with a far-right Italian MEP who had defended the extremist ideas of the Norwegian mass-murderer Anders Breivik.
David Cameron later described Mr Farage's comments as the "politics of anger" and accused him of saying "some pretty unpleasant things".
Twenty minutes into the radio interview, Mr Farage, who became increasingly agitated, was asked why he had backed out of a pledge to allow an audit of his use of EU allowances following allegations published by this newspaper that he had misused almost £60,000 in office expenses.
Patrick O'Flynn, the party's director of communications and a former Daily Express journalist, interrupted to say: "Sorry, we had an agreement about timing, you've massively ..." before the Ukip leader waved him away.
Mr Farage insisted that he had spent his allowances within the rules but would not allow his accounts to be audited in the same way as Labour MEPs. He said he was "very suspicious of the word audit used in that context".
In a rare comment by the Tories on Ukip, Mr Cameron attacked Mr Farage in a television interview, saying he sent out "a terrible message about Britain".
"I just hope people will look at this and recognise that we are an open, tolerant, compassionate country," the prime minister said. "Yes we want to have a controlled immigration system, yes we want to sort out the welfare system, but we shouldn't put these labels on as Ukip do."
Mr Farage, whose wife is German, was asked about previous comments in which he said he felt uncomfortable when travelling on a train and not hearing the English language.
O'Brien said: "You felt uncomfortable about people speaking foreign languages, despite the fact presumably your own wife does when she phones home to Germany."
"I don't suppose she speaks it on the train, you know. That's the point I'm making," Mr Farage replied.
O'Brien also questioned Mr Farage about comments that he would be "concerned" if he had Romanian neighbours. Mr Farage said he stood by the remarks, pointing to "eyewatering" statistics for crimes committed by Romanian immigrants and raising concerns about trafficking. Asked why a group of Romanians moving in next door would be any different from German children, the Ukip leader replied: "You know what the difference is."
He added: "We want an immigration system based on controlling not only quantity but quality as well."
O'Brien asked Mr Farage why he co-chaired the Europe of Freedom and Democracy group in the European parliament with Francesco Speroni, who has reportedly said that Breivik was "someone whose ideas were in defence of western civilisation". The Ukip leader mistakenly claimed that Mr Speroni had been kicked out of the group before being informed he was referring to a different politician.
Mr O'Flynn, who is likely to be elected as an MEP in next week's European poll, later claimed that he had interrupted the interview because it was supposed to last only 15 minutes and Mr Farage had somewhere else to be.
Document T000000020140517ea5h0000m
