{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1889"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Colleges risk losing right to sponsor foreign students
Alan Travis Home affairs editor   
502 words
7 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
11
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
More than 100 universities, colleges and independent schools face losing the right to sponsor overseas students under a fresh drive by Tory ministers to arrest the latest unexpected rise in net migration.
The drive was signalled by immigration minister James Brokenshire, in a speech in which he accused the Liberal Democrat business secretary, Vince Cable, of telling "falsehoods" on immigration.
The minister framed his announcement as a response to a letter published in the Guardian last week and signed by more than 160 academics in protest at increasing pressure to check the immigration status of their potential overseas students. He told the Demos thinktank: "I'm sorry, but is it really unreasonable to require universities to ensure students are genuine? After all, they would hardly admit a British student without checking their A-level results."
He warned those that did not do the job properly that they could face losing their "highly trusted sponsor" status.
Brokenshire applauded the fact that student visa applications had fallen by 29% since 2010 but said he wanted to clamp down further by reducing the proportion of visa refusals that educational institutions are allowed before their sponsor licences are suspended. He wants to see the threshold of a maximum of 20% of foreign students who are offered places turned down by the Home Office for a visa reduced to 10%. "Clearly, the existing rules which allow such a large margin are extremely generous," he said.
The Home Office said reducing this rate to 10% could lead to 105 of the 1,700 institutions able to recruit overseas students losing their licences. About 70 of the 105 are higher and further education colleges, and the rest include universities, independent and English-language schools.
In his first speech as immigration minister, Brokenshire indicated a far more combative approach than his predecessor, Mark Harper. He said Cable had been wrong to say overall evidence was that immigrant workers did not put British workers out of a job and accused him of being condescending.
Brokenshire seized on the sudden publication by the Home Office of the "suppressed" cross-government report on immigration. "As I have explained, the evidence actually suggests that immigration - especially when it is in large numbers and especially when we're in difficult economic times - can displace British workers. That's what the migration advisory committee concluded and it's also the finding of the so-called 'secret report' we have published today. So, wrong again."
In fact the report's main conclusion found: "There is relatively little evidence that migration has caused statistically significant displacement of UK natives from the labour market in periods when the economy is strong." It does, however, say there is evidence of some displacement, particularly by non-EU migrants, when the economy was in recession.
10%
New limit of Home Office student visa refusals allowed before colleges lose their sponsor licences. The current limit is 20%
Document GRDN000020140306ea370009t
