{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1071"}
____
  
NEWS
David Cameron: Ukip thinks Britain 'doesn't have a bright future'
By Peter Dominiczak and Matthew Holehouse   
448 words
7 May 2014
15:15
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Prime Minister attacks the negativity of Ukip and Nigel Farage and says they act like Britain does not have a "bright future"
The UK Independence Party believes that Britain does “not have a bright future”, David Cameron has said.
The Prime Minister suggested that Ukip’s policies are only negative and that Nigel Farage’s party does not want to talk about the “success story” of Britain.
In what will be seen as one of Mr Cameron’s most direct attacks on Ukip, he attempted to portray the Eurosceptic party as downbeat and pessimistic.
Asked whether Ukip engages in the politics of fear over immigration, Mr Cameron said: “Britain has benefited from being an economy that is open to investment and open to people coming who want to contribute and work hard here.”
Speaking at Prime Minister’s Questions, Mr Cameron added: “So much of [Ukip’s] view seems to be that we don’t have a bright future in this country. I absolutely believe that we do.
"If we get our deficit down, we get our economy growing, we invest in apprenticeships, we show that we can be one of the success stories of the 21st Century. We’re making progress and that is the way to challenge their world view.”
Downing Street aides said that Ukip has an “approach” that “everything is going very badly wrong”, particularly when it comes to the European Union.
“The Prime Minister's view is we can be very confident about Britain's future in the world and how the economy is improving,” an aide said.
“In terms of the response on Ukip, it's a reflection of sometimes their approach would be everything is going very badly wrong, remaining in the EU is going to be a disaster for Britain, we can't prosper or benefit.
“The Prime Minister's view very strongly is if you get the right reforms Britain can go on and build on the recovery we have seen already. The PM is very confident about Britain's future.”
Mr Cameron has stepped up his attacks on Ukip in recent weeks. He has repeatedly said that a vote for Ukip in next year’s general election could let Labour into power.
It comes after an analysis by YouGov showed that 42 per cent of those who voted Conservative in 2010 plan to back Ukip in the European elections this month.
Of 9,000 people questioned by the polling group, almost 2,000 said they would vote for the anti-European party if a general election were held now.
Document TELUK00020140507ea57003uy
