{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"900"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
If you feel like a chicken tonight, Nigel, that's because you are one
ROD LIDDLE   
694 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
2; National
25
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Iasked a chap in Newark's lovely marketplace whom he intended to vote for in the upcoming by-election. He was about 60, I would guess. Or maybe 50 but had endured a difficult life — it's hard to tell with northerners, isn't it? I know — Newark isn't quite the north, and I factored this into my calculations; if this had been Sheffield, say, or Preston, I would have guessed the bloke was anywhere between 18 and 35. Paisley or Motherwell and he'd have been pre-school. But Newark, Notts — I reckoned about 60, give or take.
Anyway, he replied with great enthusiasm: "I will be voting for UKIP."
And so my follow-up question was very straightforward: "UKIP? Are you a racist, sir?" He looked at me as if I were mad. "Er ... yes, of course I am."
It struck me then that the cross-party alliance recently formed to discredit Nigel Farage's party simply by shouting "racist" at every opportunity might actually be counter-productive. The allegation has somewhat less force beyond the M25 and it might even be a positive selling point for UKIP the further you travel from London's hideous, closeted, purblind sanctimony.
The main spokesbore for this attempt to besmirch Farage and his colourful minions is the ludicrous Barbara Roche, who as an immigration minister in Tony Blair's government was at least partly responsible for welcoming to the country an estimated 3m foreign workers who cheerfully took the jobs of largely Labour-supporting natives.
This person is possibly the only one left alive within the party who thinks this was a really, really great idea. Even the immigrants think it was berserk.
As a means of countering UKIP, then, I don't really believe her position has legs, you know? It might even be an idea for UKIP to put giant posters of the insuperably smug Roche in every town stating simply: "This woman hates UKIP" — and I suspect they'd rise several points in the polls.
Given this, why isn't Nigel Farage himself standing in Newark? There is some force to the prime minister's cackled accusation that he has chickened out. Here is a supposedly "middle-England" constituency in which the local people, not just the soi-disant racists, have good cause to be disenchanted with the mainstream parties.
The sitting MP, the likeable Conservative Patrick Mercer, was caught in a sting on camera flogging himself to "lobbyists" for £4,000, something that rarely goes down well with the electorate. The previous MP — Labour's Fiona Jones — was done for chicanery over her election expenses and then controversially had her conviction quashed; she died, not long afterwards, in her home, surrounded by 15 empty bottles of vodka.
These twin tragedies, of a kind, may not have commended either of the two main parties to the locals and nobody gives the Lib Dems much of a shout. So you might suppose it would be ripe for UKIP. Ranged against this is Newark's affluence — it is not, by some margin, an area of deprivation and ill-concealed blue-collar fury, nor is it anything like UKIP's previous redoubt of Poujadist, southeastern, 19th-hole, red-faced, xenophobic carping.
If it is that thing, "middle England" — a phrase that, unless you live in London, has next to no meaning — then it is comfortable middle England. My guess is that Nigel Farage looked at the figures — a Conservative majority of more than 16,000 — and thought: nah, it's not on.
But still, it was a chicken-hearted decision and Farage's insistence that this by-election was a "distraction" betrayed, paradoxically, his European obsession.
A seat in the House of Commons is a mere bauble compared with the real business of winning those Euro elections — what an odd thing for someone of Farage's mindset to think.
Farage is worried that if he stood in Newark and lost, the "bubble would burst". Maybe but, until you stand, it's still just a bubble.
Document ST00000020140504ea54000pv
