{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3303"}
____
  
NEWS
Western tolerance has fuelled growth of immigrant ghettoes – Templeton Prize winner
By John Bingham Social Affairs Editor   
477 words
14 May 2014
21:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Former Czech dissident and priest Tomáš Halík says West has replaced Christian message of ‘love thy neighbour‘ with ‘tolerate thy neighbour‘
Multiculturalism has failed in Britain and other western countries because the Christian call to “love thy neighbour“ has been reduced to a simple order to tolerate them, one of the world’s leading Roman Catholic thinkers has said.
Monsignor Professor Tomáš Halík, a former underground priest who helped bring down the Communist regime in Czechoslovakia, said the West is rapidly becoming a “conglomeration of ghettoes“ with different ethnic and religious groups living side by side but never truly mixing.
Prof Halík, a philosopher and theologian, was speaking at a ceremony in London where he was awarded the £1.1 million Templeton Prize, the world’s biggest annual award, for his work promoting religious understanding.
The 65-year-old follows in the footsteps of Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Mother Teresa and the Dalai Lama in receiving the award which recognises efforts to affirm “life’s spiritual dimension”.
Prof Halík also spoke about the recent debate over whether Britain is a “Christian country“.
He insisted that despite the apparent decline of Christianity in Britain, he was not “seized by panic“ at the rise of atheism.
But he warned that while the Communist system ultimately failed because it was controlled by ideology, western European society is also in danger because it has replaced its “spiritual dimension“ with an obsession with celebrity.
Prof Halík, who was labelled as an “enemy of the regime” in his homeland for criticising Communism, was secretly ordained as a Catholic priest and spent decades undermining the system until the fall of the Iron Curtain.
In his acceptance speech at the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, he spoke of how the Christian meaning of the word “love“ had been lost.
“Tolerance is the secular translation of the Gospel injunction to love one’s enemies,“ he said.
“But when religious concepts are translated into secular language and concepts something is usually lost.
“In order to tolerate an unpleasant neighbour I really don’t need to love him in any sense.
"It is enough for me to ignore him, since I don’t care about him.
"We each have our own life, our own style, our own truth.
“A certain model of ‘multiculturalism‘ based on the principle of tolerance resulted not in a community of citizens, or neighbours, but in a conglomeration of ghettoes.
“‘Let everyone live as they like, so long as they don’t disturb or restrict others,‘ - this is certainly a more humane situation than constant quarrels or even permanent warfare, but can it be a lasting solution?
“That sort of tolerance is fine for people living alongside each other, but not for people living together.“
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e005mt
