{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"859"}
____
  
Guardian Features Pages
G2: Arts: How we made ... Goodness Gracious Me 'How could a show with more than 100 characters in it be peddling stereotypes?'
741 words
6 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
19
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Meera Syal, writer and performer
In the mid-1990s, nobody knew what British-Asian comedy was. It had never been seen on TV. I'm not sure we really knew what it was ourselves. But there was a small live comedy scene, and we thought a TV sketch show could be something our community would watch. We had no idea if it could cross over into the mainstream.
I was a performer-writer on [BBC comedy show] The Real McCoy, where Anil Gupta was script editor. I was thrilled to be working on it, but it was an African-Caribbean TV show, very culturally specific. So Anil and I started chatting about doing something similar about British Asians. He got a team together and the BBC helped us to do a live stage show.
This went so well we were asked to do a pilot for Radio 4. They gave us the graveyard slot: 11pm on a summer Friday. We knew British Asians wouldn't be listening then. It would be middle England. And there was an amazing reaction - I think it really made the BBC sit up. We were offered a radio series, then a TV pilot, then a TV series. But it wasn't easy. It was a long, hard slog.
There were five of us at first: me, Sanjeev Bhaskar, Kulvinder Ghir, Nina Wadia and [the musician] Nitin Sawhney. Working together felt like coming home. We'd all grown up thinking, "Am I the only one who finds it funny that everyone covers their sofas in plastic, and has a drawer full of Tupperware?" With these guys, I could just say, "Tupperware" and everyone would go, "Yeah!" I'd found my comedy tribe.
Sanjeev Bhaskar, writer and performer
Goodness Gracious Me changed everything for me. I was doing a standup show with Nitin Sawhney called The Secret Asians. Anil Gupta and another writer from the BBC, the late Sharat Sardana, came to see a gig in a tiny studio in south London. They'd tossed a coin: heads, they'd come to our gig; tails, they'd go to the pub. Afterwards, they told us our act had exactly what they were after for a new sketch show.
I'd spent my 20s in marketing; suddenly I was 32 and working with this amazing group of proper actors. I'd seen Meera perform before, but this was the first time I'd worked with her. That, of course, would later turn out to be important personally as well as professionally. [The pair married in 2005.]
I was surprised by the degree to which the show was embraced by people outside the British-Asian community. A lot of the sketches were universal, I suppose - about families, greed, ambition, expectation, duty. My guru character was one of my favourites: he was a charlatan who answered any question about eastern culture with a reference to Star Wars or the Queen. I also remember a very funny version of Brief Encounter, set in an Indian railway station: the couple's long goodbye keeps getting interrupted by hawkers.
We did get some negative reactions from the British-Asian community, particularly from the older generation. One guy came up to me in the street and said: "Why are you washing our dirty linen in public?" I said: "Wouldn't you rather your dirty linen was washed?" Someone else told me the show was just peddling stereotypes. I pointed out that we had more than 100 characters: how can you have 100 stereotypes?
I understood where these concerns were coming from, though. As an immigrant culture, part of the unspoken message we were given was not to draw attention to ourselves. Goodness Gracious Me must have seemed as if it was mocking all that. But people seemed to come round when they realised that we weren't coming from a malicious place. We weren't denying who we were: we were targeting British behaviour and attitudes. We were all British Asians, with the "British" coming first.
Interviews by Laura Barnett. A special one-off episode of Goodness Gracious Me will be shown on BBC2 on 26 May.
Captions:
'I'd found my comedy tribe' . . . (from left) Nina Wadia, Kulvinder Ghir, Meera Syal and Sanjeev Bhaskar in the 1990s hit show
Document GRDN000020140505ea560003t
