{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2283"}
____
  
Nigel Farage reflects 'widespread concern' about immigration, Ed Miliband ally says
By Steven Swinford Senior Political Correspondent   
579 words
21 May 2014
07:02
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage is not racist and it is wrong to 'abuse' him for reflecting 'generalised disquiet' about immigration, Ed Miliband ally says
Labour has a "huge problem" with Ukip and should recognise Nigel Farage is raising "widespread concerns" instead of calling him a racist, one of Ed Miliband's most senior allies has said.
Lord Glasman, a policy guy who was ennobled by Mr Miliband, said that Mr Farage was not racist when he suggested that he would feel "uncomfortable" if Romanians moved in next door.
He said that it is wrong to "abuse" Mr Farage for "saying what he thinks", adding that people are "genuinely entitled to feel concerned about immigration".
He told The Telegraph that Ukip appeals to a "sense of dispossession" in the Labour heartlands and urged Mr Miliband to select more candidates from working-class backgrounds who haven't been to university.
He also said that that Labour leader comes across as too "ideological" and "seminary" when he appears on television and needs to learn to speak in a more "straightforward" and direct manner.
His intervention comes after Mr Farage was widely criticised for saying he would be "uncomfortable" if Romanians moved in next door.
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, accused him of making a "racial slur" while Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said the comments were racist.
David Cameron has said that Mr Farage's comments were "pretty unpleasant" but added that it is for voters to decide whether the UK Independence Party is racist.
Lord Glasman, however, said that Mr Farage was reflecting a "generalised disquiet" about immigration. He said: "I think people are very anxious about the scale of change. It doesn't do anybody any favours to stigmatise expressions of anxiety.
"I don't think he has said anything wrong, and I don't think the first response in political conversation [should be] to abuse people for saying what they think.
"People genuinely are entitled to feel concerned about immigration and we shouldn't begin the conversation by calling people names."
He said that Ukip is benefiting from the "steady erosion of the working class vote" over the last decade. A YouGov poll published last weekend found that 14 per cent of Labour voters will vote for Ukip at the European elections on Thursday
Lord Glasman said: "Ukip is a huge problem for Labour. They are talking to a sense of dispossession in our heartlands, appealing to working class voters who are historically very committed to Labour. It's a strange coalition between the disaffected Tory right and the northern disaffected working class left.
"We should be developing more working class leaders from the constituencies we represent, so they can be part of the communities they represent. It shouldn't just be university educated people."
He said that Mr Miliband has "real quality" and "cares about people, but needs to work more on his approach to television broadcasts.
He said: "He should talk completely straightforwardly on the television, just as he does when he's off it. Don't get too ideological, get straight to the point. You've got someone who could be really taken to [by the public] and suddenly when he goes on television he goes quite seminary.
"He needs to speak more from his own experience, his own life, his own family and the hopes he has for Britain."
Document TELUK00020140521ea5l000e1
