{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1620"}
____
  
News
May accused of trying to 'fiddle' migrant figures
Peter Dominiczak; Steven Swinford   
322 words
28 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
14
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THERESA MAY was yesterday accused of trying to "fiddle" immigration statistics by pushing through a change to the visa system that could allow her to claim there are 20,000 fewer foreign workers in the UK.
Home Office officials are considering plans to change the maximum length of visas for some foreign workers by as little as one day to avoid having to describe them as migrants.
Currently, foreign workers brought to Britain by companies to plug skills gaps on short–term visas lasting 12 months count towards the annual net immigration total.
The Home Office is understood to be considering new measures that would reduce the maximum stay for intra–company transfer (ICT) short–term visas to less than 12 months – meaning they will no longer count towards the annual net migration total.
It comes as the Government is facing pressure over David Cameron and Mrs May's pledge to reduce net migration to the "tens of thousands" by 2015.
In February, figures showed that net migration had increased by a third to 212,000, leading to warnings that the Prime Minister would miss his target.
Labour last night accused Mrs May of trying to "fix the figures brazenly" because she is "desperate" to hit the net migration target.
David Hanson, the shadow immigration minister, said: "This is a desperate attempt to fiddle figures from an increasingly desperate Home Secretary. David Cameron promised his Government would cut net migration to the tens of thousands and he has failed.
"Theresa May wants to fix the figures brazenly, trying to take the British public for fools. If the Home Secretary thinks cheating the public is the way forward, it's this Government that's the fool."
The Home Office said it wanted to impose new curbs on the ICT visas because of fears that they are being abused by companies.
Document DT00000020140328ea3s0005i
