{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"922"}
____
  
NEWS
Ukip candidate suspended after calling Muslims 'devil's kids'
By Edward Malnick   
628 words
3 May 2014
18:13
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Harry Perry, a Ukip candidate, is suspended from the party after describing David Cameron as a "gay-loving nutcase" and calling Muslims "devil's kids"
A would-be Ukip councillor has been suspended over offensive remarks Nigel Farage said were "entirely inconsistent" with being a member of the party.
Harry Perry posted comments on Twitter describing David Cameron as a "gay-loving nutcase", calling Muslims "devil's kids" and homosexuality "an abomination before god".
Mr Farage, the Ukip leader, admitted there were "some idiots" in the party as he condemned Mr Perry's comments
A Ukip spokesman confirmed Mr Perry, who was due to stand for the party in the May 22 elections in the Offerton ward in Stockport, had been suspended.
Mr Farage, who was on the campaign trail in Dover, said: "I've never heard of the bloke until last night. I've no idea who he is.
"I think he comes from the north west of England. Clearly his attitude and views are entirely inconsistent with being a member of Ukip. Simple."
But the Ukip leader again hit out at the scrutiny his party had come under since its dramatic rise in the opinion polls.
He said: "I could show you 14 elected councillors from the Lib Dem, Labour and Conservative parties who haven't just said nasty things they've been convicted this year of nasty things.
"And yet it never makes a national headline. I am not saying we haven't had our problems, we have.
"Every party has these kinds of problems but there is a completely disproportionate media spotlight on what goes wrong in Ukip compared to the others."
When asked what he thought of David Cameron's comments about not needing to discredit Ukip as they do a "good enough job themselves", Mr Farage laughed and said: "It was good, clever politics. I'll give him that. Yeah, we've got some idiots.
"What is happening here is the establishment are singling out a handful of unpleasant comments made by Ukip people and yet the other parties do these things and say these things it would appear with impunity.
"The other thing Mr Cameron said is that I was a chicken.
"Well, I'll tell you what Dave, why don't you come on telly and do a debate with me?"
Mr Farage made the comments as he launched Ukip's billboard campaign for the Euro-elections against the backdrop of the cliffs of Dover.
The campaign poster features a picture of the famous landmark with an escalator running up the middle and the slogan: "No border. No control. The EU has opened our borders to 4,000 people every week."
The poster adds: "Take back control of our country."
The Ukip leader believes his party's "simple" message about immigration will get the public, if not politicians, talking.
"I've been trying over the course of the last few weeks to have a national debate on this issue.
"They point blank refuse to engage with me. On Monday this billboard will be going up on hundreds of sites right across the United Kingdom, and even if the politicians don't want to discuss this issue, I think this very simple, straightforward message is going to get the public talking about it," he said.
He added: "We may well be on the edge of the biggest migratory wave yet to come to these shores and the British Government is impotent, there is nothing we can do.
"The only way to solve this Mr Cameron, and Mr Miliband, is for the British people to have a referendum so that we can discuss this openly and vote on it."
Document TELUK00020140503ea53003bl
