{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2902"}
____
  
News
Farage grasps the transatlantic mood and flourishes his isolationism
ADAM BOULTON   
1,106 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
21
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
'Love Britain" is a slogan that Nigel Farage has stolen from Nick Griffin's British National party (BNP) and in return Britain seems to love him. The UKIP leader heads into round two of his European title fight with Nick Clegg as the undisputed winner of round one.
He was 21 points ahead in YouGov's instant opinion poll, benefiting from the kind of beginner's luck that worked in Clegg's favour during the 2010 general election debates. If the new boy holds his own and doesn't fall over, he has already won on points.
Farage did more than earn marks for spelling his name right at the top of the exam paper. What he had to say on the European Union, immigration and the state of the nation clearly resonated with a substantial proportion of his audience on LBC Radio. The second debate with Clegg will take place on Wednesday on BBC television, overseen by the venerable David Dimbleby.
UKIP is widely expected to come first in May's UK elections for the European parliament. It's time to pay attention to Farage. That means listening to what comes out of his mouth because he has no written manifesto as yet, having disowned all UKIP's previous policy positions. At this time of East-West crisis in Europe, potential UKIP voters should ask themselves if they really agree with Farage's views or are they just temporarily charmed by his chutzpah. Farage does have something to say.
His foreign policy is born of this postpost-Cold War phase and his neoisolationism is finding friends on both sides of the Atlantic.
The most striking statement by either politician came in the closing minutes of the debate when an LBC listener asked why Ukraine should want closer ties with the EU when Britain appears to be moving in the opposite direction.
Farage didn't try to answer the question. Instead he blamed the EU for Russia's annexation of Crimea and the upheaval in Ukraine. "We should hang our heads in shame," he declared.
"We have given a false series of hopes to a group of people in western Ukraine. So geed up were they that they toppled their own elected leader. That provoked Mr Putin. I think the EU frankly does have blood on its hands in Ukraine."
His remarks were duly broadcast as support for Vladimir Putin on Russia''s main nightly news bulletin.
Farage later insisted that he had meant what he said about the "imperialist" and "expansionist" EU: "If you poke the Russian bear with a stick, he will respond. And if you have neither the means nor the political will to face him down that is very obviously not a good idea."
Farage's analysis is identical to that offered by Norman Tebbit, Margaret Thatcher's one-time cheerleader, who is now a Ukipper in all but official affiliation. Tebbit feels "more bullied by Brussels than by Moscow" and if he were a Russian would believe that "the EU having annexed swathes of central Europe is in no position to condemn Russia".
In America, Rand Paul, the Kentucky senator who is currently the frontrunner for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination, promises: "If I were president, I wouldn't let Vladimir Putin get away with it." But he would go no further than imposing heavy sanctions on both sides — presumably crippling independent Ukraine in the process.
His father Ron Paul, the libertarian former presidential candidate, is more forthright, risking comparison to Neville Chamberlain's comments about a "far away country". Paul protests: "Why does the US care which flag will be hoisted on a small piece of land thousands of miles away — so what?" In practice this attitude has already shaped the American response to Ukraine. Barack Obama plans to be remembered as a president who ends wars rather then starts them. During his visit to Europe last week his most memorable comments about Ukraine were about what it was not: not a new Cold War, not a time to use force.
Nato's supreme commander, US General Philip Breedlove, may warn that this is the moment to reverse defence cuts. David Davis, the man David Cameron beat for the Tory leadership, may demand that troops on the Continent reinforce Europe's eastern border. But whether it's called "realism" by centrists, "neoconservatism" on the right or "liberal interventionism" on the left, it's just not popular any more after Iraq and Afghanistan.
This shift in the public mood resulted in the watershed defeat in parliament of Cameron's proposal to back military reprisals for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. But Labour has declined to develop its tactical victory into a new foreign policy. Instead Ed Miliband has called for a tough EU response to Putin's adventurism. Farage deliberately used the Stop the War group's buzz phrase "blood on its hands". He also picked up on how the reluctance to use force can make matters worse when "red lines" turn out to be just lines in the sand — as in Syria and, we must fervently hope, not in Moldova and eastern Ukraine.
What has this got to do with the EU? Historically the EU has managed to bring democracy and stability to post-fascist and post-communist states. Where it has failed has been when it has been weak. If anything, the western allies "geed up" Putin's land grab in Ukraine, as in Georgia, by refusing the full embrace of Nato or the EU to those countries in deference to Russian sensibilities and threats. Too often the EU's common foreign and security policy has been indecisive, as with former Yugoslavia, split as after 9/11 — or, worst of all, cynical. I remember the 1991 summit in Rome when Britain did a deal with Germany recognising Croatian independence in exchange for concessions on the foetal euro. This triggered the nationalist Balkan wars.
Last week's accommodation between George Osborne and Wolfgang Schäuble, his German counterpart, on protecting Britain's interests in the EU makes one wonder whether perhaps another squalid deal has been done — "Don''t go too hard on Putin and we'll see you right on the referendum, George."
Does Farage believe "the principles of liberty" are only for Britain? Putin is an undemocratic, expansionist leader using methods we have come to rue bitterly in the last century in Europe. Loving Britain through isolationism works only if you think no one will ever come after you. History tells us otherwise.
@adamboultonsky
Document ST00000020140330ea3u000n7
