{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3601"}
____
  
Features; Opinion, Column
Table Talk Ember Yard
AA GILL   
1,716 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
58,59
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
ATMOSPHERE ***
FOOD **
I like markets — real markets. Not farmers' vacuum-packed, happy piggy, Cotswold camembert, grazing markets, free-range sourdough, but...
Dirty British costers with a salt-coarse backchat Shouting from the barrahs in the mad market days With a cargo of sweat pants Moody flicks, dog food Gucci bags, face packs, and cheap tin trays.
If streets are the arteries and veins of a city, then street markets are its lymph system. They remain stubbornly impervious to the changes, resist gentrification and politeness. Ilike North End Road in Fulham because it flicks Vs at the property prices that surround it; even Portobello Road manages to retain at least some of its original immigrant, Rachmanesque insouciance, despite the tourists, and Berwick Street shrugs off the mediocrity and homogenous poshburger culture that's infected Soho like an enlarged prostate.
Berwick Street is still mistress of the nebulous and the profane, the costers still bellow their incomprehensible vegetative wares, the toms still inhabit the upstairs copulatoriums and the small shops that line the road offer yards and yards of twill and bombazine, chintz and slub silk, crepe de Chine for the opera, cerise elasticated nylon for the tranny, leopard print for the lap dancer, watered satin for the bride's mother. This is the warp and weft of old Soho and I used to work in the arts supply shop Cowling & Wilcox, on Broadwick Street, which runs off Berwick Street. A couple of weeks ago I was walking through the market and thinking about them, when I bumped into Patrick Kinmonth.
He said: "I was just thinking about you Drainy." He always calls me Drainy. "You worked in that shop, the art one." Patrick is one of my oldest friends and we have remained very fond and very close by the happy expedient of rarely seeing each other, never letting the parochial sweaty reality spoil the pristine nostalgia of absent comradeship.
Not that we could meet much if we wanted to: he is booked up decades in advance now, being one of the world's great designers of opera and ballet. When I first knew him, he was a young fashion editor on Vogue and would stop off at the shop on his way to Hanover Square, stand on the shop floor and regard me in my fetching blue pinny, surrounded by Pantone and felt tips, and wave a lilac kidgloved hand in a Wildesque gesture of dashing decadence, and say: "Darling, darling, this is all so real, so you don't change a thing."
I said: "Come and have some lunch, I'm reviewing that restaurant across the road." We sat in the window and beamed. "What have you been doing?" he asked. "I've just been to Stockholm," I swanked. "Handing out the AA Gill Restaurant Award for the Dagens Nyheter."
"Oh, how funny," he said. "I've just been in Stockholm designing a ballet." (Never heard of it.) "Funny," I said "My awards thing was in the opera house."
"No!" he said "I was in the opera house. I must have been walking out just as you were walking in. Where did you go after?" "Rolfs Kök, for a bite." "Oh, my God," he said, "Rolfs Kök is my favourite."
"I know. What a find. Rolfs Kök, I couldn't love it more. I could eat Rolfs Kök seven days a week."
At this point my original dining companion, Laura Weir, from Style, the one in the fetching frock every week, arrived and I made introductions and added: "Rolfs Kök is a restaurant."
"Oh," she said airily. "You don't have to explain."
"No, no, in Stockholm, really, it's a wonderful restaurant. If you saw it written down it doesn't sound quite so…" "It doesn't matter, boys. I don't mind where you eat. I'm not one to judge."
Well, I am, which isn't altogether good news for Ember Yard. This is a new tapas restaurant. I really thought the fandango of tapas was over, but I suppose there is always room for another little plate to share. Actually, Fandango would be a good name for a tapas restaurant: an energetic Spanish dance accompanied by castanets and also a stupid waste of time. At home in Spain, tapas is food that's served in bars to eat while you stand up and drink without castanets.
It's not a sit-down lunch or dinner and it's not as satisfying when it is: the multiplesharing deal means plates of food keep interrupting the conversation with their dour practical demands, the tables are never big enough, sharing is always cack-handed and involves "excuse me's" and reaching and passing and getting your fingers sticky like a 14-year-old at a school dance.
Food really isn't the point of lunch; it's conversation. The menu isn't long but the dishes are complicated. The selling point here is the charcoal grill. Ember Yard's menu goes straight to Pseuds Corner for this gem: "Single species charcoal and wood is used for all char-grilling and roasting. Currently we're using hazel and silver birch." Stipulating a singlespecies fire is, even by Soho standards, risibly outré.
The dining room is that familiar mix of the artfully unfinished and intrusively industrial. Dishes come on a lot of planks and slate. I really thought that slate had become such a dinner cliché that it was only used to carry the corpse of a tapas out. Anyway, we tried most of it and you could eat here and think it was a perfectly good Iberian-style diner, or you could think it was all a fandango with added castanets.
The quality of the plates is variable: jamon was, as ever, good but badly sliced and the pleasure of jamon is all in the knifework. First, with the meaty stuff: chargrilled Iberico pork ribs, hand-ground chicken and, this being Soho, there was a burger, actually not at all bad, made from smoked beef with chorizo ketchup, whatever that is.
The best fish was smoked cod with bean, samphire and clams; not so great was the mackerel with mussels and purslane, or the steamed octopus and the beetroot with blood orange.
The service was jolly and cocky, in a "I'm only doing this while my agent sorts out my record deal/film script" sort of way. But it was the nicest lunch I've had this year, because of the company and the chat, and that's the bottom line of all lunch.
Rolfs Kök, by the way, is a real restaurant. I didn't make it up for the sake of a pathetically smutty doubleentendre and, if you ever find yourself in Stockholm, I recommend it. Lovely balls, meaty, meaty balls
THREE OF THE BEST TAPAS RESTAURANTS
IBERICO WORLD TAPAS, NOTTINGHAM
Set in a grade II listed building; meats and cheeses are impeccably sourced and the dishes sharp. The Shire Hall, High Pavement, Lace Market, Nottinghamshire NG1 1HN; 0115 941 0410; ibericotapas.com
LIDO, BRISTOL
Moorish inspired, appealing and inexpensive dishes; the menu changes daily. Oakfield Place, Bristol BS8 2BJ; 0117 933 9530; lidobristol.com/restaurant EL GATO NEGRO TAPAS Importing many ingredients from Spain, this restaurant has a serious, cheffy touch. 1 Oldham Road, Ripponden, West Yorkshire HX6 4DN; 01422 823070; elgatonegro tapas.com
SECOND HELPINGS THREE OF THE BEST TAPAS RESTAURANTS TAPAS, NOTTINGHAM
Pink radicchio
The Ingredient Pink radicchio BY SOPHIE HAYDOCK Pretty and pink, this rare variety of radicchio, grown in Verona, is a splash of colour in winter months. The leaves are slightly sweet and a little bitter, with a crisp crunch. There are about a dozen main types of radicchio grown in northern Italy; all are late-season winter vegetables. Common radicchios include chioggia, which looks like a small maroon cabbage with thick white veins reaching up from the base; treviso, with narrower, longer leaves; the curly radicchio trevisano tardivo and small shiny grumolo rosso.
BUY
Pink radicchio can vary from pastel pink with light-green shades to magenta, but the colour doesn't affect the flavour. Pick ones with crisp leaves and no brown edges. They should hold their shape when shaken and the white central part should feel firm when pressed. Radicchio is available from late October until early March, and will keep in the fridge for a couple of days. Price: £3.50 per 150g.
PREPARE
Pink radicchio is tender enough not to need cooking. Wash the vegetable, shake off any excess water and pull the leaves from the head. Discard the white central part as it can be spongy and bitter.
EAT
Radicchio is known for its bitterness. This variety is sweeter than other radicchios, but holds a bitter note, too. It is best eaten fresh in a salad, or with a citrus vinaigrette (try orange or pink grapefruit). It also works well with orange segments, thin shavings of fennel, apple slices, pear, blue cheese or almonds. The key is to balance out the light, bitter flavour with sweetness. Other radicchios can also be used in salads, sautéed, grilled or mixed into pasta or risotto, deep fried and dipped into bagna cauda (a hot, anchovy-based dip, from Piedmont), or eaten with extravirgin olive oil and balsamic vinegar.
MORE
Radicchio is an Italian variety of chicory. Modern cultivation of it began in the 15th century in northern Italy. Pliny the Elder first wrote about its medical properties as a blood purifier and to ease insomnia.
FROM THE MENU
Jamon Iberico de Bellota £15.50 Quince-glazed Iberico pork ribs £7.25 Smoked Basque beefburger £6.25 Cod with braised cannellini beans £7.25 Mackerel with mussel escabeche £6.50 Octopus with pepperonata £8.75 Courgette flowers stuffed with goat's cheese £4.50 Beetroot and blood-orange salad £5.25 TOTAL (inc 12.5% service) £66 for two people
EMBER YARD
60 Berwick Street, Soho, London W1F 8SU; emberyard.co.uk 020 7439 8057 Mon-Sat: noon- midnight; Sun: noon-10.30pm
"We tried most of it and you could eat here and think it was a perfectly good Iberianstyle diner, or you could think it was all a fandango with added castanets"
Document ST00000020140223ea2n000jo
