{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"82"}
____
  
News; Opinion, Columns
We must encourage working families
Paul Gilbride   
329 words
26 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Scotland
14
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
INSIDE HOLYROOD
OUR population is ageing more quickly than the rest of the UK, which will have a profound effect on how we fund pensions and welfare, as there will be fewer workers to fund them. According to experts, unless we slash public spending and increase taxes, one million working immigrants will be needed to pay for an independent Scotland's pensions over the next 50 years.
That's 20,000 immigrants per year, every year, till 2066 or so. It means Scotland with its current population of 5.2 million, would need that population to grow by about a fifth, and in fairly short order too, if we want our OAPs to enjoy the same level of state pensions as those in the "foreign" UK.
Such an influx would require massive social change. The SNP goes on about "Scottish values", whatever that means, but can a society preserve its values and the "social glue" – the common bonds that neighbours sharing those values enjoy – if 20 per cent of the population comes from other, sometimes very different, cultures?
And another thing. If we really need a million "New Scots" from abroad aged 16 to 65 to work and pay the taxes that fund our old age pensions, it stands to reason, surely, that those million extra mouths will need yet more immigrants coming in to pay for their dotage too.
You can see where this giant Ponzi scheme is going, can't you?
What we should be doing is doing everything we can to encourage hard–working families already here to have more children, through tax breaks, flexible working time, parental leave, or whatever. That way, the future workers/pension providers are born here, grow up here and live here.
And, in that way, we can encourage them to share those common bonds that give a society cohesion, and immerse them in "Scottish values".
If they survive, that is.
Document THEEXP0020140326ea3q0005o
