{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1851"}
____
  
Spain's astonishing abortion bill: do you even know about it? Spain is the second largest country in the European Union and yet the reaction to a controversial bill, which is set to be passed, to end women's right to abortion on demand, is surprisingly muted. Ahead of big protests this weekend, Cathy Newman reports
By Cathy Newman Presenter, Channel 4 News   
734 words
6 March 2014
12:39
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
You’d think that a bill to end a woman窶冱 right to abortion on demand in Spain would be of such fundamental importance that the rest of Europe might have something to say about it. But it seems that despite regular and vocal protests in Spain itself – the latest planned for this weekend - the reaction elsewhere in Europe to what's going on in the EU's second biggest country has been somewhat muted.
Which is odd when you think that what’s being proposed is a plan to make abortion illegal except in the case of rape or when there’s a risk to the physical and mental health of the mother. In any circumstance, a woman wanting a termination would need two doctors to vouch for her.
So the new law would be amongst the most draconian anywhere in the world.
Spain’s justice minister Alberto Ruiz-Gallardon told his party’s convention last month: “We are not talking about moral issues or electoral advantages, but instead the defence of fundamental rights." Seemingly oblivious to the rights of women, he added for good measure: “You have my word that no screams or insults could provoke me to abandon my commitment to comply with [the People’s party] platform to regulate the rights of women and the unborn."
So rather than screaming or hurling insults, protesters in Spain have been rather inventive. Hundreds of women have been entering regional government offices demanding that officials list their bodies in commercial registries usually used for cars or aeroplanes. Activists were making the point, they said, that their bodies apparently belonged to officialdom.
But what’s intriguing is why the protesters have had to work so hard to make the politicians hear them. Because polls suggest that between 70 and 80 per cent of Spanish citizens are opposed to the law change.
It’s astonishing to see a government embrace such an unpopular policy. In an age when politicians are ever more driven by focus groups and polling, it appears electorally daring to say the least.
Of course, the entire exercise looks very much like a political calculation by the Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy, keen to placate his right-wingers. Unusually in Spanish politics, some of his own MPs oppose the bill. There’s general bemusement why abortion remains such a political battleground, when the arguments have been well-rehearsed now for decades.
The last Socialist government relaxed the abortion laws, giving women the right to an abortion up to 14 weeks of pregnancy. Whether the mother’s health is at risk or the foetus is suffering from serious abnormalities, women have until 22 weeks.
One promise Mr Rajoy made in order to win in 2011 was to overturn that same legislation. Now, under pressure from rightwing factions in his party, he plans to deliver, despite having far more urgent concerns, namely how to rescue his country’s battered economy.
Spanish socialists feel dispirited, seeing it as a larger move to undermine hard-fought equalities for women. Spain’s socialist prime minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero appointed eight men and eight women to his first administration in 2004. Rajoy’s government has only half that number of female ministers.
There’s a warning for David Cameron in all of this. Because sometimes pandering to vested interests in your party can land you in hot water with your public. The electoral pressure from UKIP, and the resulting uneasiness – not to mention outright rebellion – among rightwing Tories is forcing the Prime Minister to shift further and further off the centre ground. But that’s a dangerous game, because fringe politics only delivers so many votes.
Mr Cameron won the Tory leadership with a centrist message on the environment, crime, immigration and Europe. If, like Mr Rajoy, he bows to the whims of rightwing factions, he risks losing the support of the mainstream public.
Paul Mason's film on the protests against the proposed abortion law runs tonight at 7pm on Channel 4 News
Document TELUK00020140306ea36003hb
