{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2623"}
____
  
News
Country's immigrant population hits 7.4m
John Bingham   
469 words
19 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
10
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE scale of transformation in Britain through mass migration is laid out in an international study which shows that it now has the fourth largest foreign–born population in the developed world.
The share of the population made up by those born outside the UK leapt by almost a half in the first decade of his century, according to figures published by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
With just over 7.4 million foreign–born inhabitants by 2011, the UK ranks after only the US, Russia and Germany among the world's leading economies.
Immigrants now account for 12 per cent of the population of the UK, up from 8.2 per cent a decade earlier.
The scale of the increase is partly shielded by a high birth rate over the same period.
Britain also ranks fourth in the OECD in terms of immigration rates, with 321,000 new arrivals in 2011. But, despite the shift, foreign–born residents still make up a smaller proportion of the UK population than the average across other leading countries.
"Nearly two thirds of the OECD countries had an immigrant population exceeding one in 10 of the population," the report noted. "There is, however, a large variation across the OECD countries in the share of immigrants."
The study also shows that the UK is on course to become the baby capital of the western world as one of only a handful of countries in which women are statistically having more children than before.
An average British woman is now projected to have 1.97 children in her lifetime, the eighth highest fertility rate out of the 34 leading countries.
The OECD said that the fall in fertility rates across most developed countries during the recent economic downturn was likely to compound the pressure on governments to tackle the ageing population.
Significantly, divorce rates in Britain have bucked an international trend over the past decade falling from a rate well above the average of developed countries to just below the average.
The study also charts how social attitudes have shifted during the economic downturn. Despite major cuts in public spending the UK has emerged from recession with trust in government among the highest in the developed world and Britain emerges in the top half of the OECD happiness rankings.
The number of British people who feel safe walking the streets alone at night has risen by almost a fifth since before the economic downturn.
Levels of "satisfaction with life" in Switzerland are the highest in the developed world, just ahead of Norway, Iceland, Sweden and Denmark.
Greece, which has been among the worst hit by the financial crisis, saw the biggest fall in overall happiness but Portugal and Hungary scored lower overall.
Document DT00000020140319ea3j0005c
