{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2499"}
____
  
NEWS
Immigration report 'held back by Downing Street'; Downing Street accused of suppressing a report that shows that immigrants take fewer jobs away from British workers than previously claimed by Theresa May, the Home Secretary.
By Keith Perry   
461 words
5 March 2014
08:11
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Downing Street has been accused of suppressing a report which found that immigrants are not preventing as many British workers from getting jobs as previously claimed.
Theresa May, the Home Secretary, has repeatedly cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee that found 23 British workers are left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals.
But a study by civil servants has concluded that the 'displacement' figure is actually much lower, according to the BBC's Newsnight programme.
The report was apparently completed last year but has not been released amid concerns it could prove politically awkward for ministers.
The disclosures will prove embarrassing for Mrs May and come figures showed that David Cameron’s pledge to reduce net migration to below 100,000 people a year by 2015 is unlikely to be met.
Internal emails seen by Newsnight showed that one civil servant described the MAC research used by Mrs May was ‘not robust enough given the wider evidence’.
One civil servant said in an email that the study should be published - something Mr Cameron has so far refused to do.
Critics accused Mr Cameron failing to publish the report because it would challenge Mrs May’s claims.
The Prime Minister Julian Huppert, the Liberal Democrat MP, said: "It's obvious that this report should be published as quickly as possible.
"We have to have the right figures, so we can make the right decisions, so that we get the best people here to help our economy."
Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, said: “I don’t know what the new figure is going to be but whatever it is, the report is going to show that there is displacement of British workers because of excess oversupply in the labour market caused by open-door immigration to southern and eastern Europe.
“What we really need to see is what the displacement of UK workers’ jobs from the European Union is because that is the issue."
David Hanson, the Shadow immigration minister, said: "The British people should have information made available to them so they can make a judgement about the impact of immigration on jobs.
"This should be done on the basis of fact, not more empty rhetoric or spin from the Government."
A Government spokesperson said: “Reducing immigration so our economy delivers for people who want to work hard and play by the rules is part of our long-term economic plan to build a stronger, more competitive economy and secure a better future for Britain. We don’t comment on internal government documents."
Document TELUK00020140305ea35002mj
