{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2436"}
____
  
Business
'Bollygarch' has the right prescription for profits in big pharma
Louise Armitstead   
1,445 words
14 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
5
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Monday interview
Migrant Vijay Patel and his brother Bhikhu came from lowly beginnings in Kenya to amass a £500m fortune in the UK
For Vijay Patel, there's an irony about being celebrated on the Asian Rich List this weekend by compatriots and politicians who are torn over Scottish independence, quitting the European Union and what to do about immigration.
This millionaire says his success is the direct result of both Britain's openness and his own focus on borderless trade. "We are immigrants and this country has made it possible for us to prosper," says the founder and chief executive of Waymade, the pharmaceutical conglomerate. "Of course we worked hard, but we are also grateful for the opportunity."
Together with his brother Bhikhu, Patel, 64, has amassed a £500m fortune, up 25pc from £400m last year, positioning the pair as the 14th richest Asians in Britain.
The jump is due to the sale of part of Waymade to the private equity group Cinven last year in a £370m deal. But, far from retiring, Patel has already started work on a new international arm of his company and a private venture capital business. "This is me, through and through," says Patel. "I love building global businesses. I always knew that if I wanted to be a player, I had to focus not only on the UK but abroad, too."
Patel admits part of his drive was an instinctive flight from poverty. He was born in a Kenyan village, the son of a timber merchant who died when Patel was just five. "There was no social security or welfare. We were seriously poor. And if you've known that deprivation, you never want to go back there again" he says, adding that it provides a great motivation "to get on and do something with yourself".
But Patel is not known for his lavish tastes, either, despite living on "a beautiful estate" in Essex. Waymade itself is still based in an old munitions factory in Basildon. Apart from a fleet of Range Rovers outside, there are no signs of the ostentatious trappings of his fellow "Bollygarchs".
His real passion is business and he reckons the opportunities in the global pharmaceuticals industry have never been better. "My philosophy is that pharma is a $1 trillion global business and the UK has less than a 4pc share," he says. "The market is huge."
Boris Johnson agrees. Last week the Mayor of London launched MedCity, a Government–funded initiative to promote a "global triangle" of life sciences research comprising London, Oxford and Cambridge. The aim is to unite the teaching hospitals, research units and businesses to build a hub that will steal Boston's crown as the world centre of medical science.
"We can compete with Boston, for sure," says Patel. But, he argues, the success hangs on one proviso: the hub has to be open to foreigners. "In MedCity we have to facilitate and create the fertile ground not just for our people, but also for those outside. We need to invite companies, entrepreneurs and scientists and make it easy for them to come here. That's the way to create a global hub."
Patel sympathises with the Government's dilemma on immigration. "Open immigration is difficult," he says. "The infrastructure of schools, hospitals and welfare can't cope." But he argues the fears are overblown. He's a strong backer of the EU, despite some "nuisances over bureaucracy", and says it would be "quite seriously wrong" if the UK quit. "The vast majority of immigrants want to work hard and better themselves," he says.
Patel may have inherited his entrepreneurialism from his parents. His father travelled to Kenya as part of a wave of Indian migrants looking for work on the railways. After his premature death, his wife had to be resourceful to feed their three young children. "My mother was not particularly educated, but she started a nursery from our house," says Patel. "The income from that brought us up."
Patel recalls she also put "incredible pressure" on her children, two sons and a daughter, to pursue her priorities. "We had a few things drummed into us," says Patel. "Honesty, integrity and education. She was a tiger mother and fulfilled our needs as mother and father."
After Kenyan independence in 1964, the opportunities for the family diminished further, says Patel. "The immigrant population suffered as the people wanted education and jobs for Kenyans," he says. "So people like us with no money had very little choice."
But they had British passports, thanks to their father choosing British rather than Kenyan citizenship. The marriage of Patel's older sister in the UK offered the crucial base in London to which the brothers were despatched when they reached 16. "Our primary task was to finish our education, but we worked for a living, too," says Patel. "I washed dishes, pulled pints, worked as a labourer – anything really."
By the time he had his A–levels, aged 18, Patel was full of money–making ambitions and a passion for business. His mother, however, insisted he chose a profession. "I didn't want to be a doctor or dentist – I couldn't see the future in that," he says. "So I became a pharmacist, thinking at least that way I'd be running a business one day."
After graduating from De Montfort University, Patel was offered a job at Boots but instead chose to join a tiny practice in Burnham–on–Crouch, in Essex. "My reasoning was that at Boots, I would only ever be a manager," he says. "But in the small firm, I would learn immediately how to run my own business."
After a year, he tried to seek bank financing to start by himself. After nine months of failure, eventually an uncle took pity and guaranteed a loan of £6,000 with which he started his first pharmacy, in Leigh–on–Sea, also in Essex. Just three months later, he bought a second shop nearby and within five years he had nine.
"I love people and I loved chatting," he says. "I made it my business to know my customers and they always came back. At the peak I had 25 shops, I was on fire."
By the mid–1980s, Patel's expansion was impressive but, he admits, poorly managed. He sought help from his brother. "As an architect, he has a very disciplined mind – he sees everything in 3D," says Patel. "I said 'I've got the recipe to succeed here but I'm dying for some help', so he joined." Freed from the operational side of the business, Patel looked to the next level up the supply chain. He had started buying directly from the pharmaceutical giants to supply his own chain. But he soon started supplying others, too. Over the next 15 years, the wholesale drugs business took off. In 1999, Patel sold the shops, except his first two which he retains for "sentimental reasons".
"My wife works in them," he says.
"She is a pharmacist too, and far brighter than me, but has kindly always supported my ambitions."
The next step was a leap into manufacturing, sales and marketing – and international expansion. Patel founded a new division of Waymade called Amdipharm, through which he started snapping up international pharmaceutical assets. "The vision was to build a global pharmaceutical company," he says. "We acquired businesses and registered products in 110 countries. We had manufacturing from Sydney to Buenos Aires."
Last year, Patel sold Amdipharm to Cinven but, he insists, not for private equity help or to retire, but simply to extract cash for both him and his family. Using the Waymade rump as a foundation, he's already started rebuilding the business under a new name, Atnahs Pharma. In just six months, the business is already operating in 10 countries.
The brothers have brought in their own children to drive the new business. But Patel says he will still be hands–on. "Last time was a big learning curve. This time around, I am going to make it bigger and better," he grins. "To be honest, I don't do it for the money any more, I like to see businesses flower."
CV
Born November 10,1949
Home Ingatestone, Essex
Family Married, two sons
Education De Montfort University, Leicester First job Pharmacist
Current job CEO, Waymade Plc
If I weren't doing this, I'd be… putting entrepreneurial effort into some enterprise or other
'We worked for a living while finishing our education. I washed dishes, pulled pints, worked as a labourer'
Document DT00000020140414ea4e00027
