{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3470"}
____
  
NEWS
Britain should learn from Asian and African immigrants about caring for elderly, says minister
By Steven Swinford Senior Political Correspondent   
721 words
22 April 2014
10:12
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Simon Hughes, the Liberal Democrat justice minister, says Britain should follow the example set by Asian and African immigrants when caring for elderly
Families should follow the example of Asian and African immigrants and take greater responsibility for their elderly relations instead of “forcing” them into care homes, a minister has said.
Simon Hughes, the Liberal Democrat justice minister, said that too many elderly people were being “neglected” by their families and endure a “much less happy ending” to their lives than they should.
He told The Telegraph that people in Britain had lost a sense of “obligation” to care for loved ones and should look to “immigrant cultures” which understand the importance of “sacrifices” and a responsibility to “look after your family to the end”.
Last year a study suggested that 800,000 elderly people in England were chronically lonely, while 5 million have only the television as their main form of company. There are also growing concerns that Britain is facing a care crisis as the number of people aged over 75 is forecast to rise from 4.2 million to more than 6.3 million within the next 20 years.
Mr Hughes said Britain should look to the “best example” of Asian and African families who have migrated to Britain, where the elderly are often at the centre of family life and live with their children.
He said: “Our society has often left too many people who are the responsibility of the public services on their own in later life, even though they have family alive and other people you would have thought would care.
“We have gone through a period where the sense of a wider family responsibility has been much less important than it has in the past.
“I think we need to learn better the lessons of many other cultures and communities, of which the Asian and African communities are noticeable.
“They understand the obligation to look after your family to the end.
“If we had a society in which we collectively take responsibility for our families I think we would see fewer people dependent on the state.”
The 2011 census found that there were 624,000 people over 85 in England and Wales living on their own, three-quarters of whom were women.
Surveys have pointed to greater willingness for a return to Victorian-style multi-generational households, particularly during the economic downturn. But in practice they account for just over one per cent of all households.
An official estimate in 2011 concluded there were only 295,000 multi-generational households in the UK and it is unclear how many were formed to provide care as opposed to younger family members being unable to afford to live on their own.
Mr Hughes said it would take “sacrifice” but said it was ultimately a “much more civilised way to proceed”.
“There are many families, some of which are from more recent immigrant cultures, who are very good at understanding the wider family obligation,” he said. “We need to look to our neighbours who often, even if they are not well off, manage to share family responsibility which means not forcing them into care homes. It can be done. We should not consign any individual to be neglected by the family and often have a much less happy ending than they would otherwise have.”
Mr Hughes was speaking ahead of an overhauling of the divorce law, to promote out-of-court mediation, which he said would also help foster a sense of “wider family responsibility”.
From Tuesday couples who apply to a court to resolve disputes over property or children will be refused unless they have already met a mediator.
Denise Burke of the think tank United for All Ages, which has studied multi-generational households, said: “It is very laudable and something that we would very much like to see but it is very difficult to compare us with other cultures.
“Certainly in this country, often the extended family is completely spread around over time and families no longer live within the same community,” she added.
“The world is changing and, while it is an ideal, it isn’t for many families actually doable.”
Document TELUK00020140421ea4l0056b
