{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3599"}
____
  
Features
JUDGE FOR YOURSELF
Simon Cowell   
2,138 words
23 February 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
4,5,6,7
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Harry Hill's musical is merciless in its portrayal of The X Factor — so why has Simon Cowell given it his blessing?
What can you say about Simon Cowell that hasn't been said a thousand times before? That he's camp, bitchy, rich, rude, smokes wherever he likes, has a highly inflated opinion of himself, went out with the singer Sinitta, put Power Rangers and Teletubbies into the charts, and has very, very high-waisted trousers. All of which everyone knows, and all of which is in Fabulous, the opening number of I Can't Sing! The X Factor Musical, penned by Harry Hill and partly financed... by Cowell himself. Self-mockery? As they say on the Twitter, WTF?
Pop-culture musicals fall into two camps: the Mamma Mia!/We Will Rock You one of crowbarring the hits into a dubious tale; or the Book of Mormon/ Jerry Springer: The Opera one of merciless lampooning. I Can't Sing! is firmly in the latter camp. It's loosely based on the tumbling four months of chaos surrounding The X Factor's 2010 series, which featured Cheryl Cole suffering malaria; contestants battling visa issues and mental-health problems, and claiming incapacity benefit; ludicrous performances from a Brazilian karate teacher; and viewer uproar over...well, everything. To live through those heady days was almost like living in France.
Nigel Harman, the EastEnders-to-Downton bad boy, plays Simon (with Victoria Elliott and Ashley Knight filling the other judges' chairs) — although he's unwilling when I ask him to give us a bit of Cowell. "I'm not Jon Culshaw," he insists. "There are classic mannerisms I use, like the way he stands and his hand gestures, but we take it into a whole new realm of farce." Did Cowell give him any tips? "He said, 'Just go out there and be a dick every night.'"
For the curious, YouTube footage of Harman's National Television Awards performance of Fabulous demonstrates his point — he winks and glitters and flaps his hands in a spectacular wave of such arch musical campery, it makes Stephen Sondheim look like Dr Dre.
"We had lots of people trying to do really serious versions of the show, but we turned them down," Cowell explains when he joins us, perched in a shiny conference suite deep in the belly of a huge central London hotel. (It takes so long to walk from reception to the meeting room that it feels as if we're in The Shining.) "When Harry used to take the piss out of us on TV Burp, we all wanted to be the one he parodied. He knew we had banned the word 'journey' — they're not on a journey, they're on a talent show for a couple of weeks, so we fined anyone who used the word 'journey'. Then we banned the word 'dream' because it was getting out of control. Of course, when he pitched to me, the first song they played was called Journey to a Dream. It made me laugh, and I was in."
As we chat, he leans back in his chair, wearing a tight V-necked grey T-shirt over a tan, puffing on an e-cigarette and nibbling from the plates of canapés the hotel staff keep placing on the large conference table. He looks surprisingly relaxed for a man just days away from the arrival of his first child, Eric— born in New York four days after we meet — and talking to me only three days after the US version of The X Factor was cancelled. Despite the furore surrounding Eric's conception — his mother, Lauren Silverman, was still married to an American property magnate, Andrew Silverman, at the time — Cowell says he's "feeling really good about it, yeah. Now it's all nearly happened, I'm excited. I mean, it's actually real. It's a first time for me, so I didn't know how I was going to feel, but I'm excited."
Is he going to put his son on the stage? "I'll give it a year," he grins wickedly. "I don't want to exploit him too early."
The US X Factor issue he waves away almost casually. "I cut a deal to come back and judge the UK show last year, and knew the American one would come off the air — they said if I wasn't on it, they wouldn't renew it." He shrugs. "I was hoping I could change their minds, but in the end it's worth resting it for a year. We did that in Australia — took it off air, changed network, put it back on and it went to No 1." He gives a small smile. "There are eight music competition shows on this year in America, and you don't want to be fighting against that."
Last summer, however, when Forbes magazine named Cowell America's richest TV celebrity — he earned $95m (£57m) between June 2012 and June 2013, ahead of Oprah Winfrey's $77m — US X Factor profits were credited with boosting the profits of his company, Simco. He shakes his head. "The most important thing I wanted was to get the UK show back to where we were when I left in 2010," he says emphatically. "As much as the show is important for us as a company and my partnership with Sony, what comes out the back of it is really all they care about.
"In 2010 we had Cher Lloyd, One Direction, Rebecca Ferguson. That's 45m albums. The big stars come from the UK shows."
Certainly, One Direction's American business dwarfs The X Factor USA. Both the boyband's debut album, Up All Night, and its follow-up, Take Me Home, moved more than 2m copies Stateside on Cowell's label, Syco, and made them the first British band to enter the US charts at No 1 with their first two albums. According to the event tickets trend analyst TiqIQ, the band will have raked in $500m in ticket sales by the end of 2014, which, added to $300m in record sales, a $150m box-office take for their movie, This Is Us, DVD sales of $15m and merchandise sales of $70m, makes them the first billion-dollar boyband.
With The X Factor UK's ratings trailing at less than 10m — way down from its 2010 peak, when an astonishing 19.4m people watched the final — you can see Cowell's point. If another Harry Styles-shaped egg is to slip from the show's golden cloaca, it requires his undivided attention. ITV is paying him £150m for the next three seasons of X Factor — if he finds another One Direction, that sort of change is almost irrelevant.
Is that why he gave the go-ahead for the musical? It can't be for the money. Is I Can't Sing! part of a cunning awareness strategy for the relaunch of The X Factor UK? To be fair, Harry Hill, his co-writer, Steve Brown — whose CV includes Alan Partridge and TV Burp — and the director, Sean Foley, whose Jeeves and Wooster play is a current West End hit, are definitely no Syco stooges. Harman's route to the role was equally organic. "They did this work-inprogress show ages ago, which I avoided, thinking, 'It's going to be terrible,'" he recalls. "But friends of mine went and loved it. They said, 'It's not what you're expecting. One of them, Amanda, said, 'I think you should play Simon.' When the script came round, I could see what she meant."
Cowell insists he was doubtful at first, but has "embraced the madness. I think people will be surprised that we backed it, because it is a bit close to the mark at times, but that's what makes it fun." He picks at a canapé. "I mean, I don't do research groups on anything. I just think, would I like it? I'm not a fan of musicals — usually I'm out after the first song — but this one I liked." He insists, and Harman concurs, that he's had no say in any part of the script. "The deal I made with Harry was, I'm not going to change a word. It is what it is. If it looks like I had an influence, it won't work."
Which ought to seem unlikely, but I have personal experience of Cowell's willingness to encourage the kind of coverage others forbid. A few years back, I interviewed him for this paper in his large, immaculate Holland Park not-quite-amansion. He was charming, restless and slightly edgy, smoking throughout the interview, explaining how he'd lived in the Mandarin Oriental for 18 months until he ved w t ity got fed up with room service, how he saved every nasty email he'd received, how he hated being patronised and how he got so mad that Popstars — the first music reality show — nicked a song from one of his bands' albums that he started making TV to take Popstars off the air.
Views, 8m, labowell Given his reluctance to grant interviews, I traded on this chat for a couple of years — editors were keen for a splash of insight as The X Factor's ratings soared to 17m, 18m, 19m. For one piece, I had to call his collaborators, including Louis Walsh, as well as more disgruntled ex-colleagues such as Jedward and the American Idol producer Nigel Lythgoe, to canvass their opinions. His ucer pals checked in with Simon — he'd read the original less than flattering piece — but he gave the go-ahead and they delivered snarky, unpolished comments. When this interview came around, I expected to be blacklisted, but he welcomed me with a handshake, a big grin and "You're looking well, it's been ages".
Harman is still slightly incredulous that Cowell is OK with everything. "People will sit in the audience and go, 'I can't believe he's allowed this to happen,'" he says. "The main girl contestant's back story is that she lives in a caravan under a motorway flyover, with her grandfather, who is in an iron lung, and they're so poor that if she wants to make toast, she has to unplug the iron lung." He bursts out laughing. "And she goes up on the motorway to get roadkill so she can feed her grandfather. And all the other contestants are resentful that their stories aren't as heartwarming.
"There's a hunchback rapping like Eminem, Cheryl's just called Jordy... I mean, it's outrageous."
"Cheryl is going to kill me when she sees it," Cowell mutters darkly at that point. "I mean, seriously, I'm going to get it in the neck." Then he shrugs like a true Tin Pan impresario, far more at home in the dusty backstreets of the West End than on the distant lawns of Beverly Hills.
"But then, it's the stuff over which you have no control that always works best." c I Can't Sing! The X Factor Musical previews at the London Palladium, W1, from Thursday Stranger than fiction I Can't Sing! takes inspiration from The X Factor's 2010 series — which gave ITV its highest non-football audience for at least a decade, launched One Direction and popularised the phrase "Twitter bomb": a TV moment so jawdropping that social media ripples translate rapidly into front-page news. Kicking off with contestant Shirlena Johnson leaving the show over mental-health issues after her chaotic but successful audition, the show's real-life shocks will prove hard to top.
Cheryl Cole Has Malaria Shock The Geordie judge failed to make some of the audition rounds as she was "close to death" after contracting the illness on holiday.
Cher Lloyd Racism Shock Online hate mail over her gypsy background proved less damaging to her X Factor run than her duet with will.i.am, which sounded like two musicians falling downstairs in four different keys at once.
Gamu Nhengu Immigration Row Shock Gamu was a viewer favourite, and Cole sparked outrage by not taking her through to the live shows. ITV denied reports that this was because Gamu had visa issues.
Everything Wagner Did Shock The Brazilian-born karate instructor Wagner Fiuza-Carrilho produced shambolic performances, forgot his words and sang out of tune. At least 150 Facebook pages, some with 20,000 members, were set up to co-ordinate pro-Wagner voting campaigns.
There's a hunchback rapping, Cheryl's called Jordy... it's outrageous
People in the audience will go, 'I can't believe he's allowed this to happen'
Document ST00000020140223ea2n0003s
