{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3309"}
____
  
NEWS
Minister admits immigration target off course
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
463 words
14 May 2014
19:01
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
'At the moment we don’t seem to be on course,' says Anna Soubry on plan to cut migrants to under 100,000
The Government is not on course to meet its target of reducing migration to tens of thousands, a minister has admitted.
“At the moment we don’t seem to be on course,” Anna Soubry, the defence minister, told BBC World At One.
David Cameron on Tuesday told the Commons liason committee the target is “perfectly achievable” but admitted he could not give a “cast iron guarantee.”
The pledge to cut net migration to under 100,000 was made in the Conservative manifesto. But net migration surged to 212,000 last year.
Mr Cameron said that Britain had taken in people from the stricken Eurozone.
“I think [the target] it is perfectly feasible,” Mr Cameron told the Commons liaison committee. “We have brought net migration into the UK down by a fifth under this Government – not as much as I’d like.
“The figures have been altered by the fact that in the last couple of years, because our economy has been growing more rapidly than the other European economies, we’ve seen an increase in the number of people coming from EU countries to the United Kingdom.”
Mr Cameron added: “Some of the biggest increases are actually from countries like Spain and Italy and France and the original EU members.
“The target remains, the commitment remains. I want net migration to be down to the tens of thousands. I think it is absolutely achievable.”
Figures released today show the number of Bulgarian and Romanian immigrants working in Britain dipped slightly in the first three months of this year following the lifting of transitional controls.
But despite the unexpected fall, the total number of people from the two eastern European countries working here is still nearly 26 per cent higher than it was a year ago.
New figures from the Office for National Statistics show there were 140,000 migrants from Romania and Bulgaria working here in the first quarter, up 29,000 year-on-year. It also represented a 44 per cent leap on the same period in 2012, when there were just 97,000 living here.
The previous set of quarterly figures covering October to December 2013 reported there were 144,000 workers from the two countries in Britain, indicating that several thousand workers who came here before restrictions were lifted have since left the country.
Despite the fall among migrants from the most recent EU expansion, the ONS data showed a sharp spike in the number of workers from other eastern European countries such as Poland which joined the EU in an earlier wave in 2004.
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e003sa
