{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1855"}
____
  
News
Too many tweets: why David Cameron should quit Twitter
By Iain Martin   
761 words
6 March 2014
14:35
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
There is much to like about Twitter. By following a good range of people I get a constant stream of news, humorous observations, thought-provoking pictures and links to great pieces of writing I might otherwise miss. Last night – between talking to my family and reading a book – on Twitter I marvelled at an image of soldiers from a Scottish regiment off to the Crimea in the 1850s, retweeted by a leading ITV news journalist. Later on I had an outlet for my personal view – no doubt hopelessly old-fashioned in London medialand- that the closure of one of the BBC's many, many outlets, the youth channel BBC Three, is really in the grand scheme of things not very important and unworthy of significant news coverage.
But there is much to loathe about Twitter too. I'm thinking of the way it shortens our attention span; the mindless abuse that hollows out the soul; and the way it shortens our attention span. And then there is David Cameron tweeting pictures of himself on the telephone.
Last night the Prime Minister tweeted – or rather had his personal tweeter, the social media equivalent of a fag at Eton, tweet on his behalf – a picture of himself talking by phone to President Obama. The Prime Minister had his serious "look, I'm on the telephone being a world leader" face on. Within seconds, Twitter pounced. Many people on Twitter tweeted pictures of themselves spoofing the image. Remember, the common language on Twitter is the common language of our age: playful irony, mockery and incoherent rage. (I'm as guilty as anyone on the first two.) Try tweeting what a lovely day it is and see what kind of reaction you get. It is a lovely day in London, by the way. On my run along the Thames this morning I saw blossom, and the sun, and…
More on Twitter
• More than ever, children need to be taught how to say 'No'
• Twitter mobs are confused, angry and stupid
• Twitter and Silicon Valley: in a world of their own
Anyway, Steerpike, the on-line diarist at The Spectator, being a young and thrusting hipster, dissected the Cameron on the phone image within hours. As he said, if you were worried because you did not know what someone on the phone looks like, fear not, here is the Prime Minister to show you. An amusing gallery of Cameron on the phone pictures accompanied Steerpike's blog.
I'm late to this particular party – being over 40 – but I do have one thought to offer. The latest Cameron picture and tweet show that we have passed well beyond the point where senior politicians engaging with social media is doing them, or us, any good. I don't blame them for trying. For almost a decade now they have been under intense pressure to get with it online. Their antics – witness George Osborne eating a burger at his desk the night before the budget – have become increasingly desperate, exposing them only to snide remarks from the likes of me.
Surely the gap in the market is for the leader who will have almost nothing to do with it, who has a press officer occasionally tweet links to his speeches and that's it. It is not remotely surprising that David Cameron and Barack Obama should conduct conversations by phone. It is part of their job. We do not need to see pictures to be convinced that these calls are happening.
For decades it has been conventional wisdom that the process of leaders making themselves more accessible will mean, because we see them close up, that we appreciate their authenticity. Actually, the use of Twitter is having the opposite effect. It leaves them open to the accusation that they are blatant fakers indulging in the social media equivalent of embarrassing dad dancing.
David Cameron is the Prime Minister, a very important job. We know that and do not need to see him undertaking the most basic of tasks, such as speaking into a phone, to grasp the reality. It is time for him to stop tweeting pictures of himself. In fact, it is time for him to stop tweeting altogether.
More by Iain Martin
• Nick Clegg is right to attack Ukip
• Worrying about mass immigration is not racist
• Labour's reform has strengthened Miliband
Listen to our weekly podcast:
listen to 窶路ow do you deal with a power-hungry bully like Vladimir Putin?窶  on Audioboo
Document TELUK00020140306ea360043k
