{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2740"}
____
  
NEWS
Schoolgirl Yashika Bageerathi to be deported
By Agencies   
512 words
2 April 2014
23:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Yashika Bageerathi is being deported on an Air Mauritius flight
Mauritian student Yashika Bageerathi is being driven to the airport and will be deported tonight, a spokesman for her school has said.
The 19-year-old is being taken from Yarl's Wood Immigration Removal Centre in Bedfordshire to Heathrow airport for an Air Mauritius flight at 9pm.
Ms Bageerathi was described as ''very distressed and worried'' by the spokesman for Oasis Academy Hadley in Enfield, north London.
He added: ''She is on her way in the van but I really hope we can keep her here. We're encouraging everyone to tweet Air Mauritius and to phone them to stop this.''
It comes after Immigration Minister James Brokenshire told a Commons Home Affairs select committee yesterday Ms Bageerathi must be deported.
The Conservative said all the facts of the case involving Ms Bageerathi had been considered but were not deemed to be of the ''exceptional nature'' required for intervention.
A-level student Ms Bageerathi, whose case has sparked a petition that has attracted around 175,000 signatures, has been detained at Yarl's Wood since March 19. Fashion icon Cara Delevingne was among those who backed a campaign to try and stop her leaving.
She was due to be deported on Mother's Day but her removal was deferred.
Mr Brokenshire remained steadfast on the controversial decision despite pleas from fellow MPs to show ''compassion'' as he appeared before the committee.
Her tearful mother Sowbhagyawatee Bageerathi appeared briefly before the committee with David Burrowes MP and headteacher of Oasis Academy Hadley, Lynne Dawes, breaking down as she told the committee: ''I saw her (on) Mother's Day.''
She called for the minister to free her daughter from Yarl's Wood, adding ''it's not a place for her, it's a place that is cruel''.
Mr Burrowes, Tory MP for Enfield Southgate, had tweeted earlier on Wednesday that Mr Brokenshire ''just replied to my reps and says he ''can find no compelling and compassionate circumstances'' (in her case)''.
Promising student Yashika came to the UK with her mother, sister and brother in 2011 to escape a relative who was physically abusive and claimed asylum last summer.
She was due to take her A-level exams next month, with the first on May 14 and the final one will be held on June 23.
The committee heard that her age means she is not protected by deportation rules that protect children sitting examinations.
But lawyers for Ms Bageerathi had hoped to make an application to the High Court today for the student to be given an interim period to stay in the UK to complete her A-levels, Ms Dawes said.
The headteacher said they were now trying to lobby support to stop tonight's deportation and get ''the message as far as we can'' that she should stay.
Ms Dawes said she had spoken to the student less than an hour before and that Ms Bageerathi was ''really upset and absolutely devastated''.
Document TELUK00020140402ea42003eh
