{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3321"}
____
  
News
Look out – even the irreconcilables are on side
By Benedict Brogan   
724 words
14 May 2014
10:01
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
 From my Morning Briefing: subscribe here 
Tory high command was initially circumspect about Lord Ashcroft's poll giving the Conservatives a lead on Monday night. They were cautious about investing too much in a new measure that didn't come with months or years of previous comparative data. The appearance a few hours later of a matching ICM poll however changed things. As I mentioned yesterday, it's had a galvanising effect. It's also served to confirm a development that has become increasingly apparent in recent weeks: the Tories are uniting behind David Cameron. I know, sounds a daft thing to say. Surely a party in power is united behind its leader? But we all know that one of the hallmarks of the Cameron premiership, until recently, was a shocking lack of unity about him and his leadership. His first four years in office were marked by mutterings, threats of a coup, letters to the chairman of the '22, and a steady drumbeat of hostility from his backbenchers. The extent of his unpopularity among his colleagues was a constant source of wonder. At one point about a year ago things were so unstable that I and other feared that Mr Cameron might find himself bundled out almost by accident, swept aside by the inchoate grumpiness of his MPs.
Consider the situation now. The muttering has almost completely stopped. The irreconcilables are quiet. There's the odd rumble from the likes of David Davis, but otherwise all is sweetness and light. A few months ago some of them let it be known that if the Euro-elections produced the dire result everyone predicts, a delegation would be sent in to see the PM to demand…things: a tougher line on Europe and immigration etc. Now even that idea seems to have been quietly dropped. Economic success has shut everyone up. Poll success will do the same. The prospects of a panic after next week's elections are fading. Downing Street was braced for trouble but it now looks unlikely. What worried Mr Cameron and his team was not a real panic but a fake one, engineered by his opponents. On Monday night grandees of the Tory outist wing were invited in to CCHQ for supper and a chat with Grant Shapps. Those present included John Redwood, Bill Cash, Bernard Jenkin. The plan had been to enjoin them to rally round, stay on side, stay quiet. Turns out there was no need. It was Mr Redwood, I am told, who urged Mr Shapps and his colleagues to hold the line, keep their heads. The last thing anyone should do, he said, was to go out and stir trouble in the media or try to undermine Mr Cameron. Cue relief in CCHQ to find that the heavy mob are now on side.
That unity of purpose will be more evident in coming days. All ministers below Cabinet rank attended a meeting in Downing Street yesterday to be told by the Chief Whip Sir George Young and Mr Shapps that everyone is expected to make at least three appearances in the Newark by-election campaign. The suggestion was clear: with a reshuffle imminent, prospects will be directly linked to campaigning enthusiasm – Cabinet included. Mr Cameron dropped in on the meeting to reinforce the point.
So let us pause to note this moment. Whether it's because of George Osborne's economic wizardry, or Lynton Crosby's message enforcement, or Downing Street's organisational improvements, or David Cameron's resilience, or the mess Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg find themselves in, the fact is that the Tories are united in a common purpose. That is not to say that the wider Conservative family is happy, reconciled to Dave, or agreed on some big issues. But No10's hope that at some point, later rather than sooner, the party, especially its MPs, would wake up and smell the coffee seems to have been realised. Which is why we should expect the markets to shift quite quickly. Next week won't be great – though I suspect it won't be as bad as the dire third place CCHQ tells us it expects – but the betting must now be that David Cameron will indeed pull it off next year.
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e002bd
