{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"287"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Cameron tells Eurosceptics: trust me' - I get it
TIM ROSS   
685 words
11 May 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; Scotland
1
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
DAVID CAMERON makes a personal appeal to floating voters today to give him their backing in this month's European elections.
The Prime Minister is determined to assure sceptics that he understands their concerns on Europe.
Writing in The Sunday Telegraph, he proclaims his "passionate" and "optimistic" belief in Britain's potential, arguing that "real" patriots should vote Tory rather than be tempted to support the UK Independence Party.
Mr Cameron insists that despite overseeing deep public-spending cuts, the Conservatives do not care more about economic results from "gilt yields and bond markets" than about giving families peace of mind.
As postal ballot papers arrive in homes for the European elections, the Tory leader insists that he is not just another politician who will break his promises.
"If you're thinking 'I've heard all this before' - I get it," he says, before going on to offer his personal guarantee that he will resign as prime minister if he cannot deliver an in-out referendum on Britain's membership of the EU after the election next year.
His rallying cry comes as Tory MPs demand new policies to win back Ukip voters, amid widespread expectations that Nigel Farage's party will beat the Conservatives into third place in the European elections on May 22.
Immigration will return to the top of the agenda next week when official figures are expected to indicate that at least 30,000 more migrants from Romania and Bulgaria have moved to Britain for work in the past year, as border controls were relaxed.
Government statistics will show there was at least a 25 per cent rise in the number of migrants working in Britain from Europe's two poorest countries over the past 12 months, according to forecasts from Oxford University's Migration Observatory.
A series of recent polls have suggested that Ukip will force the Conservatives into third place in a national election for the first time in the party's history.
In his article, Mr Cameron responds to the rise in popularity of Mr Farage's party by setting out his own three key reasons why undecided voters should give him their vote.
"If your pencil is hovering over the Conservative box - or if you're wondering if you'll make it to the post box at all - I'm writing this directly to you," he says.
Only the Tories can deliver meaningful changes to the terms of Britain's membership of the EU, he says.
Only the Conservatives have a "long-term plan" for reforming Europe and rebuilding the British economy, based on the same values that inspired Baroness Thatcher, he says.
Finally, Mr Cameron insists that he is the only party leader who can be called a true patriot, because he is genuinely optimistic about Britain's future.
The Prime Minister makes a thinly veiled jibe at Mr Farage — although he declines to name him - for what he calls Ukip's permanently pessimistic outlook.
Ukip is constantly crying "we're all doomed", like the Dad's Army character, Pte Frazer, Mr Cameron suggests.
Tory MPs said the public was desperate for a meaningful response to migration from one of the mainstream parties and the Prime Minister's promise of an in-out referendum on EU membership was not enough.
Nigel Mills, the Conservative MP for Amber Valley, said: "On the doorstep, people fundamentally believe immigration is too high.
"If we can't find a way to answer that, after a bad European election result, it is going to be a very hard situation for the powers that be.
"The key to the general election will be convincing the people who lent their vote to Ukip this time that they should vote Conservative. We have to show that we have heard their concerns."
Ukip will turn its fire on Ed Miliband this week, with posters claiming that pulling out of the EU would save families £512 a year on food and power bills in a challenge to Labour's "cost of living" campaign.
Document STEL000020140511ea5b000ef
