{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"310"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: ESSAY: Generosity ... and call centres: For much of the 20th century, British workers knew that, while life could be grim, they could determine their own history by acting together. In a post-industrial age, can that camaraderie be reawakened? By Richard Benson
2,277 words
3 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
20
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
When in 2012 Grayson Perry went to Wearside to film his All in the Best Possible Taste episode about working-class values, he subjected a patriotic local Sunderland supporter to some interesting, if awkward, questions as to what exactly made him so proud of his city.
"We've got the beautiful beaches, a beautiful football team," said the Mackem bloke, who was in his 20s and gave the impression of both believing what he said and laughing at himself for saying it. "Everything about Sunderland you just love! The history as well! Our mining history, the shipyards history which is all gone now, but we're still living the tradition. I mean my dad's still a coal miner to this day."
"What else?" asked Perry.
"Well . . . the heritage."
"But that's the past."
"Well, we're proud that we're still here. We're still together aren't we? We might have nothing now but we still have the . . . generosity."
"Is that the industry now, generosity?"
"Yes!" replied the man victoriously. "Generosity - and call centres!"
If anyone had been looking for the perfect 75-word encapsulation of the feeling that might be otherwise described as "being from the British provinces and loving your home because it feels uniquely wonderful even though its old distinctive wonders are being replaced by huge crinkly tin sheds and branches of Subway" then surely this was it. Only a Newcastle United supporter could have failed to sympathise with the bloke by the end; how can you dislike someone who, grasping for pride-inspiring qualities, comes up with "generosity"?
Perry seemed to read the exchange as evidence of working-class culture's excessive nostalgia and old-fangledness, but to me this seemed slightly, well, ungenerous. What the man was trying to say was that the old industries themselves might have gone, but they left behind them a set of enduring attitudes and values. That may or may not be true, but insofar as those attitudes and values were about improving yourself and helping your fellows, then this was at the very least a laudable hope. And when he talked about "living the tradition", that hope began edging towards something bigger, getting closer to a venerable old idea about the working and lower-middle classes' place in history. It is an idea that in recent years has been neglected, then hijacked and now may be beginning to be reclaimed.
This is the idea, once prevalent in areas such as the Sunderland shipyards and north-east pit villages, that while life in industrial communities could be grim, it exceeded that of the old agricultural rural settlements in its potential for self-betterment and social progress through hard work and communal endeavour. Or, to put it another way, that if members of the working classes clubbed together, they could determine their own history.
In The Making of the English Working Class, EP Thompson described it as the "collective self-consciousness" that was "the great spiritual gain of the industrial revolution", and allowed the working class "to be present in its own making". Richard Hoggart recognised it in The Uses of Literacy when he touched on the sense of advancement felt in the 1950s by people who still remembered their rural peasant ancestry. In a 1968 book called Working Class Community, the educationalist Brian Jackson attributed to it the fact that "industrial workers over 10 generations made so much out of such squalor and indignity, [which is] one of the little miracles of British social history".
The point was that people were conscious of this ongoing effort to improve their lives and shape the destiny of themselves and future generations. This sounds rather grand, as if shipbuilders and their families sat about in the evening remarking that they wouldn't have been able to afford such terrific kitchen appliances if it hadn't been for the struggles of the Chartists years before. Some did, of course, just as some never thought about it, but in most cases it was usually an imprecise idea latent in day-to-day stories, anecdotes and comparisons.
When I think of it, I think of my late grandma, eldest daughter then matriarch of a large mining family, talking about the village in the Dearne Valley in South Yorkshire where my family is from. There were memories, shared at birthday and golden wedding parties, of the Welfare Hall being built with miner's subscriptions in the 1920s. Tales about her sisters leaving the bullying and sexual predations of domestic service for the relative wealth and independence of mill work. Comparisons of the strike of 1984-5 to the lockout of 1926. Anecdotes about Co-op divvies, Christmas clubs and indeed the lending of money between women neighbours when husbands had spent the rent money. I didn't really think about it at the time - wow, great examples of collective self-consciousness, grandma! - but many of her stories were examples of a community being present its own making.
I have spent the last seven years interviewing people in South Yorkshire for a book about my family and the Dearne Valley, and I sometimes wonder what exactly happened to that old sense of struggle and self-determination. Predictably, while many over the age of about 40 had, or at least remembered having, my grandma's faith, it tends to be a good deal rarer in those who entered the workforce after the mid-1990s. ("Being working class means very little these days," one male student from Barnsley told me in 2008. "You're either part of the huge range of the middle class, or dole scum. The closest thing to what you're talking about is chav culture.")
It is clear that in the mid-20th century my grandma (Winnie Hollingworth nee Parkin, to give her her name) and the children and grandchildren she influenced, lived through a peak in the principle's power and popularity, thanks largely to two world wars. In 1919 when Winnie was nine, she stood on the doorstep of her family's terraced house and watched her father, Walter, limping up the road towards her as her returned at last from his service in the war. Two years earlier he had been awarded the Military Medal for bravery after pulling his CO off enemy barbed wire at Passchendaele. Now, at the age of 30, he was a wreck, partially blinded, back and legs studded with shrapnel, and still barely able to walk after 12 months rehabilitation at a convalescent hospital.
Winnie would henceforth spend much of her spare time helping him hobble around the streets of their village. When he returned to his old job as a coalminer, and joined 1920s strikes and lockouts, she was furious at the betrayal of the former heroes with reduced pay and conditions and vilification by the likes of Churchill and Lady Astor. Walter, who died from infections in his spinal wounds in 1933, always believed that justice would come only with a victorious campaign for nationalisation. Winnie, like most other people in mining families, believed it too, and felt vindicated when Clement Attlee's postwar Labour government took the pits into public ownership.
In the summer of 1947 she stood with her husband Harry and six-year-old daughter Pauline in Barnsley's Locke Park to hear Attlee's speech to the Yorkshire Miners' Gala. "No one of us can carry on without depending on the work of other members of the community," he said, anticipating the all-in-it-together rhetoric of a quite different PM more than 60 years later. "You in the mining industry are now working not for private profit but for the nation. You have the incentive of your earnings, but you have besides another powerful motive. You are at the forefront of the new society which we are building." My mother remembers standing with her father as he listened to a brass band shortly after the speech that day, and glancing at his face to see him weeping.
In stories like these a sense of identity that mixed the personal and the political was passed down through generations, in homes and workplaces. Typically for a mother in that community, Winnie passed them on to her children, and then in the 1970s and 80s to me and my brother, sister and cousins. By then life in the pit villages, with its indoor heating and toilets, foreign holidays and welfare-state provision, had improved beyond her dad's hopes and imaginings. She seemed to believe, though, that these improvements were partly due to the struggles of men like her dad to ensure that future generations avoided the rotten treatment that Walter had suffered.
That belief would inspire her grandchildren to meet the challenges of their times. My cousin Gary, first as a builder and then as a miner at Houghton Main, was involved in the union militancy of the early 1970s. He remembers that "when it was going on, we felt like there was almost a sort destiny to it. Our parents and grandparents had struggled, and now that struggle had reached a point where it was our time. It was a question of us getting fairness for everyone at last."
Gary, who retrained as a social worker after leaving mining in the early 1990s, remembers the old sense of history beginning to fade with the mass redundancies at collieries, steelworks, mills and factories in the 1980s. Previously, older and younger generations had been thoroughly mixed, and stories and lore percolated down among those with an interest. When redundancies were offered, the older employees tended to leave first, taking with them an old sense of continuity.
The process was accelerated by the dispersal of families as people moved away from old industrial areas, the closure of social institutions tied to workplaces and various political measures and cultural trends that discouraged people from thinking of themselves as members of the working class. At Winnie's funeral in 2002, I sat in the village working men's club and looked for a mural, painted above the bar in 1984, depicting scenes from the strike that year. It seemed to have vanished. "Might have been covered over," someone said. "Some people are a bit embarrassed about all that now."
Politicians such as Frank Field, who recently suggested the white working classes should attend citizenship ceremonies, often talk about the loss of a sense of identity, but this is glib. The people I know have a pretty clear sense of who they are. The problem is that they happen to be people who a) feel life was easier and richer a couple of decades ago, and b) can't see many longterm solutions to the challenges facing them.
Lacking belief in their ability to find solutions, people often resort to grumbling, but every now and then you meet one of the old guard who reminds you of the power of the belief in self-propelled progress. It took a sixtysomething ex-union delegate, for example, to point out that much of the tension concerning immigration could have been dispelled with a second-tier minimum wage set at higher levels for skilled labour. "It'd mean they had something to work towards," he said, "instead of putting all their energy into having a go at the lads they were competing with for low wages. With a problem, you always have to ask each other, 'how can we look forward with this?'"
In the last two or three years, more under-40s appear to have become interested in their heritage, in much the same way that the Sunderland bloke was. A similar drift is noted by Stephen Armstrong, author of the The Road to Wigan Pier Revisited, a book in which he retraces the steps George Orwell took to research poverty in depressed industrial towns in 1936. Armstrong did come across people, he says, "particularly older community organisers, who consciously take the spirit of mutual support they remember in the past, and use it to build organisations - credit unions, community centres - that revive it permanently for a younger generation who have grown up not knowing those times. The effects on those helped can be incredible."
The challenge for the future, he agrees, is to look at the past not with simple nostalgia for the camaraderie and decency, but with a selective interest in the ways when people actually managed to take leaps forward in terms of living standards. Reconnecting with that past and that faith in a progressive working-class narrative would mean that it became harder for other people to rewrite the past (as Dominic Sandbrook did last year on TV with his argument that the National Union of Mineworkers had a proto-Thatcherite agenda in the 1970s) and the future ("All in it together" - enough said). And it would make for another good answer for Grayson Perry, should he ever revisit Wearside.
By the way: the mural had not been obliterated. It was just lost to view when the club steward had the ceiling lowered to save on heating bills. It still sits hidden above the bar, waiting to be rediscovered.
Richard Benson's The Valley: A Hundred Years in the Life of a Family is published by Bloomsbury.
Captions:
'Everything about Sunderland you just love!' . . . A tanker under construction in Sunderland dock yard in 1963
Document GRDN000020140502ea53000bm
