{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1334"}
____
  
Liam Fox: What a vote for Ukip really means; Only a Conservative majority has any intention of forging a renegotiation of Britain’s fundamental relationship with the EU
By Liam Fox   
775 words
1 March 2014
18:30
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
One of the issues dominating Westminster is the future of Ukip. Current betting markets expect a strong showing from the party at the European polls on May 22. If Ukip should fail to impress, it would be a devastating blow to their electoral prospects. If they do well, many will point to the successes of previous minor parties that prospered in the Euro-elections only to fail at the next general election.
This could be dangerous complacency, especially for the Tories. Latest polling shows that some 45 per cent of Ukip’s current support voted Conservative in 2010, with only 14 per cent having voted Lib Dem and 8 per cent Labour. How should the Tories respond? The first thing is to understand that it is unwise in politics to be defined by your competitors. The correct response is to set out a positive vision, clear philosophy and definable objectives.
It is also worth noting how different issues motivate different parties’ voters. When it comes to the matters affecting the country and the proportion of voters who see each as important, Tory voters have immigration at 64 per cent, the economy at 60 per cent and welfare reform at 34 per cent. Ukip voters have immigration at 83 per cent, the economy at 49 per cent, and Europe at 36 per cent. These differences become more marked when asked “what are the most important issues for your family?". For Conservative voters, the economy comes top with 53 per cent, health second with 36 per cent, and pensions third with 34 per cent. Immigration drops way down the list on this measure.
For Ukip voters, however, while the economy still comes top at 43 per cent, immigration is a strong second at 40 per cent, with health third on 36 per cent. Clearly, immigration is a more important issue to Ukip voters.
If the Tories are to bring back enough of these voters to win an overall majority at the election, there needs to be a clearer narrative on immigration, stressing not only the need to restrict numbers, but also to determine which individuals, with what skills, enter our country. While Conservative policy has concentrated on getting down the net migration numbers, it is actual numbers that affect school places, housing and health. The Conservatives must ditch this statistical nonsense.
Likewise, even if numbers came down and all were economic refugees from Somalia, what has been gained? We need to control how many and who comes into Britain. That will help to ensure that we get the right kind of migration for our needs. On the economy and on welfare reform, there is a strong Conservative case to make. The economy is likely to strengthen further as the election approaches, and there’s an increasing fear of progress being wrecked by Labour once again.
On welfare reform, voters seem increasingly convinced about the need to tackle the social and spiritual poverty that long-term welfare addiction produces. The Prime Minister’s recent intervention on this will have reassured many wavering Conservatives.
But it is not simply a matter of policy – it is also a matter of attitude. Name-calling – the accusations that Ukip activists or representatives are “cranks" or “crackpots" – is ill-advised and counter-productive. Many decent and patriotic people have been willing to consider flirting with Ukip. We should not insult their motivations by denigrating their voting choice. Rather, we should point out the unavoidable consequences of a vote for Ukip, particularly in the coming general election. For a start, only a Conservative majority will guarantee a referendum on the European Union, which so many of us want. Only a Conservative majority has any intention of forging a renegotiation of Britain’s fundamental relationship with the EU.
Either David Cameron will continue as Prime Minister in 2015, or Ed Miliband will replace him. That will be the choice. In all my dealings with Nigel Farage, I have found him personable and reasonable. I share many of his aspirations for our country. But I do not believe for a moment that those considering voting Ukip really want to see a Left-leaning Socialist government led by Mr Miliband and Ed Balls.
It is not the actual vote for Ukip that matters, so much as the consequences of doing so. That is the real consideration voters will need to face up to in the year ahead.
Dr Liam Fox is Conservative MP for North Somerset
Document TELUK00020140301ea31005hj
