{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3483"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Ukip's aim is little more than wishful thinking
480 words
22 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
17
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
Now that the Easter holidays are over, campaigning for the European and local council elections on May 22 will begin in earnest. This is, effectively, the start of a protracted run–in to next year's general election, marked out by a number of Parliamentary milestones on the way, notably the Queen's Speech in June, a financial statement in the autumn and then a final Budget next spring.
Today, the United Kingdom Independence Party (Ukip) launches a controversial advertising "blitz" in an effort to top the Euro polls on May 22. It may be tempting to dismiss the election of MEPs as meaningless and simply an opportunity for disaffected voters to protest without any fear that the recipient will end up running the country. But Ukip's performance may well have a knock–on effect next year. Should Nigel Farage's party knock the Conservatives into third place in May, the impact on Tory morale at Westminster could be significant. Many MPs in marginal seats will feel particularly vulnerable to Ukip's populist appeal.
The irony, of course, is that if Ukip denies the Tories seats at the general election, then the next government could be formed either by Labour alone or in coalition with the Lib Dems – and thus Nigel Farage's hopes of an in/out referendum on Britain's membership of the EU would be shattered. Only an outright Conservative win offers any realistic prospect of such a vote, which wealthy Ukip backers such as Paul Sykes, writing on these pages today, regard as the central plank of their electoral platform. Ukip's aim is to have such a spectacular result in May that the backlash will force Labour and the Lib Dems to promise a referendum as well, preferably before the general election. This is wishful thinking.
It is important, though, that the Conservatives do not panic if they don't do well. Next year, when voters come to elect a government they will be looking for a good deal more than the anti–immigration rhetoric that Ukip is serving up. The Tories have a strong economic story to tell, while also being able to warn of the dangers of entrusting the country once more to the tender mercies of a Labour Party that learnt nothing from its period in office.
Moreover, the better Ukip does in the polls, the closer the scrutiny of the party and its leadership will be. Such examination is legitimate and cannot be dismissed – as Mr Farage recently attempted to do following questions about his allowances – as an "establishment witch–hunt". So, even if Ukip does do as well as it expects to on May 22, this is just the start of what promises to be a long year in British politics.
Document DT00000020140422ea4m0005b
