{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3107"}
____
  
News
Reform of judicial review will silence vulnerable
Nigel Morris DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR   
577 words
25 April 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
20,21
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News | Home Affairs
It has been successfully deployed by Alzheimer's patients to obtain access to drug treatment, by residents opposing a hospital closure, and by teenagers to win the right to be accompanied in police interviews.
Campaigners in Lincolnshire are using it to challenge library closures and opponents of HS2 are prepared to deploy it as a tactic to block the £42bn rail scheme.
Yet sweeping reforms to the system of judicial review, which traces its roots in England back to the 17th century, are set to slash the number of "David and Goliath" cases brought by people against public bodies to argue that they have broken the law.
Chris Grayling, the Justice Secretary, says the system is being abused by "countless left-wing campaigners" attempting to overturn government policies.
Opponents insist his moves - combined with cuts to legal aid - will have a "chilling effect" on access to justice for the vulnerable.
They warn that judicial review will soon be open only to individuals and large organisations wealthy enough to risk losing hundreds of thousands of pounds. Labour has even claimed it is ironic that Mr Grayling is planning commemorations for next year's 800th anniversary of the Magna Carta while "seeking to undermine its most lasting legacy".
Critics' anger centres on plans for judges to block judicial review applications in cases where they consider it is unlikely that people have been seriously affected by the state's wrongdoing.
Applicants will also be left at greater risk of large legal bills, while charities that become involved in judicial review challenges could find themselves liable for costs if the cases are not successful.
The alterations appear arcane, but the impact on the legal system could be far reaching. The moves are contained in the Criminal Courts and Justice Bill, which also includes raising the maximum age of jurors to 75 and allowing single magistrates to preside over some low-level cases. Nick Armstrong, a barrister specialising in immigration and asylum, says it is "impossible to overstate the significance of the changes" which would deprive minorities such as migrants, prisoners and disabled people of justice.
Angela Patrick, the director of human rights policy at the law reform charity Justice, warns: "This will reduce the onus on all public decision-makers - from local authorities cutting services, to ministers closing hospitals - to make the right decisions, within the bounds of the law."
But Mr Grayling is unimpressed by such arguments, telling The Independent: "Judicial review must continue its role as a crucial check on the powers-that-be, but we cannot allow meritless cases to be a brake on economic growth." He says the moves are designed to "bring balance" to the system and ensure "unmerited, time-wasting applications no longer stifle progress".
The changes are about to clear the Commons despite the reservations of some Liberal Democrats. But they are heading into opposition when the plans reach the Lords in the summer.
Several prominent figures, including Baroness Hale of Richmond, the country's most senior female judge, and the human rights lawyer Lord Pannick have raised fears over the plans.
Opponents have already started discussing tactics over how to defeat the reforms in the Lords. Given the number of lawyers in the Upper House, the proposals face a roasting from critics who warn that a fundamental and enduring feature of British justice is about to vanish.
Document IND0000020140425ea4p0002p
