{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"672"}
____
  
News
How the beard and sandals brigade learnt to stop worrying and love Government
By Matthew Holehouse   
504 words
10 March 2014
12:50
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nick Clegg yesterday sought to quell the colleagues who are jockeying to replace him, declaring he will not step down as Liberal Democrat leader until 2020, come what may.
It's a bold claim. Few in the party think we would want, let alone be allowed, to stick around as the leader of a rump party if they lose half their seats and left out of power in 2015.
So who will succeed him?
There's one school that says after the pain of Coalition, the party's 42,000 members would want to replace Mr Clegg with someone in tune with their left-wing instincts; someone like Tim Farron, the plain-speaking party President whose hands have not been bloodied by a job in Government, backs the 50p top rate of the tax and who told the opening rally in York on Friday night that the Conservatives are "crackers" and "hysterical fantasists" on immigration.
But what if that base has changed?
The striking thing when you listen to delegates in York is how little dissent and discomfort there is at being in Coalition, and how closely activists' wish lists appear aligned with ministers'.
A caveat: If you didn't really like what the Liberal Democrats are doing in Government, after four years you'd probably just stay away rather than spend your weekend attempting to force a change of course. So these are the ultra-loyalists.
On Friday night David Laws, the schools minister, held a consultative session to gather ideas for the next manifesto. Over two hours, dozens of delegates stood to give their wish lists.
There were some old-school beard-and-sandals policies: re-regulating the buses, reforming the UN security council, switching local elections to the Single Transferable Vote system (the public's rejection of AV in a referendum an aberration) and installing solar panels on every home.
There was just one call to abandon austerity and walk away from the Tories. "Attacks on the poor and needy masquerading as welfare reforms has to go," said the delegate from Camberwell, to quiet sighs and a few rolled eyes.
But most of the suggestions were terribly on message – if not Tory.
Get fracking. Deregulate the planning system to boost house building. Build high speed rail. Upgrade rural broadband. Rebalance growth away from the south east, towards manufacturing and boost BRIC exports. Get small business invoices paid within a fortnight. Give tax breaks to stay-at-home mums. Raising the National Insurance threshold in line with income tax. Even Free Schools found a supporter. "We must put fixing the economy first. That's the country's priority," said one.
Strikingly, delegates urged Mr Laws not to put red lines around their most treasured policies when going into any Coalition negotiations, fearing a repeat of the humiliating climb-down on tuition fees.
I mentioned this to a minister, who smiled. "They like being in Government."
Document TELUK00020140310ea3a002jx
