{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2854"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Mauritian teenager to be deported alone on Mother's Day
Kevin Rawlinson   
509 words
29 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
12
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
A teenager has been told that she will be deported without her family on Mother's Day. Yashika Bageerathi, whose classmates have been campaigning to stop her being forcibly removed for more than a week, has been told that a ticket is now booked to take her back to Mauritius tomorrow, her teachers said.
Her supporters held a protest outside the Houses of Parliament and there were claims that the decision to remove her has been taken without the approval of the immigration minister.
The 19-year-old was threatened with deportation without her mother and two siblings earlier this week because, as an adult, her case was considered separately from theirs. She thought she had been given a last-minute reprieve on Tuesday when she was stopped from boarding a flight, but found out later that evening that her case had been rejoined to that of her family and that all of them were to be deported together.
In a new twist, her teachers have now said she has been handed a plane ticket by the Home Office and told to leave the UK alone, or "removal may be enforced".
Supporters immediately began an email campaign to the 140,000 people who signed a petition opposing the deportation, and some students made their way into Westminster to demonstrate.
Conservative MP David Burrowes criticised the Home Office over its handling of the case. He tweeted: "Out of order and wrong that decision appears to have been made by Home Office before minister decision."
He added that he was calling on his Tory colleague, the immigration minister, James Brokenshire, to rescind the decision to remove Yashika. "Heartless to remove #Yashika from family on Sunday. Needs to be stopped on Mothers Day in gift of minister," he wrote.
Yashika's headteacher, Lynne Dawes, accompanied students to the Mauritian high commission to ask Air Mauritius not to allow Yashika to leave on the flight. She said: "We're horrified because it's only Yashika. Our argument is still the same: not to send her back by herself."
On Thursday the home secretary, Theresa May, told Sky News it would not be appropriate to interfere with the case. May said: "Yashika's two claims to appeal against the decision on her asylum claims have been dealt with by the judges."
However, Yashika's supporters pointed out that May has intervened in deportation cases in the past.
People due to be deported must be given 72 hours' notice, which must include at least two working days. But Yashika's supporters said the Home Office got round this by delaying her previous deportation rather thancancelling it.
Yashika came to the UK with her mother, sister and brother to escape a relative who was physically abusive and claimed asylum in the summer of 2013, although all four now face deportation.
Captions:
Yashika's teachers say the Home Office have told her to leave the
UK voluntarily
or 'removal may be enforced'
Document GRDN000020140328ea3t000cj
