{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"3810"}
____
  
Hurling insults at Ukip is not the solution
1,178 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
20
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
I wonder if those Tory media groupies who are currently attacking Ukip with such hysterical fervour actually think that they are helping. By which I mean, of course, helping their own side: there is no question at all that they are helping Ukip. That they have now been joined in full cry by a team of Labour cheerleaders must have Nigel Farage opening yet another bottle in celebration.
Clearly the Clegg-Farage debates were the breaking point. The catastrophic failure of Nick Clegg's attempt to defend the official pro-European case has caused the mainstream parties to give up any prospect of winning the rational argument. So they are now reduced simply to smear and shame by association.
This would not matter all that much since, in the short term, Ukip's popularity will be largely unaffected, and in the long term it will cease to matter as an electoral force. But in the course of this campaign of desperate vilification, there is serious damage being done to the public discourse.
First, the accusation of "racism" was bandied about in ways that were simply absurd. The contentious Ukip poster that shows a finger pointing at the (presumably British) viewer, and a warning that 26 million EU migrants are looking for work and potentially competing for his job, may be inflammatory and divisive. But to call it racist is to debase the language: it is an insult to those whose lives have been devastated, or ended, by genuine racism. As a member of an ethnic minority that was almost annihilated by an actual racist regime, I find this trivialisation of the concept seriously offensive.
In one particularly preposterous broadcast encounter, the interviewer advised Farage that the dictionary definition of racism was the assertion that one race was superior to another - and that because his poster suggested that the British worker was "superior" to the foreign one, it was inherently racist. In fact, if anything, the poster suggested precisely the opposite: that foreign workers are likely to be superior competitors who will put indigenous employees at a natural disadvantage.
At any rate, all the mainstream parties now publicly accept that unlimited migration has caused economic and social problems. This admission, and the need to reassert Britain's control over its borders, has become part of David Cameron's official renegotiation strategy with the EU. Why should this be a legitimate concern for the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition to raise, but outrageous, and "racist", when it is pointed out by Ukip? The only substantive distinction between the Conservatives' stance and Ukip's on the mass-migration question is that Farage's party believes it will be impossible to negotiate away the EU open-borders policy.
After the poster farrago had died down - having had no effect whatever on Ukip's standing in the polls - there came a rather more serious incident with an activist who actually had published a stream of racist tweets. Farage promptly suspended Andre Lampitt from the party, thereby exhausting the possibilities of further shock and disgust. Interestingly, he refused to do the same to the next embarrassment the media dredged up, Exeter branch chairman David Challice, whose offence was to appear in a YouTube video expressing the sort of criticisms of multiculturalism and moral relativism that can be read in almost any Right-of-centre publication. With considerable tactical astuteness, Farage stated that the right to present controversial or unfashionable opinions was one that his party stood by - thereby drawing a distinction between Challice's views and the true racism of Lampitt, whom he had banished.
As it happens, I disagree with Ukip's position on immigration. I have mentioned before on this page that I am an immigrant twice over. My grandparents fled to the New World to escape from the pogroms waged by a genuinely racist regime, and I emigrated, under more leisurely circumstances, to Britain and adopted it as my home.
Having grown up in a nation in which everybody (or their antecedents) came from somewhere else, I do not personally have any difficulty accepting the cosmopolitan nature of the London neighbourhood where I live. I believe firmly that human progress is the story of the movement of peoples, and that economic migration is a particular force for good, offering as it does the possibility of personal liberation and self-improvement.
But none of that is to say that I do not understand the fears and resentments of people whose lives have been less privileged than mine: who have not had the education and the life chances that make for an easy enjoyment of cultural variety and little worry about competition for scarce employment.
My in-laws in the North of England - who are not racists either - live in a different world, in which skilled men in the building trades are competing with Eastern Europeans who will work for wages that could not support a British household. It is quite wicked to pretend that anyone whose life is affected by these pressures must be a bigot for complaining - or even for supporting the one party that seems to speak frankly on their behalf.
Meanwhile, the argument moves on. The most fashionable thing to say at the moment is that smearing Ukip obviously doesn't work, so let's open another front. As well as telling people that they should be ashamed of themselves for supporting a "racist" party, we should explain why mass migration is good for the country. Don't just throw insults: make the positive case.
Which, of course, is just another way of telling all those people who are flocking to Ukip that their perception of reality is deluded. They are not actually disadvantaged by competition from cheaper labour. Their children are not actually going to schools where only a minority of pupils speak English. Whatever they think they are seeing with their own eyes, there is no price to be paid for uncontrolled immigration. Let's watch and see how that goes down.
The best way to counter an opponent who is distasteful but wildly popular is not to scream abuse at him, or imply that his followers are morons who do not understand their own circumstances. There is another way altogether to defeat what you see as dangerous populism: address the need that it is filling.
The Conservatives undermined the electoral attraction of the BNP in the Eighties by making it clear to the country that they understood its anxiety about Commonwealth immigration and by taking steps to limit it. Offered a respectable mainstream alternative, the British voter will turn away from the extreme option. But now, alas, because we are subject to EU rule, there is no longer the possibility of a simple governmental decision to reduce the number of migrants. So we have mainstream party leaders powerless to respond to the popular will. Which is where we - and Ukip - came in.
You can defeat dangerous populism by addressing the need that it is fulfilling
Document STEL000020140427ea4r0003i
