{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1316"}
____
  
Features
MARRIED TO THE TIGER
Judith Woods   
1,730 words
1 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
1
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Exclusive interview
What is it like to be the husband of Amy Chua, notorious for her savagely strict parenting? And why is their new book, The Triple Package, proving so controversial? Law professor Jed Rubenfeld tells all to Judith Woods
HAT does a human doormat look like? WA bystander in his own family? The sort of father who abdicates responsibility for the excesses of his wife's extreme parenting?
It's fair to say he looks nothing like Jed Rubenfeld, husband of Amy Chua, whose controversial 2011 book Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother sent shock waves the length and breadth of the planet.
Sitting in a Manchester hotel, so jet–lagged from his New York flight that he knocks back not only his own strong coffee but mine too in a matter of minutes, Rubenfeld is very much his own man. Tempted though I am to call him The Tiger Mother's Mate, I think the better of it rapidly.
He is a tall, rangy 52–year–old with a attractive air of sardonic melancholy: "I'm familiar with the concept of happiness but I think that I'm constitutionally unsuited to it," he jokes, drily. At least I think it's a joke, but then again, maybe it isn't.
A brilliant professor of law at Yale – as is his wife – Rubenfeld bears a marked resemblance to the Little Miss Sunshine actor Greg Kinnear, who is also a past master of the deadpan one–liner.
But for a very long time, Rubenfeld has kept his own counsel as his Tiger Mother wife was vilified and insulted, subjected to racist slurs and bombarded with death threats and anonymous messages expressing a hope that her children would commit suicide.
Chua's unflinching, often scurrilously funny account of how she chivvied, bullied and browbeat their two children into academic and musical high achievement saw her slated as a wicked pariah in the US, feted as a parenting prophet in Asia and regarded with shock, awe and no small amount of envy here in Britain.
The book was essentially a satire that misfired, if an international bestseller can ever be regarded as misfiring. Chua, with a string of worthy academic tomes to her name, unapologetically portrayed herself as a Tiger Mother harridan, who ruthlessly sacrificed her daughters' childhood in the pursuit of excellence, by way of cocking a snook at wishy–washy permissive parenting.
Of their father there was no mention. Although himself an author, inter alia of successful novels including The Interpretation of Murder, which topped the bestseller list here in Britain, Rubenfeld's absence from his wife's narrative was noted, extrapolated and condemned – hence the "human doormat" charge.
So where was he while Chua banned sleepovers and television and playdates, introduced rotelearning and hours of music practice daily? Was he present when his wife threatened to burn elder daughter Sophia's toys or when four–year–old Lulu handed her mother a homemade birthday card, featuring a big happy face, only to be informed that it wasn't good enough and told "I reject this"?
"I was there, in real life and in the book," he says. "But I made Amy take out all references to me, because I didn't want to be a character in her memoir; I don't particularly like talking about myself or my family."
Despite the fact he would have incontrovertibly come across as the good guy? Or did Rubenfeld fear being caricatured as a powerless (for which read spineless) bystander?
He brindles with supressed irritation, then tells me a story.
"When Lulu was young, aged about five, she was supposed to learn a piano piece with both hands for the first time," he says. "She tried and tried and couldn't do it.
Again and again her mother made her stick with it and there was crying and shouting, and I took Amy aside and said, 'Let her stop, what you're doing isn't useful and it's not going to achieve anything'."
His wife wouldn't countenance backing down. More yelling and sobbing followed. Then, after 20 minutes, Lulu suddenly, mercifully had an epiphany and mastered the technique.
"Her eyes lit up, and in that moment she realised that even when she was sure she couldn't do something, it didn't mean she couldn't do it. And do you know what I learnt from this?"
That you are a much nicer person than your wife? To his credit, Rubenfeld smiles. Briefly. Reluctantly.
"What I learnt was that if I had let Lulu quit, she would never have had that much better experience of overcoming adversity. People think that I somehow "let" Amy rear the kids, but we were always on the same side.
"In the book Amy never mentioned the unconditional love she showed the girls, the rolling about giggling on the bed, the fun stuff," he says. "That was very much part of life, but she was writing a different sort of book."
Rubenfeld came into his own during the downtimes; it was he who insisted on the family bike rides and apple–picking and water slides and Yankees games. In truth, Tiger Mother is more finely nuanced than the headlines would suggest and by all accounts Chua herself is a far cry from the Asian–American Mommie Dearest figure she provocatively projected in the book.
And yet the incidents in the book all happened.
I wonder if the dynamic might have been different had they had two sons? Would The Tiger Mother's Matehave been quite as noninterventionist if one of his boys was so stressed he left teeth marks on the piano, as one of his girls did?
Rubenfeld pauses for a long moment, then grins, ruefully.
"That's very difficult for me to know – but I might have pushed them more in sports if they had been boys."
Nature, nurture; the interplay never ceases to fascinate, and indeed, unsettle. My hunch is that Rubenfeld and Chua come down firmly on the side of nurture, although his intellectual yet laissezfaire Jewish upbringing was the polar opposite of her highly pressured home environment, and they both ended up in the same Ivy League ivory tower.
Their common experience was as the children of immigrants; Rubenfeld's parents emigrated to the US from Poland. Chua's family were Chinese Filipino. And it is that very success that has led them to collaborate on their latest book, The Triple Package: What Really Determines Success. If anything – and this is saying a lot – it actually manages to offend more people than Tiger Mother did.
It's a densely written, minutely researched, hugely inflammatory work that dares to ask questions such as: why do Jews win so many Nobel Prizes? Why do the children of poorly educated Chinese immigrants excel so remarkably at school? Given he is Jewish and she is Chinese, they're on reasonably safe territory here.
More eggshell topics are: Why are Mormons running America's financial sector?
Quickly followed by, Why are Nigerian Americans doing better than Appalachian Americans? Alongside the groups that succeed are those who, by contrast, fail; a thorny issue in a country of heightened racial sensibilities, where, post–cold war, China is perceived as the 21st century's most potent threat.
To this end, The New York Post has already lambasted The Triple Package as "a series of shock–arguments wrapped in self–help tropes... meant to do what racist arguments do: scare people." But Chua and Rubenfeld steer conspicuously clear of the word "race", preferring "groups" or "culture". Their premise – that can be equally applied in Britain – is that there are three traits that certain groups possess that lead them to succeed.
The first is a superiority complex, which is to say a feeling you and your group are exceptional. The second, paradoxically, is a feeling of insecurity which is expressed by a need to prove oneself. The third is "impulse control" or self discipline.
"These qualities aren't racially determined or the product of genetics," says Rubenfeld. "They are very often seen in the children of certain immigrant groups, such as those from China and India, who are tremendously high–achieving, both the US and Britain.
"But by the third generation that advantage can peter out as they are exposed to a Western culture where parents offer unconditional love which is severed from high expectation."
If Tiger Motherdom was about screaming in your daughter's face and calling her "garbage" and "fat", The Triple Packageis about instilling in every child a sense of extraordinary potential, which creates drive – but not entitlement, which begets complacency.
If this is accompanied by the strict understanding that said potential has not yet been reached – and Mummy and Daddy really won't love you as much as they could until it is – then all that remains is a massive injection of steely self–discipline and ta–dah! Your offspring might end up at Harvard like Sophia, or Yale, which has offered a place to Lulu.
Rubenfeld is aware, of course, that the flipside of a superiority complex is intolerance, just as inadequacy can breed resentment. Throw overarching self discipline into the mix and you're perilously close to the realms of the Third Reich.
"Our book isn't a celebration of the cultures that are way ahead in terms of average income and education, it's an explanation of them and a pretty honest one at that," stresses Rubenfeld. "If this is what it takes for people to get ahead in our hyper–competitive economic world, is it worth the price we might have to pay?"
He rejects the idea that The Triple Package is a how–to manual. That's his wife's territory. "If I were a single parent bringing up kids, they would be unemployed and probably unemployable," he muses. "I wouldn't dream of giving anyone parenting advice."
Perhaps not, I reassure him. But the bike rides and apple–picking sound fun. And they won't leave teeth marks on the baby grand.
The Triple Package (Bloomsbury) is available from Telegraph Books for £16.99 + £1.35 p&p. 0844 871 1515 ; books.telegraph.co.uk
'If this is what it takes to get ahead in our world, is worth the price?'
Document DT00000020140301ea31000h8
