{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"1543"}
____
  
Features
WHY I WILL LEAD THE TORY FIGHT AGAINST VINCE CABLE'S MANSION TAX. IT'S A BRUTALLY UNFAIR ATTACK ON EVERY HOMEOWNER
BY BORIS JOHNSON    
1,188 words
16 March 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
27
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
A FEW days ago I was on a train coming back from Croydon when I fell into conversation with a couple in their late 20s. He worked in IT; she was a nurse.
I expect their families were second or third-generation immigrants from the Indian subcontinent, and they were typical Londoners - and both in professions that are crucial for the economy.
But they were in near-despair. They wanted to start a family and were looking for a home. They wanted something with any kind of patch of outdoors. They had been to Croydon about six months ago to scout around - and though they liked what they saw, they hadn't quite clinched a deal.
Six months ago some nice places looked as though they might be within their reach. Six months ago they had been given leisurely tours by estate agents. Six months ago it all looked feasible. Then whoooomph.
Now they couldn't believe it. Estate agents were giving them ten minutes max. Now they were being frogmarched through living rooms like Soviet citizens being filed past an effigy of Lenin. Now buyers were paying the asking price, on the spot, or sometimes more than the asking price.
This couple were seeing their dreams of home ownership slipping further and further away - and they wanted to know what I was doing to help. So I told them what we were doing to tackle the number one issue in London: the desperate need for housing.
I told them about the record number of affordable places we have already built since I have been Mayor, and we will hit 100,000 over eight years.
I explained (and by now the whole carriage was listening, since this is a subject that obsesses both the capital and the rest of the country) that we were helping tens of thousands of people such as them - couples with a joint income of, say, £33,000 - to get a part-buy, part-rent home. This kind of deal allows you gradually to increase the proportion that you own outright, even if you start with a small deposit.
I told them above all that we could crack the problem if we got on and built homes on those brownfield sites that have the space - and I explained about the money that is now flooding into London to enable that to happen. Look at Battersea, or Greenwich, or Old Oak Common - there are dozens of incredible schemes now under way or about to start.
BY USING these sites properly - and there are about 30 - we could build almost 400,000 homes in the next ten years. The Chancellor is poised to give the go-ahead for a new rail extension in East London that will allow us to build a beautiful new town the size of Windsor at Barking Riverside.
I told these young Londoners that, in a nutshell, the answer to the problem is to increase the supply of properties - and that is what we are doing.
The answer is to build lovely, roomy new homes and communities; in many cases, family homes with gardens. The answer is NOT to slap some mad new tax on properties in London and the rest of the country.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats are taking us to disaster with their plans for a so-called mansion tax. This tax is not only brutally unfair on people who happen to be living in family homes, but it would hit the economics of new housing developments and make it even more difficult for people such as the couple on the train find the property they need.
It is time people woke up to the horror of what is being planned. Labour and the Lib Dems currently claim that this tax would fall only on homes that are valued above £2 million. But everyone knows these thresholds have a habit of falling.
Ed Miliband and Ed Balls say that they would raise £2 billion from the tax - and yet to do that, and pay for all their political promises, it has been calculated that they would need the threshold to be £1.25 million.
Business Secretary Vince Cable has given the game away by saying that the tax would kick in for all homes valued above £1 million. We are talking about hundreds of thousands of people, and hundreds of thousands of homes - and with every month that goes by there are more and more whose values are reaching the danger zone.
The number of property 'millionaires' is currently increasing by about 50,000 a year.
LABOUR and the Lib Dems would have you believe that the people they want to hit are oligarchs and international bankers. But the overwhelming majority of victims would be Britons who find themselves living in a house that has nudged over the threshold. That includes people who currently have no idea of the risk they face.
In order to impose the new tax there would inevitably be a revaluation of property, since we have not had one for 23 years. Suddenly people on modest incomes, such as pensioners, could find themselves clobbered with insane demands for one per cent of the notional value of their home, every year.
That is £10,000 a year on a £1 million property, or £25,000 a year on a £2.5 million house.
It is hard to think of a tax that is more viciously unfair. It hits families who have worked hard and traded up the property ladder only to find themselves walloped for their success.
People would find that they could not afford to remain where they are. They would have to move. People would live in terror of exceeding these arbitrary thresholds. Improvements would be abandoned, and one can imagine a certain strategic decay would set in.
Above all, a tax on these higher value homes would not only clobber existing owners, it would make it more difficult to build the new properties I have described and that we so desperately need.
If you look at new developments taking place around London, you can see they contain a mixture of properties. In order to pay for discounted homes, you need to have a proportion on sale at the market rate.
It is the penthouse flats and the top-end stuff that helps make such schemes viable and allows developers to fund affordable homes.
But how is that delicate system supposed to work if you suddenly tell potential buyers that they have to pay not only the asking price but a huge new tax - say £250,000 over ten years - just for owning a property? At the very least you create enough anxiety and uncertainty to make it more difficult to get the housing scheme off the ground.
And how does that help that couple on the train?
It is a catastrophe waiting to happen. We need new homes - not a new tax on homes.
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140316ea3g0000r
