{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1752"}
____
  
News
TMS
kaya burgess   
528 words
24 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
11
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Grant on the political scent
Richard E Grant is not known as a method actor, but his role as the drug-addled Withnail, above, may just have been research for his new fragrance, Jack, which contains notes of marijuana.
Perhaps it explains his sketchy memory for faces, especially those of our anonymous political leaders. Asked which current politician he would most like to portray, the actor, who played Michael Heseltine in The Iron Lady, told TMS: "I'm really struggling to conjure up a clear image of anyone since the sad demise of Spitting Image."
Asked what ingredients might make a good fragrance for the political classes, Grant mused: "Do you mean Pong de Poll Tax, Eau de Lies, Scent of Fiddled Expenses or perhaps How Do You Solve A Problem Like Maria Miller?"
News that 1,000 schoolchildren have been caught with deadly weapons since 2011 is worrying, though it was a surprise to see they included 14 lead pipes. Forget gory video games like Call of Duty, is it, in fact, Cluedo that is turning our kids violent? Should schools prepare for candlestick attacks in the library?
UKIP CRACKS (UP) AMERICA
In distancing itself from Europe, Ukip has become a hit in America, as ridicule of the party's election posters goes global. A British parody, made by Duncan Stott, declared: "Immigrants set up one in seven companies. And whose jobs are they creating?" Picked up Stateside, an American version was shared by Daniel Lin, an economics professor in Washington DC, noting that 40 per cent of Fortune 500 companies were founded by immigrants. Professor Lin tweeted: "Mockery of the Ukip poster has spread across the Atlantic. Be proud, Ukip. Be very proud."
Ukippers held a raffle in Sheffield this week. The prize? A holiday in Brussels. If that wasn't comedic enough, the winner was a Mr Peter Kay. Though, sadly, not that one.
IT'S THE PITS
When Jack Straw's son, Will, a Labour parliamentary candidate, tweeted a photo of himself next to two Morris dancers with blackedup faces, it drew cries of racism. Straw defended the Britannia Coco-nut Dancers' make-up, based on Moorish pirates and sooty-faced miners, but Eddie Mair, the BBC Radio 4 presenter, was keen to test the limits of political correctness still further.
When Peter Herbert, a human rights barrister, appeared on the PM show this week to discuss his own childhood in a mining village, Mair asked him: "Did you ever black up?" Probably not a question the chairman of the Society of Black Lawyers has been asked before.
TRASH TALK
James Cracknell, the Olympic rower, below, has been pounding the streets of the southwest as a prospective Tory MEP candidate. His doorstep encounters have been odd, he told the Western Morning News, including a naked man offering him his vote through the open crack of a door. At least someone found a real use for the European elections. One old lady, a lifelong Labour supporter, told him: "I'm not going to change, but on your way out can you take my bin bag? It's rubbish day."
KAYA BURGESS
Document T000000020140424ea4o000b6
