{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3762"}
____
  
'Only a joke': More fool the rise of TV celebs and their offensive 'jokes'
By Ava Vidal   
927 words
28 April 2014
16:19
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A string of offensive jokes from celebrities including Jeremy Clarkson and Joan Collins have comedian Ava Vidal in a spin. What kind of society do we live in when racist epitaphs and distasteful jokes are easier to say than the word 'sorry'?
Top Gear窶冱 producer has once again expressed 窶腕egret窶 over one of its presenter Jeremy Clarkson’s comments. He has had to express his regret so often that he may as well have an automated reply made up for whenever Clarkson offends yet another group of people.
Whether it's Indians, Mexicans, Asians, disfigured people, those with mental health issues or women, it seems that the only kind of equal opportunities that Clarkson knows about is equal opportunity offending. It seems that no one is safe from his archaic form of ‘wit.’ The trouble is, it will only happen again and the producer will pretend that he feels ‘regret’ once again.
When there are genuine feelings of regret then somebody is either fired or resigns before they can be fired. We have seen it time and time again. Frank Bough, Angus Deayton, Richard Keys, Russell Brand and Jonathan Ross have all had to redirect their careers after some unfortunate incidents. Most of them are still working (and in some cases they are doing much better) but for a moment a stand had to be made. The broadcasters had to show the public that they understood their outrage.
Most cases where there have been sackings or resignations took place before the digital age. Nowadays there is Facebook and Twitter. Every television show has a ‘hashtag’ and researchers monitor them to see how much the show is being talked about. If a show gets either no reaction, or a very negative reaction on social media then you can be sure that it dies a quick death. The public have become the critics and journalists even quote tweets in newspapers articles about shows. Things have changed.
Programme makers need to have people talking about their shows so they invite people that they know will generate headlines irrespective of whether or not they are qualified to talk about the subject or not. This is why we are having ‘debates’ about serious, divisive subjects like benefits and immigration and people like Katie Hopkins are invited to sit centre stage.
These are important subjects that affect people’s lives, that politicians spend ages crafting carefully worded statements about lest they should offend and effectively end their careers over. And television executives are treating them with all of the reverence that one would give to a pantomime performed by the local amateur dramatics society. Who can honestly hold their hands up and say that when thinking about these serious issues their first thought has been, “I wonder where Katie Hopkins stands on the issue?”
Equally, on the other side of the Atlantic comedienne Joan Rivers has caused controversy again . This time because of a joke that she made at the expense of the three women that were held captive by Ariel Castro saying that they had more space than she does in her daughter’s guest room.
Even when the women were upset by the comments she still did not apologise choosing instead to add that she had “no sympathy as they got to live rent free making them freeloaders.”
She forgot to add that these women were snatched off the street, their families were devastated and they were being repeatedly raped and beaten. 'Cause perhaps that would have spoilt the ‘joke’. Joan Rivers’ defence was that it was only a joke and that is what comedians do. I have heard that defence many times before as an excuse for trotting out lazy, disablist, racist tropes and it is simply not good enough.
Maybe Ms Rivers has never heard the comedy rule that comedy + time = humour. And these women are just not ready to laugh yet. And perhaps they never will be. What kind of society do we live in when racist epitaphs and distasteful jokes are easier to say than the word 'sorry'?
While these television producers are rubbing their hands in glee that their shows are being spoken about and generating headlines, perhaps these stars need to remember the hard lesson learned by Jade Goody. She was trotted out in front of cameras, the template for the stars of the series The Only Way Is Essex where the middle classes would mock her accent and laugh as she celebrated and showcased her lack of education. And then it all went wrong.
She was on Celebrity Big Brother and she made a racist comment to Bollywood star Shilpa Shetty and then she was shunned by those that had used her to gain ratings. The magazines and newspapers stopped calling and the money stopped rolling in. She was not taken back into the public’s hearts until they found out about her tragic illness that caused her untimely death.
So the Clarksons, Rivers and Hopkins of this world had better start to become their own moral compass. Because it seems as though the producers of their shows have no intention of doing it. I know first hand what it is like to have an audience with you as you are pushing the envelope and how quickly they switch when they decide you have crossed the line. And if and when the proverbial hits the fan, there will be no one to cushion the fall.
Document TELUK00020140428ea4s003h1
