{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1498"}
____
  
What do you stand for, George Osborne – and what’s your vision for Britain? The Chancellor must use his Budget speech to reconnect with disillusioned voters
By Allister Heath   
1,301 words
14 March 2014
19:48
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
He has been in office for almost four years, and yet George Osborne remains a man of mystery. What is his real vision? What sort of country does he want our children to live in? Astonishingly, the public doesn’t really know – and herein lies the Chancellor’s greatest problem, one which he must urgently address in next week’s Budget.
All of the great chancellors – those who left a permanent mark on this country – were clear about their beliefs. We knew what Gordon Brown, Lord Howe and Lord Lawson stood for, whether or not we agreed. Sadly, we remain in the dark as to what the present Chancellor actually believes in, other than outwitting Labour and demolishing Ed Balls.
Economic firefighting and cutting the deficit, policies born out of necessity, are not enough. Truly successful, epoch-defining politicians are able to inspire, convince and explain. A Machiavellian pursuit of power alone may work in the very short term, but it guarantees long-term irrelevance; a successful statesman, assuming that this is what Osborne aspires to be, needs a clear social and philosophical mission around which a new consensus can be forged.
This is not merely about the distinction between tactics and strategy, a reductionist dichotomy dear to the hearts of Westminster insiders. It is about principles and ideas. Howe, Lawson and Brown all shifted the middle ground of British politics; so far, the only issue on which Osborne has successfully moved the consensus is increasing the personal allowance – an excellent policy, albeit one for which he can hardly claim sole paternity.
But when it comes to Britain’s increasing antipathy to the better-off, Osborne has utterly failed to prevent the ideological climate shifting. In fact, he has repeatedly inflamed the situation, helping to move the centre of gravity to the Left on issues such as property taxation and City bonuses. His modest tax break for married couples would be undone by Labour, as would his reduction to the top rate of income tax. As for austerity, it would have happened in roughly the same way regardless of who had been in 11 Downing Street, give or take a few billion. Even Labour would have slashed the public sector payroll and started to reduce the state’s share of national income.
William F Buckley, the US author and journalist, once defined a conservative as “someone who stands athwart history, yelling stop, at a time when no one is inclined to do so, or to have much patience with those who so urge it". On that definition, Osborne hasn’t so much failed as not even attempted to succeed. His approach has been that of a passenger on a small raft buffeted by nasty ideological currents, desperately seeking to stay afloat, rather than the assured captain of a powerful aircraft carrier, safely navigating it out of troubled waters.
As a result, the Chancellor’s message is confused on all of the big issues, even the more managerial and technocratic ones. Does he believe in expanding home ownership? If so, why has he increased stamp duty and failed to increase the supply of new houses and flats meaningfully? And why has the proportion of families that own their own homes fallen to just 65.2 per cent, the lowest since 1987?
Does he believe in helping the aspirational middle classes? Then how can he be content to have raised the share of taxpayers facing the 40p tax band to a record 15.8 per cent? If he wants to cut public spending, why is he reducing total expenditure by just 3.4 per cent between 2010-11 and 2018-19 – less than the 3.9 per cent Labour managed in just one year in 1977-78? If he supports a simpler, flatter tax system, as he once claimed, why has the tax code exploded under his tenure, becoming even more gargantuan and incomprehensible to anybody other than the best paid of lawyers?
His approaches to reforming welfare, the environment, Europe, savings and immigration also suffer from the same problem. An outdated obsession with triangulation (an approach copied from Tony Blair), combined of course with the unfortunate realities of Coalition politics, has sown confusion and allowed a gulf to emerge between rhetoric and reality.
The contrast with Labour’s return to its Left-wing, ideologically pure roots couldn’t be any clearer. Voters can be in no doubt that Ed Miliband’s government would be socialist, that it would wage war on markets, business and the successful. Many of us despise this message; but everybody knows exactly where Labour now stands.
The good news for the Chancellor is that there is still time for him to explain what he believes in, and why the public should support him. Rather than merely gloating about the return to economic growth, reeling out streams of statistics (an approach copied from Gordon Brown) and trying to invent new gimmicks to damage the Labour Party, Osborne should use the Budget as an opportunity to relaunch himself and thrash out, for the first time, a genuine vision for the country.
It is no secret that the Chancellor would love to become David Cameron’s successor at the helm of the Tory party; so he needs to hijack the Budget speech and make the most of the opportunity to deliver a proper personal manifesto. He needs to be passionate and articulate, and present his take on a modern, 21st-century liberal conservatism fit for a nation that has grown cynical and angry at its political establishment.
Before he came to power, I once asked Osborne who his favourite economist was, and what he had been reading. He hesitated just a second, before replying Adam Smith, and a collection of essays by Hyman Minsky, a Left-wing economist. They weren’t exactly the most original – or reassuring – of answers. Next week, Osborne must do better. He must tell us which thinkers have inspired him, how he wishes to make the country a better place and the sort of Britain he would like to build. He needs to summarise, in a few clear sentences, what his core values really are, what higher purpose his political career seeks to serve, and whether he sees himself as closer to F A Hayek, John Stuart Mill or Edmund Burke.
He also needs to show that he is tune with the aspirations of millions of disillusioned voters, and flesh out how he wishes to connect with them. In addition to his plans for tax and spending, and his latest growth forecasts, the electorate deserves to be told whether he believes in personal freedom, what he believes the right relationship between individual and state to be, and how he sees Britain’s role as an economically liberal, trading nation in a globalised world.
Michael Gove’s speeches always powerfully connect his reforms with a meritocratic and highly sophisticated philosophy. Boris Johnson is Britain’s latter-day Ronald Reagan, projecting a fusion of supply-side economics, optimism, a love of society as it really is and a belief in progress. And one cannot be in any doubt as to where Iain Duncan Smith, Liam Fox, Kenneth Clarke or Owen Paterson stand. Sadly, the same cannot be said of either the Prime Minister or his Chancellor.
Politics is not just about power – it is also about ideas, public service and doing good for others. Osborne’s big challenge next week is to show the country that he understands that. We must hope, for his as well as Britain’s sake, that he succeeds.
Allister Heath is editor of City AM
Document TELUK00020140314ea3e0063n
