{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2246"}
____
  
NEWS
Boris Johnson and George Osborne told to 'get back in their box and stop fighting'; Tory leadership campaign will only happen if Ed Miliband becomes PM, Cabinet minister warns, as allies of Chancellor and Mayor of London jockey to succeed David Cameron
By Tim Ross Political Correspondent   
791 words
9 March 2014
07:40
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Boris Johnson and George Osborne have been told to “get back in their box" and stop jostling for position to succeed David Cameron as leader of the Conservative Party.
A furious Cabinet minister warned colleagues who are plotting to become party leader that they are making it more likely that Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, will enter Number 10 at next year’s election.
The senior Tory, speaking on condition of anonymity, attacked those allies of figures, including the Chancellor and the Mayor of London, who have been fuelling the debate over who should be the next party leader, as “silly and unhelpful".
The appeal for unity at the top of the Conservative Party follows a week in which Mr Johnson’s aides accused Mr Osborne of mounting a “dirty tricks" campaign intended to undermine the popular London Mayor’s hopes of leading the party.
Mr Osborne, who two years ago appeared unlikely to stand for the leadership himself, is now regarded at Westminster as firmly back in the running to succeed Mr Cameron, as the economy has improved.
Mr Johnson has attempted to give the impression that he will not stand for Parliament in next year’s election but commentators have pointed out that he has failed categorically to rule it out.
Even the most senior figures in the Conservative Party do not know whether Mr Johnson will stand to become an MP, while sources who know him well say that he is determined one day to lead the party. Mr Johnson’s term as London Mayor is due to continue until 2016.
The Cabinet minister said: “The people doing this need to get back in their box.
“Whether you’re Cameron’s number one fan or number one hater, the only way any of these people can become leader is if Ed Miliband is Prime Minister. We should all be working to stop that, and this sort of thing is silly and unhelpful."
Mr Cameron is expected to face discontent from his backbench MPs later this year when the European Parliament elections are held.
If the Conservatives lose the General Election in May 2015, Mr Cameron would be expected to quit as party leader, triggering a contest among leading MPs.
Mr Johnson would need to be an MP at that point in order to stand a realistic chance of being elected leader. There have been suggestions that a number of possible seats could be made available for a by-election allowing Mr Johnson to return to the Commons, if does not stand as a candidate for the General Election in 2015.
Last week, Mr Osborne was reported to have personally urged Mr Johnson to stand for Parliament in next year’s election so that the Mayor is fully tied to the result and cannot claim to be the “change" candidate for the leadership if the Tories lose.
It was said that the Chancellor was attempting to call Mr Johnson’s bluff and ensure that he was personally as implicated in the party’s success or failure at next year’s poll as any other senior Tories.
The Mayor’s supporters immediately hit back, denying suggestions that Mr Osborne had suggested he should stand for Parliament and insisting that the mayoral term lasted until 2016.
Some of Mr Johnson’s allies claimed supporters of Mr Osborne and Mr Cameron were deliberately attempting to “destabilise Boris" by making sure he “gets as much flak as they do" if the Tories lose next year.
Lynton Crosby, the Australian election strategist who helped Mr Johnson win two terms as Mayor of London, is now in charge of Mr Cameron’s Conservative general election campaign.
He is credited with bringing greater discipline to the Tory message during the past year but is unlikely to be impressed with the renewed leadership speculation.
Mr Crosby has sought to focus on core issues which will resonate with voters in the run up to the 2015 election, including the economy, immigration, and European Union reform.
Mr Cameron will travel to Germany tomorrow for fresh talks with Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, over changing the way the EU works. Mrs Merkel visited London last month, where she addressed both Houses of Parliament, had lunch in Downing Street and tea with the Queen.
Mr Cameron will co-host a computer technology trade fair in Hanover with Mrs Merkel before the pair hold discussions over the Ukraine crisis and the EU during dinner.
Document TELUK00020140309ea39002be
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	22/02/2014 to 05/04/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or London Evening Standard Online Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,848
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 16:38
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
