{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2870"}
____
  
Features
CAITLIN MORAN
922 words
29 March 2014
The Times
T
1; National
7
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Columnist of the year
It's easy to get dolorous about the political future of this country, ie, that we don't have one.
Barely 90 years since we won universal suffrage, you might wonder if, technically, we are a democracy any more - if only 37 per cent of the population care to vote.
After a couple of gins, I often get maudlin about how, 120 years ago, it was all so different: clever, impassioned miners in the Welsh Valleys mobilised with little more than collections of spare change and a series of local meetings, in order to send the first Labour MP to Westminster. They wanted to take part in forming this country - and they saw politics as the best way to do it.
"And they didn't even have Twitter then," I will slur. "When Keir Hardie walked into Westminster, they all made fun of his hat, because they were all in top hats and he was in a deerstalker. But he turned up to Parliament dressed like Sherlock Holmes, man. I mean, that's bad-ass. Meanwhile, back to 2014, and there aren't any clever, impassioned workers in rad hats getting elected to Parliament. Not even in sombreros, or tricorns."
After a tiny blip, we appear to have returned to having a real political class in this country again. We've lost the "demo" in democracy, the "poli" in politics: we're back to white, straight males who've done PPE at Oxford or Cambridge. Essentially the same people who laughed at Keir Hardie's hat in 1892.
In 2014, not only is it harder for someone working class to get to Westminster than it was in 1892, it's harder to find someone who would want to. The era of bright-eyed young revolutionaries forming a party from scratch and going on to rule the country, in a rad hat, seems like a much missed historical relic.
Except. Except! Over the past few months, I have felt a surging, wild hope about the future of democracy in Britain again, and do you know what started it? Nigel Farage. Looking at a picture of Nigel Farage, leader of Ukip. Mad old, ramshackle, "Foreigners out", "No to the EU", smashing reporters from Channel 4 News with a rolled-up magazine Ukip.
These days, when I think about Ukip, I feel as happy as I do re-reading the wording of the National Health Service Act of 1946. And my hope springs from the fact that they're awful - yet also weird. I mean, look at them. It is no exaggeration to say that, in the cantina scene in Star Wars, a booth containing Ukip's leading members would by far be the oddest in the room. Even more than one containing that ,alien who plays his own proboscis like a flute.
The party's raggle-taggle bunch of candidates are openly demeaning of, variously, women ("Do you clean behind the fridge?"), immigrants ("Send the lot back"), and homosexuals (the councillor who, winningly, blamed the recent floods on the introduction of gay marriage) - thus alienating a good 60 per cent of a possible electorate before they even start. It has all the logic of launching yourself as the "We hate Coronation Street, Biscuits & Sex" party.
In an image-conscious age, meanwhile, Ukip's logo looks like the kind of shonky thing that would be invented by a drunk butcher using an Amstrad in 1998 - a purple £ sign on a yellow circle, which looks like it should be thrust into a window display of meat, next to a sign saying "MONDAY MINCE SPECIAL".
Their manifesto declaration claims that "Political correctness is stifling free speech" - suggesting that, in a world of Bradley Manning, Edward Snowden and Wikileaks, the rights of a builder to shout, "Oi! Tits McGee!" at passing schoolgirls without remonstration is the biggest problem we face.
Even their name is a bit "Wha?". "Ukip" sounds like the kind of acronym you'd find on a dogging website, referring to a practice so awful, you can't even bring yourself to google it. "Couple - he 47, she 42 - seek bisexual younger female for Ukip on Cannock Chase."
But think about it. If a party as awful and weird as Ukip can build itself up out of nowhere, without any Establishment help, fronted by a series of bluff w***ers, operating without any credible kind of economic plan, and derided by the rest of the world - yet is now on course to beat every other party in the forthcoming Euro elections, with 30 per cent of the vote - what could a new party with noble intentions, and a proper plan, do?
In short - what if there were a good, clever Ukip? A ramshackle group of similarly untutored, raw ideologues who came to lead political debate with, rather than diatribes against immigrants, smoking bans and Europe, ideas on housing, economic disentanglement from Russia, a living wage, and the simple, honourable pursuit of human progress and joy?
Yes - if I were a young, liberal firebrand, sitting at home, planning to start a new party, planning the revolution, I think the "inspiration poster" I'd have on my wall, right now, would be of Nigel Farage. Because if Ukip can do it, anyone can.
caitlin.moran@thetimes.co.uk
'Ukip sounds like an acronym on a dogging website: "Couple seek bisexual female for Ukip on Cannock Chase"' dogging website: "Couple seek ouple bisexual female for Ukip on Cannock Chase"' hase"'
Document T000000020140329ea3t0008j
