{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2378"}
____
  
News
Britain is world's worst for sexism, UN inspector says
Ruth Gledhill   
620 words
16 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
5
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Sexism is more pervasive and "in your face" in Britain than in any other country, according to the United Nations' investigator into violence against women.
Rashida Manjoo, a law professor from Cape Town, called for the national curriculum to teach children that sexism was wrong. She also accused a controversial immigration detention centre, where there have been reports of sexual misconduct, of denying her access to detainees.
Professor Manjoo, who had just completed a 16-day tour of the country, said it was clear that a "boys' club" culture existed in Britain and that it was worse than in other countries. She added: "Have I seen this level of sexist culture in other countries? It hasn't been so 'in your face' in other countries. I haven't seen that so pervasively in other countries. I'm sure it exists, but it wasn't so much and so pervasive."
Since 2009, Professor Manjoo, as UN special rapporteur, has reported on countries such as the United States, Jordan, Somalia, Croatia, Bosnia, Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands.
Publishing her interim report, she said: "I'm not sure what gives rise to a more visible presence of sexist portrayals of women and girls in this country in particular. What is clear is that there is a boys' club sexist culture that exists and it does lead to perceptions about women and girls." She referred to "the easy availability of porn, the use of social media including influencing young children around images" and "harassment on the Tube". She added: "When you're sitting on public transport and it's OK to harass someone, to inappropriately touch them, it's sexist culture. If I was walking down the street and there were whistles, which won't happen at this stage in my life, that's sexist culture."
In describing the high levels of sexism tolerated in British society, she was responding to a question about the controversial Facebook group Women Who Eat on Tubes, with photographs of women eating bananas, baguettes and other foods on the London underground. It was described by its founder Tony Burke as an "observational study" but by critics as "voyeuristic" and "bullying". It recently changed from an open to a closed group after criticism.
Professor Manjoo also met officials from the Department for Education to discuss including material in the national curriculum to address "stereotyping and devaluing of women". She insisted that it was the responsibility of the State to fight sexism and suggested that the subject should be in the national curriculum so that schools had no choice but to cover it. "The State has a responsibility to protect, to prevent, to punish, to provide effective remedies," she said. "These are part of the State's responsibility."
She added that it was a matter of regret that, despite repeated requests, she had been denied access to Yarl's Wood, the privately run immigration detention centre in Bedfordshire. She wanted to visit the centre after receiving reports of violations and wanted to verify allegations of abuse. "If there was nothing to hide, I should have been given access," she said.
A spokeswoman for the Home Office said: "Violence against women and girls in any form is unacceptable and the government has shown its commitment to ending it. A tour of Yarl's Wood was never agreed as part of this fact-finding mission."
In February a report by Raquel Rolnik, the UN rapporteur on housing, which called for the suspension of the withdrawal of housing benefit from council tenants with a spare room, was dismissed by the government as partisan and a "misleading Marxist diatribe".
Document T000000020140416ea4g000br
