{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"651"}
____
  
News
Tories accused of starting 'witch hunt' over foreign workers
Matthew Holehouse; James Kirkup   
542 words
10 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
2
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE Conservatives have caused a "witch hunt" where anyone who employs foreign labour is at risk of criticism, a Liberal Democrat minister has said.
David Laws accused James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, of demonising workers from overseas and those who hire them.
Mr Brokenshire last week appeared to criticise middle–class households and businesses for creating a demand for immigration, saying that the "wealthy metropolitan elite" wanted cheap labour and services. That has raised political questions for Cabinet ministers including David Cameron and Nick Clegg, who employ people from overseas to work in their homes.
The Prime Minister, who has called for curbs on the arrival of unskilled workers, employs a Nepal–born nanny who has been granted British citizenship. A member of Mr Clegg's domestic staff holds a Belgian passport. Theresa May, the Home Secretary, has a Brazilian–born cleaner.
Mr Laws, the schools minister and a close adviser to Mr Clegg, said Mr Brokenshire's comments had triggered a "feeding frenzy".
He told BBC Radio Five Live: "I hope that this witch hunt will end. We rely upon in our country – for things like the National Health Service and many very tough, low–paid jobs – a lot of people who are legitimately in the country."
He added: "If we create a climate where anyone who looks or feels foreign is someone you shouldn't be employing, that is bad for our country."
Mr Laws noted that business groups, including the Institute of Directors, had criticised Mr Brokenshire's speech.
"They know it would be a disaster for our country if we were not to be able to attract some of the hugely skilled people we need for our economy and our health service.
"We must not get into a feeding frenzy where we put off really skilled people."
In his first major speech since taking on the immigration brief last month, Mr Brokenshire attempted to align the Conservative Party with working–class voters, whom pollsters say are most unhappy about immigration and most tempted to vote for the UK Independence Party.
"For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services – but not to the ordinary, hard–working people of this country," he said in a speech to a London think tank.
Mr Brokenshire's attempt to focus political attention on the "metropolitan elite" has irritated some of his Conservative colleagues, who fear the result will be that more voters regard politicians as members of that elite.
Patrick McLoughlin, the Conservative Transport Secretary and a former coalminer, said: "It's the first time I've been called part of the metropolitan elite."
The row over immigration has seen the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats taking ever more divergent positions on the issue.
While the Tories remain committed to cutting annual net immigration – now more than 250,000 – to fewer than 100,000, the Lib Dems are making the economic case for more relaxed migration rules.
'For things like the NHS and many tough, low–paid jobs, we rely on people who are legitimately in the country.'
Document DT00000020140310ea3a0005e
