{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2896"}
____
  
Features
TOP STORIES FROM THE UK AND IRELAND
467 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Eire
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Courts Clifford gives evidence The publicist Max Clifford denied he was a "grubby little wotsit" but admitted he had sex with a woman in his office while having an affair with her. Clifford, 70, called allegations that he had a sexual interest in children "utterly revolting". He denies 11 counts of indecent assault against seven women and girls. The trial continues.
Crime Creche shooting death A man who was shot outside a creche in Donaghmede in Dublin 10 days ago died. Declan Smith, 32, who was suspected of having links to a dissident republican group, had been shot in the head outside the Little Rainbows creche. He had been treated at Beaumont Hospital.
A man was left critically ill after being shot in the neck as part of a gangland feud in west Dublin. The 34-year-old was attacked in the car park of a church in Clondalkin. He managed to drive to a local garda station, where he collapsed.
Europe EU: 'blood on its hands' In a radio debate over Britain's future in Europe, Nigel Farage accused the deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg, of dodging a question on uncapped immigration. The UKIP leader said the EU had "blood on its hands" for encouraging the revolution in Ukraine. A YouGov poll said Farage won the debate by 57% to 36%.
Surveillance Garda bugging inquiry The Irish government launched an inquiry into claims of widespread bugging of garda stations. It said the suspected surveillance was so worrying, a statutory commission of investigation was required.
The revelation emerged from an ongoing court case, during which "the government learnt that a system was in place in a large number of garda stations whereby incoming and outgoing telephone calls were taped and recorded". The practice was ongoing for 20 years and did not end until November 2013.
Garda Commissioner quits Martin Callinan resigned as garda commissioner after Brian Purcell, the secretary general of the Department of Justice, visited him to convey the Irish government's feelings about telephone calls being recorded at garda stations.
Callinan later suggested he had delayed withdrawing his use of the word "disgusting" to describe the behaviour of two garda whistleblowers following advice from the department. This was denied by the department.
Nóirín O'Sullivan took over as acting commissioner.
Politics TD McFadden mourned Nicky McFadden, a Fine Gael TD, died after a long battle with motor neurone disease. The 51-year-old deputy for Longford-Westmeath was a mother of two children, and had been diagnosed with the condition in the summer of 2012.
A former councillor and a director of the Dean Crowe theatre and arts centre, McFadden was elected to the Seanad in 2007 and won a seat in the Dail four years later.
Document ST00000020140330ea3u00067
