{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3144"}
____
  
NEWS
Immigration means a new house every seven minutes, says Ukip
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
387 words
24 April 2014
09:02
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip staff appear in new broadcast that highlights pressure on housing
A house must be built every seven minutes in order to cope with the pressures of immigration, Ukip claimed last night.
The party tied the national shortage of housing to migration from the European Union in a televised election broadcast.
Hundreds of thousands of British jobs are being advertised across the EU and Polish migrants are driving down natives’ wages, the broadcast claims.
Nigel Farage hopes to come first in next month’s European elections – a victory that is likely to provoke open revolt against David Cameron from within the Conservative Party.
Ukip has secured £1.5 million in funding from Paul Sykes, the retail entrepreneur, making this its most lavish election campaign.
The party’s improved financial health is evident in the slickly-produced video.
“To meet current levels of immigration, a house has to be built every seven minutes,” the broadcast warns.
The housing claim is based on migration figures that show Britain will grow by 221,000 households per year for a decade. Migration will account for about 38 per cent of population growth, creating 200 new households per day.
In a scene shot in a pub, Mr Farage said: “The other parties will go on telling us we can’t survive outside the European Union. The truth is we can.
“We want our country back. I’m urging you to join our people’s army and cause an earthquake in British politics.”
In an appeal to older voters, the broadcast warns more than eight million people are forecast to be in fuel poverty by 2020, in part due to green levies.
However, the party faces embarrassment because several of the people featured in the broadcast are party aides.
They include Lizzie Vaid, Ukip's events manager and an assistant to Mr Farage, who lives with his press officer Alexandra Phillips.
Amjad Bashir, the party’s small business spokesman and a candidate in the European elections, also appears in a scene shot in a curry restaurant.
Mr Farage on Tuesday said it was “ridiculous” to criticise the use of party staff in adverts as they are “sincere” supporters.
"Most parties use actors. We use Ukippers," he said.
Document TELUK00020140424ea4o0018j
