{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"1826"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Ukip campaign posters are direct but not racist
Stephen Pollard   
983 words
23 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
IF YOU want a perfect illustration of how debased our political culture has become, just look at the reaction to posters released by Ukip on Monday. Before the glue holding them up had even dried, out came the cry of "racist".
Apparently it's now racist to point out that we no longer have control of our borders and to argue that it might be worth considering leaving the EU. It's difficult to know whether to laugh or scream.
The posters are certainly direct. That's typical Ukip – one of its main strengths. Instead of the carefully calibrated marketing–speak that's now the stock in trade of the three main parties, Nigel Farage says it as he finds it. As the polls show, that goes down brilliantly with voters who are fed up with the same old same old.
One of the posters has a picture of a construction worker begging, with the caption: "EU policy at work. British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour."
Another has a picture of the Union Flag on fire with the EU flag appearing from the flames. It has the words: "Who really runs this country?" A third has a picture of British commuters contrasted with a chauffeur driven Eurocrat and the message: "Your daily grind… funds his celebrity lifestyle."
But the one that is apparently racist has a finger pointing out and the message: w"26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?"
LABOUR MP Mike Gapes said that he hoped the "racist posters encourage all decent British Commonwealth and EU citizens to vote for another party next month".
It's a common chant of the other parties that Ukip peddles "lies and hatred", to use the words of Mr Gapes. Talk about the pot calling the kettle black. It might be an idea for the Labour MP to attend a selfawareness course. The real hate peddlers are politicians who bandy around the accusation of racism to score a cheap political point but in doing so strip it of any real meaning.
There's nothing racist about a poster pointing out the effect of EU law. Just as there was nothing racist about the Tories' 2005 election poster, "It's not racist to impose limits on immigration", and just as there was nothing racist about Gordon Brown's phrase "British jobs for British workers".
Racist they might not have been. But they were deeply cynical attempts to mislead voters – because as members of the EU we can't do anything to stop EU citizens coming here.
The Ukip poster is, unlike the Labour and Tory examples, honest – because it's based on a simple statement of fact about EU law. The Eurofanatics might not like the way Ukip keeps pointing this out but a cornerstone of our EU membership is the free movement of labour. Any EU citizens can move here – or anywhere else within the EU – whenever they choose and there is not a thing any of us can do to stop them.
Maybe that's a good thing. But the debate should be conducted on its merits – not with bogus accusations of racism for pointing it out. It's ironic that it's the Eurofanatics who try to claim that they operate on a higher moral ground to those of us who object to having laws imposed on us by a supranational body. Yet it's consistently the Eurofanatics who throw around the accusations of racism and who ascribe all sorts of unpleasant motives to their opponents.
They may talk about how much they want to do for ordinary people and how they entered politics to help improve lives, but many Eurofanatics have such high regard for their own views and such contempt for ordinary people's that they really do think it's immoral to object to their plans.
Hence the reaction of the Lib Dem peer Lord Oakeshott, who said the posters were "extreme even by the standards of the Front Nationale", the French fascist party led by Marine Le Pen. Lord Oakeshott really does appear to think that anyone who objects to the EU is, by definition, a fascist.
That withering dismissal of mainstream public concerns about the EU explains why the other parties keep walking straight into Ukip's traps – and still they don't realise it.
By screaming "racist" in reaction to the posters, they simply prove again just how out of touch they are from the public they claim to represent.
Because if it's racist to think immigration and the free movement of labour is an issue, then an overwhelming majority of us – 77 per cent – are racist. That's the figure that the British Social Attitudes Survey in January found want immigration reduced. Indeed even a majority of first and second generation migrants – 60 per cent – say that the level of immigration needs to come down.
UKIP's rise is a protest fuelled by that disconnect between the public and the three main parties. But instead of responding with real action they have almost nothing to offer except abuse for the vehicle of that protest – Ukip. And by extension it's the public they are abusing.
That's nothing new – and neither is the form of abuse. Remember when in 2006 David Cameron described Ukip as a bunch of "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists"? It's that R–word again.
To be fair to Mr Cameron, he is at least trying to do something, with his referendum pledge and attempted renegotiation of our EU membership terms.
But I'm as certain that that renegotiation will come to next to nothing as I am that Ukip will top the vote in next month's European elections.
'So out of touch with public concerns'
Document THEEXP0020140423ea4n0005m
