{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"244"}
____
  
NEWS
EU elections 2014: Is immigration good for Britain?
By James Kirkup Political Editor   
3,226 words
12 May 2014
15:46
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Telegraph’s political editor James Kirkup examines how the town and society of Llanelli has coped with an influx of European migrants and how its story mirrors that of the UK
After a lifetime in the construction industry in south Wales, George Parker is a plain-spoken man, happy to call a spade and spade and a hydraulic earthmover a digger.
But on one subject, he picks his words with some delicacy.
“I have to be a bit careful, you know?” he says.
Mr Parker, 55, is talking about his decision to give British jobs to foreign workers.
He runs Parker Plant Hire, a firm he founded in Llanelli with his father in 1981. He employs 60 people on two sites, and counts some of the biggest public companies in Wales as customers.
Six of Mr Parker’s 60 staff are Polish. Some are doing jobs that used to be done by British workers: “The jobs the Polish lads are doing, we used to have Welsh boys doing it.”
Mr Parker’s Poles are a small part of a great tide of humanity, numbered in the millions, that has delivered probably the biggest change in the British population in the country’s modern history.
In the first decade of this century, net immigration to Britain – the balance of people arriving over those leaving – averaged just under 200,000 a year. In the 1990s, it was around 50,000. In the 1980s, less than 10,000. Even during the upheaval of the years from 1931 to 1951, net migration ran at around 25,000 people a year.
Britain’s membership of the European Union is an indivisible part of this immigration story.
" Freedom of movement for workers shall be secured within the Union,” says the basic treaty of the EU. Being in the club means opening your borders to all of its citizens, a population that now passes 500 million.
LOOK EAST
Just over a decade ago, on 1 May, 2004, the EU changed forever, and as a consequence, Britain did too. The EU expanded to the east and took in 10 new member states with a combined population of almost 75 million, almost all of them poorer than their fellow Europeans to the west.
Unlike other western states, Britain chose not to restrict the entry of the Poles, the Czechs and others. They were free to come to this country.
Long-Term International Migration estimates from the Office for National Statistics suggest that around 713,000 Eastern Europeans came to the UK between 2004 and 2012. However, even the ONS admits that is almost certainly an underestimate, and most analysts put the total closer to 1 million.
They joined an already significant European population in Britain. The 2011 Census recorded that 2.7 million residents of the UK were born elsewhere in the EU. Of those, 1.1 million were from the new eastern member states.
When countries like Germany and France finally opened their borders and labour markets to the east, there were predictions that the flow of newcomers to the UK would slow.
That didn’t happen. Last year, 209,0000 EU nationals came to the UK, up from 149,000 in 2012. Indeed EU arrivals helped push last year’s net immigration figure to 212,000, shredding David Cameron’s pledge to reduce it to “tens of thousands” before next year’s general election.
Economic turmoil in western Europe helped push up that immigration: the numbers of Spaniards, Italians and Portuguese registering for National Insurance numbers all rose sharply. But most of the new arrivals were Poles: 111,000 in all, a 39 per cent rise in a year.
Other factors are at play too. A socialist government in France has helped give London a substantial French population, many of them bankers fleeing high tax rates.
In the London districts of South Kensington and Clapham, French is spoken almost as commonly as English; both have heavily oversubscribed French-language schools.
The arrival of French financiers causes little controversy, since few politicians see votes in campaigning for British jobs for British bankers.
Elsewhere though, the labour market effects of immigration are of profound political importance.
Probably the biggest of the many questions raised by the arrival of EU citizens in Britain is this: do European immigrants take jobs from British people?
If you listen to the UK Independence Party, the answer is a clear “Yes.”
The party has based its campaign for next week’s election on the premise that bringing more European workers into Britain is bad for British workers.
Between the end of 1996 and the end of 2012, the number of European nationals employed in the UK rose from 420,000 to 1.45 million. That rise, of 1.03 million, was just short of the 1.1 million increase in UK nationals’ employment.
The ONS’s Labour Force Survey also suggests that European arrivals are more likely to be in work than Britons: EU visitors have an employment rate of 77.2 per cent, compared to 72.4 per cent for natives.
In Llanelli, does Mr Parker believe that the Polish arrivals have cost British workers their jobs? Quite the contrary, he says, offering a real-world story of the textbook economic theory that immigration increases productivity, growth and employment.
“The Poles, their work is outstanding. The pride they take in it is amazing, a credit to them and their country. The way they look after a machine, it looks better and we get more use out of it. We spend less money and we do more business, and then we hire more people.”
The Government, for all Mr Cameron’s rhetoric, takes a similar view, albeit more quietly. HM Treasury’s basic statistical model for predicting economic activity still includes 0.25 percentage points of growth that wouldn’t be there without immigration.
That’s an official, if tacit, admission that the arrival in the UK of predominantly young and industrious migrants makes the UK economy bigger.
On the other hand, it also makes the population bigger. And some, like the House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee, would say that there’s no point baking a bigger cake if you only have to cut it into more slices.
Some economists say immigration means healthier public finances too: the Treasury’s Office for Budget Responsibility notes that immigrants are more likely to be of working age, more likely to pay taxes and less likely to need to have money spent on them for education, health care and pension.
According to Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, an international think-tank, the overall effect of immigration is that the British Government’s deficit is at least £7 billion a year smaller than it would otherwise be. That’s money that would otherwise have to be found from higher taxes or lower spending.
Still, generating wealth and growth is one thing. Distributing it is quite another.
Politicians from all the parties fret that immigration enriches employers and the better-off, but impoverishes low-skilled, low-paid Britons. As Ed Miliband put it in 2012, immigration was good for people who wanted a cheap conservatory, bad for people who build conservatories.
The economic evidence here is cloudy at best.
In the hope of shedding some light, the Home Office and the Department for Business this year carried out a comprehensive review of that evidence. Its conclusions were mixed, and cautious.
In essence, it found some evidence that non-European immigration costs British workers jobs, but only in two years during the recent recession, 2009 and 2010.
As for the European arrivals, Whitehall’s definitive search found “little evidence so far in the literature of a statistically significant impact from EU migration on native employment.”
What about wages? A lot of people suspect immigration pushes down wages. Again, the economic evidence is mixed. Few studies have offered firm evidence that wages fall, and some have found that average pay levels actually rise along with immigration – albeit with the benefits more clearly felt by higher-skilled workers.
In Llanelli, Mr Parker cannot easily be accused of driving down wages to cut costs: his firm has achieved a rare gold standard in the Government’s Investors in People scheme. He says he pays his Polish workers as much as their Welsh counterparts.
And he insists that none of his Welsh workers were dismissed to make way for his Polish staff. Instead, some locals chose not to work: “Let’s put it this way: some people decide they don’t need to work to have a nice life – benefits, you know?
Such views can cause local offence, but Mr Parker is in good company.
Mr Cameron has acknowledged that the welfare system gives some Britons an economic incentive to stay out of work. He’s also admitted that an underperforming education system means some young Britons are “not fully capable” of competing in the job market against European rivals.
IT’S THE SOCIETY, STUPID
Of course, economics is only one facet of the European immigration debate. Even people who believe immigration brings economic benefits can accept that it can also have social consequences and costs. After all, the sudden arrival of large numbers of outsiders in any community would almost inevitably mean disruption.
So it was in Llanelli. The town and its nearby villages have a population of around 80,000. In recent years, as many as 5,000 Poles and other Europeans have arrived.
Many work at the Crosshands Food Park, a cluster of food processing plants north of the town centre and part of an industry that relies on foreign labour: 41 per cent of all food processing workers are immigrants.
In the early years after 2004, a lot of the new arrivals were young and single and most spoke poor or no English. Keri Thomas, a Labour member of Carmarthenshire Council for a ward in central Llanelli, said that led to problems in his community.
“They were bringing people into town, they weren’t vetting them. They couldn’t speak English, they didn’t have anywhere to live. They were bringing in the people the country doesn’t need. Some of them had criminal records. They were horrible.”
Such was the local unease over immigration that in 2008, the British National Party won a seat on the community council in Llandybie in the Amman Valley above Llanelli, something almost unheard of in Left-leaning Wales.
The following year, the trend continued nationwide. The BNP won two seats in the European Parliament.
For Vanessa Marsh and other residents of Cllr Thomas’s Tyisha ward, it all got too much.
She helped found the Safer Community Action Group, a group of volunteers intent on tackling modern Llanelli’s social problems, including some associated with immigration.
“A lot of them were single males who seem to think it is acceptable to drink all day in the streets, and urinate and leave their rubbish around,” she says. “It reached such a place that we decided we had to do something about it.”
Such complaints are not unique to Llanelli. Several police forces and MPs have reported similar problems of anti-social behaviour linked the arrival of largely young, single male migrants.
Across the UK, other newcomers are responsible for more serious transgressions, with drink-driving and violence especially prevalent.
There are almost 1,000 Poles in jail in England and Wales, more than 1 per cent of the total prison population.
The Llanelli residents’ response, developed with local police, was a “designated public places order” covering much of the town centre, allowing officers to confiscate alcohol from people drinking in public and impose immediate fines.
Notices telling residents of the new rules were posted in shop windows, the warnings printed in three languages: English, Welsh and Polish. According to Mrs Marsh, the change is working: drink-related trouble is down, and residents are happier.
Aged 67, she has lived in Llanelli since birth, and seen the town change a lot in the last decade. Is she unhappy at the arrival of her European neighbours? She says not.
“The world is always changing, that’s just a fact of life. None of us has a problem with the Polish community – they are hardworking, family-orientated people. Most of them don’t want to be associated with the problems either.”
Cllr Thomas agrees, saying Llanelli has “turned a corner” and describing the town’s Poles today as “a credit to the community.”
As a Labour politician, what does he think of his party’s decision to allow Eastern Europeans free access to Britain in 2004?
“It was wrong, it was a mistake. It put a burden on services, on the GPs and the hospitals and the schools. It still does, but we’re coping. We are coping, but it is a burden.”
Immigration undoubtedly means spending more on public services, though just how much is highly uncertain.
According to a Department of Health study last year, short-term European migrants consume £261 million worth of NHS services each year. A European Commission report suggests UK health spending on “non-active” EU migrants is more like £1.5 billion.
On the other side of the coin, immigrants are essential to providing those services. Some 26 per cent of health professionals in the UK are immigrants.
As for education, the National Audit Office last year estimated that England is short of more than 250,000 primary school places, a shortage that leaves many parents unable to send their children to their chosen schools. The NAO said that some – but not all – of that shortage is down to higher migration, as some migrants bring children to Britain, while others start families here.
The presence of foreign-born children in British schools can be emotive, not least since it produces schools where many pupils do not speak English as their first language. The majority of children in 1,755 English primary and secondary schools - almost a tenth of the total – have English as a second language.
But the consequences of linguistic diversity often confound the fears of critics. Many polyglot schools have high ratings from school inspectors. Last year, the Centre for Economic Performance, a think-tank, found that the arrival of Polish children in British schools had helped lift their native classmates’ results. The researchers said one explanation is that Polish children’s stronger work ethic encourages their British peers.
COMING, AND STAYING?
While the Poles are the most numerous of the new arrivals, it is more recent migrants – and potential migrants – who tend to attract the most attention.
Cllr Thomas says he worried about the next phase of European immigration. Since January, Romanians and Bulgarians have also had free access to Britain and its labour market.
“The Poles we’ve got are good, but it’ll be those Romanians next and that’ll be a problem.” Are there many Romanians in Llanelli? “No. But they could come here. They’re perfectly entitled to, as long as we’re in Europe.”
Fear of the unknown, and acceptance of the familiar, are common features of Britain’s immigration experience: the more direct experience of immigration someone has, the more likely they are to accept it.
A Survation/Sky News poll in November found that 71 per cent of people who don’t know any immigrants well want “drastic action” to cut immigration. Among those who know immigrants well, the figure drops to 58 per cent.
Perhaps, just perhaps, more immigration will mean more acceptance, though those figures remain high: plainly, Britain is unhappy about the arrival of so many newcomers.
Will that unhappiness persist? The Europeans are hardly the first big immigrant group to come to Britain. In living memory, the country has seen the arrival of people from India and Pakistan following Indian independence, from Uganda following Idi Amin’s pogroms, and from the Caribbean aboard ships like the Empire Windrush.
None of those groups was anywhere near as large as the new European population, but each changed the country profoundly, by becoming part of it.
On the front benches of both the Conservative and Labour Parties are men of such heritage who can plausibly be described as potential prime ministers: Sajid Javid, the son of a Pakistani bus driver, and Chuka Umunna, the son of a Nigerian businessman. Will Polish Britons eventually become part of our national make-up in the same way?
The extent and nature of the changes brought about by European immigration will depend in part on how many of the recent arrivals stay. Many are transitory migrants whose temporary presence here depends on economic circumstance: they earn and save, then leave for home, or another country with higher wages, especially Germany. In 2012, some 75,000 European nationals left the UK, 30,000 of them from the east.
But others will stay, putting down roots, raising families, becoming a permanent part of the country.
Radek Tuczynsky, 37, came to Llanelli from western Poland seven years ago. He knows exactly how much longer he’ll be here: “Another 24 years – that’s when I’ll have paid off the mortgage.”
Mr Tuczynsky works for Parker Plant building portable accommodation blocks, skilled technical work his boss says he does well. In his time in Wales, he says he’s never experienced hostility from the locals, and gets along happily with his Welsh colleagues and neighbours.
Still, he says he understands why immigration sometimes leads to tensions, especially when it comes to his transitory compatriots.
“Some of them live poor lives here, they just take the money back to Poland, they don’t settle. I can see why people have a problem with them.”
He is not that sort of migrant, he suggests.
“Last year, I bought a house. I have a mortgage here. I pay taxes here. In seven years, I’ve never taken benefits. The British Government has given me nothing and that’s fine. I just want to work.”
Settling down may ease social tensions, but ironically, becoming “normal” Britons will eventually make European immigrants less economically useful to their adopted home. Those that stay will age and require health care and pensions, and have children who must be educated. A University College London study last year found that immigrants who arrived in the Eighties and Nineties, then stayed and had children, now pay in only 85p for every £1 of public services they consume.
That remains some way off for the new immigrants, however.
For now, the UCL figures suggest recent European arrivals are young and industrious, contributing a third more in taxes than they receive in services.
Mr Tuczynsky and his partner, a dental nurse, have a young daughter. They need more space at home, so they’re converting the garage into a bedroom.
Since he tends to work seven days a week, Mr Tuczynsky doesn’t have the time to do the work himself. So he hired builders. And where are those builders from?
“They’re Welsh builders, Welsh boys. They’re reliable, they do a good job. I used them once before. I want someone reliable, so I get people I know.”
What does Europe think of us?
Document TELUK00020140512ea5c00105
