{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3534"}
____
  
News
Briton leads Pope's anti-slavery battle
Nicholas Hellen   
823 words
20 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
20
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Vatican's most senior woman tells Nicholas Hellen how UK Catholics are helping combat human trafficking
IT WAS an incongruous place to plan the war on human trafficking. In a quiet corner of a spaghetti restaurant in London, a senior police officer and the top woman in the Vatican swapped ideas on hitech ways of catching international slavery gangs.
Detective Inspector Kevin Hyland of the Metropolitan police human trafficking unit was having lunch last Wednesday with Margaret Archer, a distinguished British academic who has been tasked by Pope Francis with tackling slavery.
"We were discussing software to detect traffickers," Archer said last week. "We were saying that we needed to get hold of hi-tech boffins who could do that."
This month the Pope appointed Archer president of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences, which advises him on social policy. It makes her the most senior woman in the Holy See.
She runs a project that Francis initiated last year when he sent a handwritten note to the academy, asking it to devote its energies to tackling human trafficking. Until then, it had been better known for publications that rarely caused a ripple outside academic circles. According to Archer, the Pope was determined that the academics — who include the Nobel prizewinning economist Joseph Stiglitz — should help him to tackle social ills.
"Wherever he goes, he registers what he sees in terms of resources at his disposal," she said in an interview with The Sunday Times.
Archer, who said this newspaper should "be congratulated" for its campaign against human trafficking, disclosed details of a grassroots movement among British Catholics to help the victims of trafficking.
Nuns have accompanied police on raids, rescued women from brothels and provided rape victims with support, she said.
Churchgoers will in future help foreign victims rebuild their lives by teaching them English and work skills, and by befriending them to provide some stability in their lives.
Archer argued: "The law needs to be changed to inaugurate a scheme where they have the legal right to remain [and] to acquire a British passport — a scheme that helps them to a productive way of life which does not involve forced labour. They did not come here voluntarily — they are not illegal immigrants."
She said modern human trafficking was in some ways worse than Roman slavery. Unlike Roman slaves, modern victims often had no route to freedom. Many victims were dragged back because they remained in debt to the traffickers, even after the authorities had intervened.
Archer, a 71-year-old grandmother and for many years professor of sociology at Warwick University, has been a member of the pontifical academy since it was founded in 1994 by Pope John Paul II.
This month she organised a human trafficking conference in the Vatican that was attended by the Pope and police officials from around the world, including Hyland.
The detective inspector told the conference that women from religious orders accompany members of the Metropolitan human trafficking unit on raids and speak to victims.
He described how his team recently raided a brothel where they rescued a 25-year-old woman. Once she was safely in the care of the religious sisters, she revealed she had been raped an hour before the police had arrived.
Hyland said: "She would not have made this disclosure to police. This led to immediate arrests for rape and trafficking and has played a key role in the prosecution of a well established and profitable Russian human-trafficking gang."
The co-operation between the police and nuns has the support of Cardinal Vincent Nichols, the Archbishop of Westminster. There are plans for a London centre to help trafficking victims by bringing together Catholic volunteers, police, health professionals and pro bono lawyers.
Archer said she was eager to use the pulling power of the Vatican to enlist experts from around the world into the pontifical academy's antitrafficking work . "More than 95% of the people we invite accept the invitation. It may be just out of curiosity to look inside the Vatican, but it serves a greater purpose," she said.
The academy's headquarters are in the Casina Pio IV, built as a summer residence for the Pope in the 16th century in the gardens of the Vatican.
Archer revealed some guests tried to exploit their privileged access. She was dismayed when one planned to wander over to say hello to the Pope over breakfast. She made light of dealing with an entrenched male culture in the Vatican, saying it was no different from academia. "I have been in a minority working among a vast majority of men for the whole of my career," she said.
"Everybody knows you, they listen to you and the points you make get logged."
In praise of mild faith, Focus, page 21
NUNS HAVE JOINED POLICE ON RAIDS AND RESCUED WOMEN FROM BROTHELS
Document ST00000020140420ea4k000x4
