{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"1540"}
____
  
Business
Wary Whitehall back in bed with outsourcers
John Collingridge   
894 words
16 March 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
8
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Disgraced G4S and Serco have had to transform themselves to appease ministers, says John Collingridge
SET high on the North York Moors, RAF Fylingdales looks more like a Cold War relic than a strategic piece of the UK's military armoury.
Housed behind a barbedwire perimeter fence, the pyramid-shaped radar facility scans the skies for more than 3,000 miles to detect incoming missiles and stray space debris. It forms part of an early-warning system crucial to British and American security.
For the outsourcing giant Serco, it also represents a small but significant piece of a complex corporate jigsaw puzzle that has finally seen it claw its way back into the government's affections after a scandal-hit year.
The company makes about half its £5.1bn revenues from the UK public sector — about a quarter from central government alone — so contracts such as that for Fylingdales are crucial to its future.
Last month Serco signed a £15m deal to maintain the base for six years. It's a small deal, but the company's first government contracts since the Cabinet Office lifted a ban on it winning new work in January.
Getting back in with Whitehall has been a tortuous process. Serco and rival G4S were locked out of new government work last summer when it emerged they had been overcharging for the electronic tagging of criminals who were not being monitored, were in prison, or, in some cases, were dead.
The scandal came in the wake of G4S's Olympics debacle, when the security giant failed to supply enough guards for the 2012 Games.
The tagging scandal triggered the exit of Serco's chief executive, Chris Hyman, investigations by the Serious Fraud Office, a review of the companies' government contracts and a ban on them winning new work until they had undergone "corporate renewal". They had no option but to comply. The company, based near Basingstoke in Hampshire, relies on government contracts ranging from running immigration centres to managing the UK's stockpile of nuclear weapons.
Serco's rehabilitation saw it forced to create a division to work exclusively with central government, led by a new chief executive. Two external groups were set up to review the company's culture and systems, an ethics officer was appointed to each of its five divisions, new whistleblowing standards were implemented and stricter oversight of contracts and bidding was brought in.
Three new heavyweight non-executives, including the former Bank of England deputy governor Rachel Lomax, joined, and the Aggreko boss Rupert Soames has been poached as the new chief executive."This is not a one-step process," Serco said. "We need to make sure that these changes are fully embedded in the business."
This eventually satisfied the Cabinet Office minister, Francis Maude, and the chief procurement officer, Bill Crothers.
In December, Serco agreed to repay £68.5m to the Ministry of Justice for failures on the tagging contract. Weeks later its governance overhaul was approved, giving it access to lucrative state contracts again. The company had "engaged constructively" and developed a "thorough plan for corporate renewal", said Maude.
Rival G4S has had a much slower journey to redemption. Last week the security giant agreed a £108.9m settlement with the government for overbilling on tagging and problems with contracts to manage court facilities. Despite this it remains barred from new contracts and faces two Serious Fraud Office investigations. Chris Grayling, the justice secretary, said discussions with the company over corporate renewal were continuing.
Some analysts say Britain simply "matters more" to Serco than G4S, which makes only about 10% of its £7.4bn revenues from the government. G4S's refusal to co-operate with a forensic audit of its work by the accountant PwC last year may also have hindered its rehabilitation.
"Serco is dead without the UK government. G4S is not," said one analyst. "Serco at a board level has done more."
Ashley Almanza disagrees.
He was already chief executive at G4S when the tagging scandal broke, after his predecessor, Nick Buckles, was forced out over the Olympics.
Almanza argues the business has undertaken a big overhaul, begun before the scandal began. Six new board members have been appointed since June 2012. Its UK business has been carved up into divisions to give better transparency, including one specifically dealing with central government contracts.
In November Almanza targeted 35 businesses to be expanded, restructured or sold. This has happened to nine of these. Its global leadership team has been shaken up with 28 new bosses.
Three new senior roles have also been created — chief information officer, chief procurement officer and head of risk. "A lot of time and effort is being spent on where we need to strengthen our management team," Almanza said. The likelihood is that G4S will soon follow Serco back onto the government's approved list. The state relies too heavily on outsourcing companies to risk suffocating them out of existence.
But getting the all-clear from government will not mean business as usual for either company. The Cabinet Office has appointed Ian Tyler and Vincent Godfrey as crown representatives to G4S and Serco respectively — "minders" to oversee the troubled outsourcers.
Corporate renewal will haunt them for years to come.
THE ALL-CLEAR WILL NOT MEAN BUSINESS AS USUAL
Document ST00000020140316ea3g000f3
