{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2669"}
____
  
News
Nigel Farage: an anti-politics anti-hero who confounds the Westminster consensus
By Tim Stanley   
777 words
1 April 2014
13:39
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Watching that 窶廬 Love Nigel Farage窶  documentary on Channel 4 last night, I was struck by the frequent, ironic juxtaposition of “No Smoking” signs and our Jurassic hero. While the entire world has embraced clinical hygiene of both the body (no fags, no booze) and mind (political correctness), Farage carries on as if the 1970s never ended. At one point, he took the interviewer for a lunch that snowballed from a pint of beer to a bottle of wine to two large glasses of port. By the time he’d lit up a Rothmans in his EU parliamentary office, this viewer was in seventh heaven. What actor around today could convince in the lead role of the movie of Farage’s life? Alas, Sid James is no longer with us.
Which brings us to Putingate, the latest Nigel-fluff that the Westminster elite is convinced will sink him. Right to the bottom of the ocean. Farage’s sin was to say that he admires Putin as a political leader, although not as a human being. Why this is controversial, I have literally no idea. Farage made it abundantly clear that he regards the Russian leader as a despot (“How many journalists in jail now?”); he simply thinks that he outwitted Obama on Syria. I think that; you think that; even Obama probably thinks that. Perhaps there is more to challenge in Farage’s view that the Ukrainian crisis was caused by the EU's attempt to expand eastwards – but even on this point he has a point. Ukraine found itself in the middle of a bidding war between the EU and Russia, and Russia – through means fair and foul – won. This prompted the revolution, the downfall of Yanukovych and the attempted secession of Crimea. So the EU is somewhat to blame. Ah, but you can’t say such things out loud because the consensus in Westminster right now is that Putin is Hitler, Ukraine is the Sudetenland and anything less that outright Russophobia is treachery. And probably a little bit homophobic.
And that’s Farage’s real sin: he dares to be different. Contemporary British politics works by an unusual degree of consensus. All three party leaders want to stay in the EU, all wish to preserve the principle of the welfare state, all back gay marriage, all accept the need to go green, none will challenge the concept of open borders on immigration. Some or all of these positions may well be right – that’s not the issue. The issue is that this homogeneity of opinion is fundamentally undemocratic. In democracies, voters are supposed to be offered real choices rather than one establishment philosophy spun three different ways. To make matters worse, the party leaders now not only sound alike but also look alike. Janet Daley wrote a powerful column for this paper over the weekend in which she noted,
I can’t recall any time in the last half century of British politics when not a single leader of a major party had what seemed like a true connection with ordinary people. Harold Wilson, Jim Callaghan, Margaret Thatcher, Neil Kinnock, even Tony Blair in his Islington middle-class way: there has always been at least one official party voice that reached into real life.
The only man who does seem real at the moment is Nigel Farage. Of course, there’s an argument that we don’t really want "real" in our politicians – that the only reason why we find Nigel amusing or even exciting is that we don’t think he stands a chance of entering Number 10. If Ukip were to win seats in 2015, the public would start to hold the party to the same standards that it holds the other three. In which case, gay floods and Bongo Bongo Land gags might become serious vote losers. As they should be.
But until that point, Westminster is going to continue hitting its head against the brick wall of public antipathy towards politics-as-usual. The more that Farage acts up, the more different he seems, the more the establishment will hate him, the more the voters will like him. From a US history perspective, there was a very similar dynamic at work in the campaigns of Republican Pat Buchanan – a conservative who the mainstream regarded as socially unacceptable, even borderline fascist – yet who enjoyed a significant constituency of support that saw him as funny, honest and vote worthy. He, incidentally, admires Putin, too. "It's a small world among the small minded", the establishment might say…
Document TELUK00020140401ea41001uq
