{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"951"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Voters are mad as hell, when perhaps they should give thanks
BENEDICT BROGAN   
1,269 words
20 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
18
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Frustration with politics has blinded many to the Coalition's real achievements
It is safe to bet that many of those who trouble to cast their vote on Thursday will be motivated less by a sense of civic duty than by a desire to stick one in the eye of the main political parties. Anger is the dominant feature of this most fractious of elections. The UK Independence Party is predicted to come top of the poll when the results are announced on Sunday night, although that outcome is not entirely certain: days of embarrassing scrutiny have taken their toll. It is clear though that Nigel Farage will do well. Labour's shambolic operation, by contrast, makes it likely that Ed Miliband will have to fend off doubts about his leadership. Nick Clegg is braced for the worst; certainly the Lib Dems expect to discover that coalition has proved for them to be a strategic disaster. The Tories will suffer one of those annoying results – embarrassing, but largely meaningless: all David Cameron wants is to get to the other side of next week in one piece.
In the aftermath of the expenses scandal, politicians have become used to being tormented by the electorate. Abuse by ballot box is the norm. In public, the Prime Minister makes an optimist's case for why these elections should be taken as a chance to bolster the cause of reform in Brussels. But he knows he is whistling in the wind: Thursday gives the voters a free hit against everything they claim to despise. Even those who stay home will be displaying contempt of sorts. Their message will be: "What have you given us to vote for?"
When I interviewed him on Friday, Eric Pickles compared the mood on the doorstep with that of the deranged newscaster Howard Beale in the film Network, who urges his viewers to throw open their windows and shout: "I'm mad as hell and I'm not going to take this anymore." In fact, it's worth recalling the detail of that great Hollywood monologue. Beale, played with sweaty, swivel–eyed intensity by the late Peter Finch, rages at a world riven by economic failure, crime and social indifference, where people simply want to be left alone: "Well, I'm not gonna leave you alone. I want you to get mad! I don't want you to protest. I don't want you to riot – I don't want you to write to your congressman because I wouldn't know what to tell you to write. I don't know what to do about the depression and the inflation and the Russians and the crime in the street. All I know is that first you've got to get mad."
For Howard Beale read Nigel Farage, who has proved himself adept at channelling popular anger with politics, but who has never pretended to know what to do about the economy, crime or foreign affairs. True, he has voiced admiration for Vladimir Putin, but his policy solutions boil down to taking Britain out of the EU in the hope that happier days will follow. And to encourage people to support him he wants them first to get mad. "Enough is enough" it says on the Ukip leaflet stuck through my door the other day. It focuses – as their campaign does – on immigration. "Our politicians have given away control of our country," it declares. "We have no control over our borders, but we also have no control over who we trade with, how much we pay to heat our homes and feed our families or how we just get on with our lives." None of this is actually true, but the sentiment taps in to the sense of alienation that Ukip relies on for its support. Mad, certainly, but also vaguely threatening. The emails from Ukip supporters that fill my inbox convey frustration that they have been abandoned by politicians. All they know is that they are mad – mad as hell – against the "LibLabCon" of the mainstream parties, and the media that supports them.
David Cameron, Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg struggle to find polite ways of acknowledging this anger without saying "there, there" and patting the voters on the hand. Public disillusionment is entirely natural, they murmur, unconvincingly, but what really matters – the stock phrase of the politician trying to change the subject – is who has the solutions. Politicians tiptoe around the electorate, terrified of making things worse. Imagine the difficulty: they shuffle nervously up to us to ask for our votes, only to have their heads bitten off – then have to watch in horror as that man Farage, beer and fag in hand, cackles his way into the affections of the public. That feeling of impotence can be observed in Scotland too, where Alex Salmond plays the same cheeky–chappy game, running rings around the leaders of the other parties. Like Mr Farage, his one–shot solution depends on the romance of Scotland striking off on its own, against which the hard realities of the arguments of the other party leaders sound wearisomely dull and timid.
Defying the collective pessimism is the greatest difficulty politicians face today. Party leaders strike optimistic poses, but must know that those fortunate enough to be members of the political establishment – whether MPs or commentators – should be cautious about claiming things are looking up when they know nothing about job insecurity, life on the margins of welfare, the awfulness of sink schools or the strangeness of foreign neighbours who seem to play the system without wanting to assimilate. Voters do not want bromides about how terrific things are, they want humility and a dose of reality.
Yet by every historic and contemporary measure known to man, the residents of the United Kingdom in 2014 have the unique good fortune to be living at a time of unequalled prosperity and security in a country which, by a series of fortunate events, has turned out to be the most tolerant, diverse, fair and gentle place yet devised by man.
This collection of nations, which allows all colours, faiths and nationalities to unite under the British banner, remains our best protection against the ethnic politics we see not only across the Channel, but among our own nationalist parties, be they the SNP or Ukip. Even the prospects for financial meltdown, the collapse of the Antarctic ice cap, the mass failure of antibiotics or any of the countless other potential disasters we face cannot change the simple fact that, for now at least, the things that make us angry should be as nothing compared to what should make us give daily thanks.
Politicians, of course, cannot put it quite like this. Panglossian optimism is not in keeping with the age. Mr Cameron has come close though, with his line about putting "the politics of the answer ahead of the politics of anger". His dilemma is that our frustration with politics makes us blind to what the Conservatives and Lib Dems between them have pulled off since 2010: economic recovery, public sector pensions reform, sweeping educational changes, to name three. Against that the preoccupations with race and difference that Ukip plays with seem depressingly small. However we choose to explain the choice we face, however mad we are, and whether we vote on Thursday or don't bother, Britain has never been defined by its anger, but by its ambition.
Comment on Benedict Brogan's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140520ea5k0005d
