{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1146"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
A nation so many are proud to call their own
456 words
6 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
19
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
On the face of it, new research by the Policy Exchange think tank into modern Britain suggests that our country is changing at a staggering rate. By 2050, it says, one in three people in England and Wales will come from an ethnic minority, a demographic change driven by higher birth rates as well as immigration. Furthermore, the report also suggests that, among the five largest minority groups, only 20 per cent of those surveyed identified themselves as English, compared with more than 60 per cent of white people. Among many, those figures will understandably prompt a concern that our sense of national solidarity is being eroded.
There is, however, a more positive story contained in the figures. Because while ethnic minority citizens may not call themselves English, on the whole, a good majority describe themselves as British. Among British Indians and Pakistanis, more than 60 per cent consider themselves British; among Bangladeshis, that figure is 74 per cent. The numbers are lower among black Africans and Caribbeans, but none the less, the picture is a heartening one. Britain has taken these citizens (or rather, in most cases, their parents or grandparents) in, and made them its own; and they, in turn, make Britain theirs.
It is a reminder of what a unifying concept Britain is. It includes separate nations in a single state, allowing each their own identity while binding them into a larger whole; it has accepted, over its long and varied history, invaders and refugees and immigrants, and been changed by all, while remaining fundamentally the same. Its constancy in the face of change, like its unity from divided parts, ought to be a contradiction, and yet it is not.
There is much to be proud of in this idea; yet it is under attack on two fronts. One is to the north: Alex Salmond and his Yes campaign will try to tear the Union apart later this year, when the referendum on Scottish independence takes place. For all his soothing noises about how nothing will really change, Britain, as we know it, may no longer exist.
The second is to the south, where Nigel Farage and Ukip are leading the polls for the approaching European elections. While it is true that uncontrolled immigration carries risks, the tone of Ukip's campaign is entirely at odds with the inclusive picture of Britain that the Policy Exchange research paints.
Fortunately, Mr Salmond and Mr Farage do not represent the country as a whole. As today's report shows, Britain is a nation that so many of its newest citizens are proud to call their own.
Document DT00000020140506ea5600064
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:23
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
