{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"150"}
____
  
Is it OK to dumb down your accent?
By Alan Tyers   
537 words
3 April 2014
11:36
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Don't accuse us of being mockneys or fakers. We all moderate our accents depending on who we're speaking to, says Alan Tyers
Alex Proud argued in these pages (on these screens?) the other day that Britons have become irritatingly obsessed with appearing working class. He said that people pretend to be less privileged than they actually are so they can seem cooler or more interesting. Alex especially noted the “the mangled vowels of the public school mockney”.
No question, it’s hard to love the wannabe wideboy who is secretly from a good home where comfort and haitches were freely available. But while Alex sees these Guy Ritchie wretches as trying to give the narratives of their pampered lives a more dramatic arc, perhaps a different sort of deception is taking place.
The days where we all lived in little villages and dealt only with people who sounded like us and were from the same background have gone for ever. Movement of people around the country, immigration and an erosion of the line between traditionally middle class and working class jobs (although not, sadly, an increase in social mobility ) mean that we live and work alongside people from all over Britain and the world.
Might it be that Alex’s try-hard downward mobilisers are actually just trying to get along with people? People who their well-orf parents might have encountered as a funny little man from down the lane who does the chimneys now share their public space. Outside the world of dinner parties, art galleries and the meeja, there’s still a lot more people in London who sound more like Barbara Windsor than Barbara Cartland, so perhaps it is not unreasonable for the successful and privileged to try to downplay their background and deploy a glottal stop or two.
In an overcrowded and confusing world, we have to try to get along with our fellow humans as best we can, and trying to find common ground in speech is one way. You often notice people poshing up or roughening down their accent depending on who they are speaking to. Even George Osborne was caught doing it .
Taken to its excruciating extreme, this malleability can manifest in adopting the regional or perceived "ethnic" accent of the speaker.
I witnessed an especially heinous example of this in an Islington Indian restaurant recently. A nice middle-class chap (very much an organic trousers, knit-your-own lentils sort) began to slip, beyond question unwittingly, into mirroring the speech pattern of the waiter. This got so severe that the last few lines of their conversation found him doing a sort of “Goodness gracious me” impression that Jim Davidson himself would have dismissed as a little offensive and passé these days.
George Bernard Shaw said: “it is impossible for an Englishman to open his mouth without making some other Englishman hate or despise him.”
I would never deny Alex the right to stick the boot into posh plastic cock-er-nees, but is it not possible that some of them, at least, are just trying to blend in with their surroundings?
‘Ave an ‘eart, guv.
Document TELUK00020140403ea430015p
