{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1211"}
____
  
Features
The world's best networker [CORRECTED]
Janice Turner   
3,408 words
22 March 2014
The Times
T
1; National
14,15,17,18,20
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Publisher Notice: CORRECTION: We mixed up Arianna Huffington's daughters in our interview (Magazine, March 22). The painter is Isabella, who is a student at Yale; Christina has graduated and is working in Los Angeles. We apologise for the mistake.Publisher Notice: CORRECTION: In a profile of Arianna Huffington (Magazine, March 22), we wrongly suggested that she had supported cutting food stamps and Medicare. We are happy to make clear that this was never the case, and apologise for the mistake. Arianna Huffington also wishes to make clear that she has opposed neither equal rights nor equal pay for women. We are happy to put the record straight.
'Arianna Huffington pulls out a wad of my Times columns. She's viewed my Twitter feed and reminds me we have a mutual acquaintance...
I might have been seduced if she hadn't done exactly the same to a friend who'd met her earlier'
On the wall opposite Arianna Huffington's desk is a vast TV permanently set to rolling news and above it, a bit askew, a framed photo of a deserted beach at sunset. This is the new Huffington, who is both tuned in and chilled out, who runs a global media brand sold to AOL for $315 million (£188 million), but is also the aspiring queen of mindfulness, "living in the moment" and similar New Age blah.
Indeed, she has just coined her own buzz term: "the third metric". It is not enough, she argues, to succeed in terms of money and power (metrics No 1 and No 2). A person must also "create a life of well-being, wisdom and wonder". It is all laid out in Thrive, her 14th published work. In the same way that The Huffington Post is famous for aggregating news - filleting, reposting and linking to reports by other newspapers - Thrive collates every recent tome on detoxing, pet therapy, spirituality, meditation, etc, and claims it for the third metric. You might call it an aggregated book.
Anyhow, her conversion to this cause was sudden and alarming. Seven years ago, having spent a lifetime scaling the first two metrics, she collapsed, exhausted, cracking her head on her desk, breaking her cheekbone and coming to in a pool of blood. She realised that four hours' rest a night, answering e-mails at 3am and living at a crazy pace were killing her.
"I used to think, 'I'll sleep when I'm dead. I have too many things to do,'" says Huffington. But now she is a sleep evangelist, and indeed talks as if sleep - like oxygen facials or wheatgrass smoothies - is both her own unique discovery and the latest craze. Before she arrives I am shown around The Huffington Post's offices on lower Broadway, New York. Besides the usual hipster internet start-up perks of free healthy snacks and a ping-pong table, there are two nap rooms you can book for 30-minute sessions. The idea is to restore energy and creativity, although it also eliminates a major reason HuffPosters might need to go home.
Red lights glow above both doors. "Oh, they're occupied," says the HuffPo PR, although it is only 9.45am. "It could be someone transitioning between day and night shift on HuffPost Live [the online TV station]." One room contains a massage chair; the other has a pod with a hood which pulls right over your head, womb-like. Do people ever, um, use them in pairs? "Well, Arianna said she caught a couple coming out once, but she said, 'That's fine, whatever gets their energy levels back up.'"
The HuffPo staff ranged in largely silent rows are mainly under 30. The majority are female, glossy but casually dressed, and they carry silver Apple laptops wherever they go.
It is at this moment that Huffington arrives, preceded by a cloud of stylists holding suitbags of clothes. She processes through the office in a stately fashion talking all the while on her BlackBerry, a tall, big-boned yet slender woman of 63 with a fine bosom.
It snowed last night and a bone-freezing wind blows off the East River, yet the Times shoot is to be up on the roof. The crew are in quilted jackets and furry boots, but Huffington is wearing a white lattice Dolce & Gabbana jacket and her feet in her black Jimmy Choos are bare. In the service lift on the way up I express concern about the cold. "I'm a Greek peasant," she says blithely (as she often does).
On the 40th floor, while we all stamp our numb feet, Huffington poses and smiles for 30 minutes without complaint or even a shiver, declining a blanket between shots. Everyone raves that's she's a complete trouper, which I suspect was the intended effect: to be admired as exceptional, as she always is.
We finally sit down almost an hour late in her office, a standard corporate rectangle feminised with bowls of almonds, exquisite roses in spring hues and a cushion embroidered with "Sleep Your Way to the Top". There is a basket of her many published works and a photo of Huffington at the White House meeting President Obama. Two PAs guard her antechamber and a charming Argentine manservant keeps coming in to round up stray bras from the photoshoot, then brings her a plate of what she calls "my fish", triangles of what looks like salmon fried in linseed oil.
Before we start she pulls out a wad of my Times columns. Odd sentences she found amusing are underlined. She has done her research, or at least someone on her staff has, which is unprecedented in an interviewee and very disarming. She has viewed my Twitter feed, knows I loved House of Cards. She reminds me we have a mutual acquaintance, remembers he is the ex-boyfriend of my elder son's godfather. I might have been utterly seduced if she hadn't done exactly the same to a friend who had interviewed her a fortnight earlier.
But it illustrates her modus operandi.
Charm, flattery and an instant sense of intimacy have made Huffington the greatest social networker of her age, enabling a girl who grew up in a one-bedroomed apartment in Athens to scale high society in London, Washington, Los Angeles and New York, to become worth millions and to be ranked as one of Time magazine's 100 most influential people in the world.
At best Thrive is a tribute to and biography of her mother, Elli, who is the preface to her own character and achievements. It was Elli who, when Huffington decided on a whim she wanted to study at Cambridge, brought her over to "visualise" the university and enrolled her in English classes. Throughout Huffington's many incarnations she lived with her daughter as resident matriarch to her two granddaughters, while their mother rushed about ticking off metrics. Elli, who once confronted invading Nazi troops, who spoke five languages but never went to college, who left her philandering husband and sold her earrings to pay for her daughters' education, was fearless, with no sense of social hierarchy. When Huffington, then dating John Selwyn Gummer, invited Prime Minister Ted Heath to supper, Elli insisted he sit down with their plumber to discuss the issues of the day.
"She was a remarkable woman in so many ways, which I began to fully appreciate after her death," says Huffington. "I mean, we always had a great relationship and she was sort of my foundation." In the book Huffington describes her mother's serene death after a day of buying and serving food to her family, her last suggestion being that everyone have a glass of red wine.
Was Thrive a way of coming to terms with her death in 2000? "Absolutely. While she was alive, it was as though she was the keeper of all things third metric. She was the one who knew how to live without being at the mercy of deadlines. I remember the last time she was angry with me was when she saw me reading e-mails and talking to my children at the same time and she said, 'I abhor multitasking.'"
One pillar of Thrive is not to let technology rule your life, in particular disrupt sleep. Later I attend a meeting of HuffPo's Third Metric section - ten young women and one man troop in with their laptops to discuss stories such as National Sleep Awareness week. I remark that my husband is an insomniac. "Does he keep devices in the bedroom?" Huffington asks. When I reply that he listens to BBC World Service all night on earphones, there is uproar.
"Withhold sex until he stops!" she cries.
We move on to National Day of Unplugging and the joy of "digital detoxing", and I note that most people are only half-listening while composing e-mails. Huffington herself is jabbing determinedly at her ever pinging phone.
Arianna Stassinopoulos arrived at Cambridge in 1968 to read economics.
Undeterred by her heavy Greek accent - she still says "leetle" and "veedeo" - she attended the Union debates, her tentative interventions put down by smirking young snobs, but with her quick mind and perseverance ended up as the Union's first foreign president.
Second-wave feminism was in full ferment, Germaine Greer had just published The Female Eunuch and she set about writing a rebuttal, 1973's The Female Woman. "Arianna socks it to Women's Lib," reads the blurb on the out-of-print paperback I buy online. And as a clever, exotic, shiny-maned, 23-year-old anti-bra-burner she was in huge media demand.
Seeing the book in my bag, Huffington views it with suspicion: "It is a relic," she says. Her argument was that feminism distorts women's basic nature, as nurturers and mothers, while exaggerating the benefits of work. She says The Female Woman pre-figures postfeminist books such as Sheryl Sandberg's Lean In, which argues that women desire different lives to men. But back in the early Seventies, Arianna was ranging herself against those striving for basic rights such as entry into male-only professions and equal pay.
At this time, she fell in love with Bernard Levin, the celebrated Times columnist, twice her age and half her height, as someone once joked. She soaked up his erudition on Wagner, Bach, philosophy, fine food. Together they saw every new play, read every new book, relished a life of the mind. He edited her writing severely and if she produced a mixed metaphor made her draw it. But a complex man, prone to depression, he never wanted to marry or have children and so, aged 30, she left him to live in New York.
"Leaving Bernard was a very tough decision," she recalls. "But I didn't trust myself to stay in London and not go back to him. I moved to New York, really, to sort of escape and to be able to start a life where I could have children. Some of the most painful things that happen open doors that bring some of the best things. My children, my life here, The Huffington Post, would not have happened. Bernard and I stayed close to the end...
At this, Huffington's large brown eyes fill. She's remembering, she tells me, the last time they met. "It was a few months before he died, and they brought him to the hotel where I was staying to have tea, and he was completely gone. The Alzheimer's had advanced so much he did not recognise me at all. I mean, nothing, nothing. I used nicknames we had, trying to spark something. That was really hard."
She arrived in New York as her biography of Maria Callas was launched, bearing letters of introduction from her publisher, Lord Weidenfeld. Although not remotely wealthy she quickly became firm friends with Gettys and Roosevelts, Henry Kissinger and Barbara Walters. America, land of aspiring immigrants, loved her peasant roots, her drive and intelligence. Her accent was mysterious, her Cambridge education gave her class, her mother's total self-confidence imbued nerve. Only the gossip pages sneered at her ascent and Huffington's life poses the question: when does desirable social mobility become distasteful social climbing?
At 35, her friend Ann Getty introduced her to Michael Huffington, the reclusive son of a Texan oil magnate, worth $70 million and keen to run for office. She moved with him to California and helped on his congressional campaign. After he won, Michael Huffington was regarded in Washington as a joke, but she was welcomed into the highest Republican circles, becoming an acolyte of Newt Gingrich. In 1994, after only one term, Michael Huffington decided to stand for the Senate but, despite running an expensive and vicious attack-ad campaign, he lost. This, she says, ended their marriage.
"Everybody who loved him thought it was too soon, but he really wanted to do it. I threw myself into it and learnt a lot about American politics in the process," she recalls. "When he lost it was really hard on him. I said, 'Yes, OK, let's move on. We have these adorable children, we have our lives...' Which was again like my mother. She used to say, 'If you don't fail, you haven't tried for anything difficult enough.'"
Besides, as he revealed in 1998 after their divorce, Michael Huffington was bisexual. He has said in interviews that she knew from the start that he'd had relationships with men, but she denies this. Snipers have suggested the whole marriage was a deal - wealth traded for beauty, a heterosexual cover for his political ambitions - but both have insisted it was for love alone. And in Thrive Huffington writes how they have managed, over time, for the sake of their two daughters, to get along, spending last Christmas all together in Hawaii.
She has never married again; even gossip about her dating is scant. She strikes me as a woman not needy for love but more interested in success and power, getting the affection she requires from her family and countless friends. Perhaps her mother also showed how to survive without marriage? "And thrive!" she adds.
She has been in love since her divorce, she says, but her older daughter became jealous. Once, before a dinner party, she replaced the name card of a movie producer boyfriend with "Osama bin Laden".
Both her daughters have had their teenage problems, chronicled by their mother. Christina, now 24, lives at Huffington's LA home and is a burgeoning artist: her intense, detailed collages cover the office walls. In Thrive we learn of her cocaine addiction: "I was proud of her when she wanted to share her story a year after she was sober," says Huffington. Isabella, a student at Yale, discussed her teenage anorexia in Huffington's 2007 book, On Becoming Fearless.
Did they feel it was hard to live up to their high-powered, perfectionist mother? "I always worked hard but they always knew they came first," she says. "And the fact that I was a writer and could work from home for the majority of my career made that easier. Also they were blessed to have their grandmother living with them until they were 11 and 9, when she died. Her whole world revolved around her granddaughters."
Divorce left Arianna with bigger chips to play: she was now rich, and politically as well as socially connected. In 2003 she made a madcap run for Governor of California against Arnold Schwarzenegger, but polling less than 2 per cent, withdrew before the election. Her ads branded her as the hybrid taking on the Hummer - her Republican politics had turned green and liberal. Is she, as some have said, an opportunist without principles, who cares only about airtime?
"First of all, I was never an arch-Republican. I was pro-choice, pro-gay rights and pro-gun control always, and so was Michael. This person would be probably expelled from the Republican Party today." So it was the party that changed? "I think I changed, too."
It was a substantial ideological leap. From supporting huge tax cuts, the abolition of Medicare, social security and food stamps and believing only individuals in a culture of volunteering could alleviate poverty, she began to envisage a role for government. It is rare, I say, that a public figure admits a change of mind. "Yes - but we are often wrong, and it's good to admit it."
When Huffington started her online newspaper in 2005, some doubted a woman in her mid-fifties could master the quicksilver culture of the internet, let alone make money from it. But it strikes me that her whole life has been a rehearsal for The Huffington Post.
Her love of debate suits the combative blogosphere. Her connections and charm made it easy for her to persuade Nora Ephron, Barack Obama, Gwyneth Paltrow and countless other friends to write for it free. Her mother's sense of inclusiveness made her give equal value to a mommy blogger as a senator. Her somewhat loose relationship with intellectual property rights, which led to her settling a plagiarism suit over her Maria Callas book and similar accusations over a Picasso biography, made her shameless about aggregating content. The press release for Thrive describes her as a "thought leader", yet she is the opposite: a zeitgeist surfer, prone to constant reinvention, a sort of intellectual Madonna.
When Huffington and her business partner, Kenneth Lerer, a former Time Warner executive, sold HuffPo to AOL in 2011, there were squeals of outrage among those who write for the site unpaid. While its 850 employees are on salary, bloggers contribute free. Does she not think HuffPo helped undermine the principle that writers and other creative people should be paid for their work?
"People need to understand the nature of platforms," says Huffington. "The Huffington Post is both a traditional journalistic enterprise and a platform. As a platform no one has to blog for it. They are not forced to write. And, just as important, a lot of people are creating content without being paid. What are Facebook, Wikipedia, Yelp, Tumblr? We are swimming in people creating content. Self-expression, as someone said, is the new entertainment." She cites a blogger who wrote "The Day I Stopped Saying Hurry Up to My Daughter", which on HuffPo received 7 million page views. "She'd already written it; we just offered a wider audience of 95 million unique users."
Every day the site receives hundreds of requests from newspapers for HuffPost to aggregate their content, linking to their work and driving traffic which can be monetised as ad revenue: "All journalists want us to link to their work." Besides, HuffPo is not all stolen - sorry, aggregated - content. It does original reporting; one of its writers won a Pulitzer for a ten-part series on returning US war veterans. The young people on her staff aren't unpaid interns, but have excellent prospects for advancement.
Huffington talks with fluent indignation about old media misconceptions about her company, then, as I leave, stares at me, eyes wide with dismay. "I don't know why you must ask these horrible things," she says. And before I'm even back at my hotel her PR has called my editor to complain about my brutal questioning. Huffington is certainly tuned in, but chilled out? Never.
Thrive: The Third Metric to Redefining Success and Creating a Life of Well-Being, Wisdom and Wonder, published by WH Allen on March 25, is available from the Times Bookshop, priced £15.29 (RRP £16.99), free p&p, on 0845 2712134; timesbooks.co.uk
Read an exclusive extract from Arianna Huffington's book in The Times on Monday. Times+ members can join Huffington at an exclusive Q&A event at the London HQ of The Times on May 29 at 7pm. Tickets cost £10. Visit mytimesplus.co.uk for full details charm and instant intimacy make her the greatest social networker of her age 'Leaving Bernard was tough. i didn't trust myseLf to stay in London and not go Back to him' she stares at me, eyes wide. 'i don't know why you must ask these horrible things'
Document T000000020140322ea3m00019
