{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"281"}
____
  
News
Callow: Scots split would be tragedy
Jason Allardyce   
543 words
11 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; Scotland
7
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Actor fears break-up of the UK as he heaps praise on 'unique' Edinburgh festival, writes Jason Allardyce
SCOTTISH independence might provide "a temporary adrenaline rush" but breaking up the UK would be "a tragic diminution of our lives", Simon Callow has warned.
The award-winning actor and director, who starred in Four Weddings and a Funeral, is the latest prominent English artist to urge Scots to stay in the Union, following interventions by David Bowie and Eddie Izzard, among others.
Callow spent the early years of his career in Scotland and said the nation had been "so profoundly central to British history".
The 64-year-old, who returns to the Edinburgh Fringe in July with a production based on the satirical Roman poet Juvenal, said his period in Scotland — working in Edinburgh with the Young Lyceum and the Traverse — was "a golden time" as he discovered himself as an actor while discovering a country previously unknown to him.
"It was the beginning of my love affair with Scotland and the Scots, though my childhood had been filled with stories of Rob Roy all weirdly bound up with Burns Nichts and Hogmanays celebrated with ancient cousins from Aberdeen.
"What I thought as we bounced around the Highlands with our production of The Fantasticks was how gloriously diverse Britain was. I already knew Northern Ireland, which had started the train of thought, but Scotland was so profoundly central to British history — and how inconceivable British life would be without the Scottish contribution! Coming to know Edinburgh confirmed my sense of the real meaning of the phrase 'the United Kingdoms', because the great city was so clearly the capital of the kingdom in the north, a place of massive dignity and splendour, absolutely itself but absolutely part of my sense of nationhood.
"To me it would be a tragic diminution of our lives for Scotland to sever the connection; I would feel myself diminished, a lesser person, and I know that my many many Scottish friends will feel the same, whatever the temporary adrenaline rush of independence."
Callow's production Juvenalia reprises a success from early in his career. Being performed at Assembly, it is based on the writer Juvenal, who was born about AD55 and wrote 16 satires that attacked the decadence of Rome in its heyday. His insights into moral decline are said to be as relevant now as then.
"I was reminded how shockingly modern the old bugger is — an embittered member of the dispossessed middle-class raging against governments, immigrants, queers, women in great comic arias," said Callow.
"I originally did Juvenalia in 1976 — my first one-man show — and looking at it again, I was appalled to think how much more recognisable [he is] today than he was then. He positively demanded a platform. I'm only surprised he didn't ask for a televised debate with Nick Clegg." Callow's first appearance as an actor was in Edinburgh and he regards the city as the most perfect site for a festival, describing it as "an incomparably dramatic and uniquely beautiful location, out-Salzburging Salzburg, its main rival" with a "uniquely exciting and stimulating atmosphere in which to do a show".
Document ST00000020140511ea5b000xv
