{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2306"}
____
  
NEWS
Cannes Film Festival 2014: Marion Cotillard wants to play 'ugly' characters
By Hannah Furness in Cannes   
471 words
20 May 2014
20:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Marion Cotillard says she hopes to get into action films and would like to play a male role
Marion Cotillard, the Oscar-winning actress, has revealed she would like to play a man in her next film, saying she has the ability to transform herself from sublime beauty to "quite ugly".
Cotillard, who played Edith Piaf in La Vie En Rose, said she was "very able" to change her appearance, but admitted it seemed "totally impossible" to play another sex.
She has now claimed she is seeking roles in action films and comedies, and is excited by the thought of being a male lead.
Speaking at the Cannes Film Festival, where she is promoting her latest role in Two Days, One Night, she said she did not seek out "ugly" roles deliberately, but would welcome them.
When asked whether she would find an up glamorous role more of a challenge, she told a press conference: "I would say that I’m very able to change my appearance. I don’t view myself as someone who is ugly.
"I mean, in any event, even a very very beautiful woman sometimes doesn’t view herself as such. It’s a question of self-image.
“I know, however, that I can be quite beautiful and I can also be quite ugly. I’m sure I have this ability to transform myself, and that’s quite an asset in the job I do.”
She added the idea of wanting to escape her beauty on screen had "never entered into play".
"I’m not going to choose a part where I have no make-up and my hair isn’t done [for the sake of it]," she said. "That's not my plan, to escape the beauty.
“But I know I have this...I can physically portray sublime women, for example.
"But at the same time – I’m thinking of Penelope Cruz in Don’t Move – it’s really hard to make her look ugly. What she does in this film is incredible in terms of female acting, and what she does physically.
You don’t recognise her, she looks absolutely hideous."
When asked which roles she would now like to be offered, Cotillard, 38, said: "I would love to act in an action or comedy film. These are things I’ve never done. I hope one day I have this experience.
"I’m fascinated with the idea of playing a man, because it strikes me as being totally impossible, so that excites me.”
The actress, star of Rust and Bone, The Immigrant and Inception, is now appearing as a depressed woman who has to convince her colleagues to give up their bonuses so she can keep her job.
Document TELUK00020140520ea5k0060q
