{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"3533"}
____
  
News
STAYING IN GOING OUT
DAN SILVER;  VICKI GRIMSHAW; STEVE MYALL; ANNA DAY; SIMON SIMONAES; GRACE MACASKILL   
1,065 words
20 April 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; National
41
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
Couch potato or gadabout town? We pick the best ways to enjoy yourself in the coming week
LEGO THE HOBBIT
Xbox One, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PS3. Out now
Like 2012's Lego Lord of the Rings epic, The Hobbit embellishes the series' platforms 'n' puzzles formula with mild RPG elements. This time, though, the open areas and optional side-quests are complemented by a crafting system which helps stave off the creeping sense of franchise fatigue. As does the increased emphasis on co-op fun. The Hobbit is still more than playable alone but Travellers Tales have embraced the size of their principal cast by introducing buddy attacks and, yes, dwarf stacking to their repertoire of moves. It all makes for a rollicking romp that captures Tolkien's tone. ****
DAN SILVER
DVD HEMLOCK GROVE: SEASON ONE (18)
A cult horror/drama series the originated in Netflix, the offbeat and dark series focuses on the killings of two teenage girls. A dark and compulsive series.
APP ADDISON LEE MINICAB BOOKING APP
Free itunes.apple.com
Two-taps on your iPhone and a 'take me home' function does the rest. Tracks your cab live
SINGLE
AMBER RUN
Spark EP, £1.99 itunes.apple.com
A rousing chorus, poetic lyrics and a genuinely unique sound, Amber Run will be hitting the dizzying heights of sold-out arenas in no time. Think vibes of Mumford, The Killers and Ben Howard.
GAME
TRIALS FUSION
Xbox One, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PC. Out now
Beneath the deceptively simple surface of Ubisoft's physics-based motorcross series lurks one of the most sadistic but rewarding gaming experiences this side of Dark Souls. Getting to grips with the precision balancing act necessary to get from one end of a Trials track to the other is one thing, mastering it is another matter entirely. Fusion adds an infernal new layer of stunt tricks and flips into the mix, as well as a handful of more questionable quadbike-only maps, but the sci-fi setting is largely boring. While there will soon be an infinite amount of community courses to conquer, veterans will miss the invention and variety that so enriched Evolutions. ****
DAN SILVER
GADGET
SONY WIRELESS STEREO HEADSET 2.0
£79.99. Out now
Produced primarily for wireless use with the PS4 and PS3 (thanks to a supplied 3.5mm jack), Sony's new headphones offer plenty of bang for their relatively bargain £79.99 RRP. The comfortable cans come with 7.1 channel virtual surround sound, programmable presets and a noise cancelling microphone discreetly tucked into one of the cups. Audiophiles won't be impressed with the occasionally undercooked bass in particular, but they're more than acceptable as an affordable gaming solution.
ALBUM
GLENN TILBROOK
Happy Ending vinyl and CD £19.99 amazon.co.uk
Not one to rest on his multitude of laurels, Glenn Tilbrook of Squeeze is back with a new inventive and witty acoustic solo album being released as a lovely vinyl and CD combo. You won't regret adding this to your music collection.
PLAY
OTHER DESERT CITIES
Old Vic Theatre, London, until May 24 Most families are dysfunctional to some degree but the wealthy Wyeth family are a cut above. A jolly Christmas Eve reunion soon descends into bitter recriminations when troubled writer daughter Brooke (Martha Plimpton from TV's The Good Wife) arrives home. Full of bitterness towards her actor turned politician father's views and grief for their brother who killed himself, she presents them with her latest book - a memoir about her own family. Her alcoholic aunt (Clare Higgins) applauds her honesty but her icy, controlling mother Polly (Sinead Cusack), and father Lyman (Peter Egan) are appalled at her betrayal. Absorbing and witty.
VICKI GRIMSHAW
oldvictheatre.com 0844 871 7628
PLAY
A VIEW FROM THE BRIDGE
Young Vic, London, until June 7
From the moment we meet Mark Strong's excellent Eddie there is a sense of menace. His unhealthy obsession with his wife's niece Catherine (Phoebe Fox) leaves you squirming. Nicola Walker is great as his loyal wife and Emun Elliot as a moral illegal immigrant is powerful. A macho production in which lives shatter.
STEVE MYALL
PLAY
CARS AND BOYS
Dundee Rep, until Saturday
Catherine lies alone, drifting in and out of consciousness, struck down by a stroke. As her conscience and reality entwine, her past and present become confused and her past loves haunt her dreams while her family wreak havoc as soon as she opens her eyes. Ann Louise Ross plays the workaholic matriarch, battling with mortality. She skillfully leads an excellent cast in this dark, humorous play written by Stuart Paterson. Ncuti Gatwa is brilliant - and handsome - as the wayward grandson and John Buick is predictably fantastic as one of Catherine's lovers. The characters are utterly believable. All of which makes the truth of this play painfully poignant.
ANNA DAY
GIG
KATIE MELUA
Union Chapel, London
Fans queued for hours outside the iconic Union Chapel in north London, waiting to see one of pop's best-selling females in the intimate venue. And they weren't let down as Katie Melua's angelic voice bounced off the gothic themed church walls. The Georgia-born 29-year-old was performing her Simplified Tour, stripped back her own songs and elegantly arranged covers. A glittered setlist included Dusty Springfield to Leonard Cohen and The Kinks, it was a wonderful acoustic experience. Her powerful encore included Call Off The Search and a chilling rendition of Diamonds Are Forever.
SIMON SIMONAES
LIVE SHOW
CBEEBIES LIVE SHOW
Manchester Arena
It would be easy to be cynical about the CBeebies Live show but the Big Band show at Manchester Arena was nothing short of fantastic with youngsters rocking in the aisles as stars such as Katy Ashworth (I Can Cook), Nina (and the Neurons) presenters Andy and Alex and Ben Faulks (Mr Bloom's Nursery) put on their dancing shoes. And who would have thought that artist Mr Maker would be such a nifty mover. Jamaican Rastamouse and the Zingzillas also joined in the lavish production but the undoubted highlight was Justin Fletcher's Mr Tumble. Once you've witnessed your kids' beaming faces you truly get the cult of CBeebies!
GRACE MACASKILL
Document SMIRR00020140420ea4k000cr
