{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"935"}
____
  
Features
in short
Iain Finlayson   
494 words
3 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
13
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Belle: The True Story of Dido Belle belle: The True Story of Dido Belle by Paula Byrne William Collins, 292pp £8.99 * £7.99; ebook £4.99
Dido Belle "was an authentic London immigrant", writes Paula Byrne, who estimates that some 15,000 black people were living in the city in the late 18th century (Dr Johnson, for one, employed a black manservant). Belle was a beautiful, young, mixedrace woman, adopted and treated tenderly by the family of Lord Mansfield. As the Lord Chief Justice of England he presided over the "Zong" case, a claim against the insurers of a shipping company for the deliberate drowning at sea of 132 slaves, which laid a legal foundation for the abolition of slavery in Britain. Belle is an attractive figure in English high society and her poignant story contrasts with the dramatic legal issues scrupulously upheld by Mansfield. The theatrical zest of the narrative, which is a tie-in with a movie of the same name out next month, holds it all together.
Creativity, Inc: Overcoming the Unseen Forces that Stand in the Way of True Inspiration by Ed Catmull with Amy Wallace Bantam, 344pp £20 * £16; ebook £9.99
In the words of a Charlie Rich song, the hippest guy in town is fast-talking, slow-walking, good-looking Mohair Sam. Ed Catmull, who founded Pixar Animation with Steve Jobs and John Lasseter in 1986, is the Mohair Sam of computer animation. He is the president of "Creativity Inc", the geeky wizard hired by George Lucas to merge movie-making with technology and the creative alchemist who brought Finding Nemo, Toy Story and Monsters, Inc. to the screen. He is the genius who has won nearly 30 Oscars and made several billion dollars by ... well, here's his shtick on the trick to combining art, business and motivation. The commercial strategies are the same for any product. But it sounds more cool fun at Pixar's state-of-the-art San Francisco campus than anywhere else.
Some Desperate Glory: the First World War the Poets Knew by Max Some Egremont Picador, 336pp £20 *18
The names of the warrior poets of the First World War are memorialised in our culture.
For a century, their poetry has coloured our perception of the Great War, as though they wrote with one sorrowful, disappointed, perhaps inglorious voice. Here, however, we read some hundred poems in the very different voices, year by year from 1914 to 1918, of 11 young soldier poets — Thomas, Owen, Sassoon, Gurney, Graves, Grenfell, Brooke, Blunden, Rosenberg, Nichols and Sorley. As curator of this anthology, Egremont sets each year of poems in the progress of the war and in the biographical context of the hopes, experiences and emotions of their makers. We mark the making of them as men and follow their shifting visions. This is what it was like for them to be in the front line.
Iain Finlayson
Document T000000020140503ea53000h0
