{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1066"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
MPs asked to back plan to strip terror suspects of citizenship
Alan Travis, Home affairs editor   
494 words
7 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
15
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The home secretary, Theresa May, is to ask the Commons today to back her plan to deprive terror suspects of British citizenship, even if it leaves them stateless.
The home secretary will ask MPs to overturn a House of Lords amendment to her immigration bill, which would seriously delay her plans by insisting that a joint committee of peers and MPs scrutinise the proposal before it can become law.
May will, however, announce that she is prepared to concede a second Lords defeat on her immigration bill and will put in place plans for specialist independent advocates for trafficked children. It is believed that the legislation for the child guardians will be included in the modern slavery bill instead of the immigration bill, which will reach the statute book shortly.
The home secretary intends to press ahead with her plan to strip terror suspects of British citizenship, including British fighters returning from Syria who are suspected of having fought alongside jihadists, despite strong criticism.
A former director of public prosecutions, a former supreme court judge and 23 Liberal Democrats were among the 242 peers who supported Lord Pannick's successful Lords amendment that would delay its implementation. The move was added to the immigration bill in January without any of the pre-legislative scrutiny that the remainder was subject to.
At the time of the Lords defeat, Pannick said: "There are regrettably all too many dictators around the world willing to use the creation of statelessness as a weapon. We should do nothing to suggest that it is acceptable."
The director of Liberty, Shami Chakrabarti, said: "Removing the right to have rights is a new low. Washing our hands of potential terrorists is dangerously short-sighted and statelessness is a tool of despots not democrats."
Her criticism was echoed by the human rights organisation Reprieve, whose legal director, Kat Craig, said the French rightwing Front National leader, Marine Le Pen, was calling on the French government to implement May's plan.
Craig said: "When Le Pen and the French far right are the strongest supporters of a policy, alarm bells should be ringing for the government. This shows that not only are Theresa May's plans for the arbitrary exile of Britons dangerously extreme, they are also setting a terrible example around the world."
May has argued that the 1961 UN convention on statelessness included the ability to deprive a naturalised person of their citizenship if they conducted themselves "in a manner seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of Her Britannic Majesty".
On the issue of guardians for child victims of trafficking, a Home Office spokesman said that trials of specialist child advocates across 23 local authority areas that were announced in January would go ahead this summer.
Captions:
Liberty director Shami Chakrabarti said rendering terror suspects stateless was 'a tool of despots not democrats'
Document GRDN000020140507ea570002j
