{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"713"}
____
  
Nigel Farage v Nick Clegg: European Union debate, round two highlights
339 words
4 April 2014
10:32
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg and Ukip leader Nigel Farage go head to head in their second debate about UK's membership of European Union
窶｢ Phone Nigel Farage live: put your questions to the Ukip leader on Friday April 4 at 1pm 
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg met UKIP leader Nigel Farage for the second round of a live debate on membership of the European Union which saw them brand each other liars and fantasists.
A snap YouGov survey suggested 68% thought the Ukip leader had performed best in their second televised debate, compared to 27% who favoured the Deputy Prime Minister.
The verdict followed an hour of increasingly bad-tempered exchanges, with Mr Clegg repeatedly accusing his opponent of "fantasy".
He also picked up Mr Farage for "indefensible" comments in which he suggested he admired Russian president Vladimir Putin for outwitting the EU and western leaders.
"I wouldn't be surprised if Nigel Farage soon tells us that the moon landing was a fake, that Barack Obama is not American, that Elvis is not dead," Mr Clegg said.
But Mr Farage retorted that the Liberal Democrat leader was "wilfully lying" about how many laws were imposed on the UK by the EU.
"I said yes to these debates. I thought you would honestly make the pro-EU case," Mr Farage said. "By saying 7% of our laws are made in Brussels, you are wilfully lying to the British people about the extent to which we have given away control of our country and our democracy and I'm really shocked and surprised that you would try and do that."
During one of the hardest-fought passages, Mr Farage warned that immigration had been a "disaster" and left the "white working-class effectively as an underclass".
The BBC debate follows one hosted by talk radio station LBC Radio last week .
Who won round two of the Europe debate?
Farage v Clegg: Watch Tim Stanley play out the debate
Document TELUK00020140402ea42003sf
