{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3358"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Nigel Farage's Ukip is über-nationalist and xenophobic ut not racist, says minister
Matthew Holehouse   
514 words
17 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
1,4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Labour refuses to make migration pledge
THE UK Independence Party is "übernationalist" and "xenophobic", a senior Conservative minister said yesterday.
Nigel Farage, its leader, has preyed on people's fear of immigration in a "shameful" way, added Eric Pickles.
His party contains people who have made "racist calculations". But the Communities Secretary tells The Daily Telegraph he does not believe "in my heart" that the party is racist.
His comments came before Mr Farage took part in a heated radio interview in which he was accused of running a "divisive" and "racist" organisation.
In the live interview with LBC radio, Mr Farage suggested that people "know" which foreigners make good neighbours as he struggled to justify his opposition to European immigration, despite being married to a German. David Cameron said Mr Farage's comments were "unpleasant".
Voting for Ukip "sends a terrible message about Britain", he said.
Ed Miliband entered the debate as he promised that Labour would "never again turn our backs" on people who are concerned about immigration.
But he ruled out setting targets over the numbers of foreigners in Britain.
Mr Pickles's comments come before the European elections on Thursday. Ukip is expected to beat the Conservatives, with some polls predicting the party could finish first above Labour. However, there are concerns that Ukip is being damaged by a series of allegations about racist and homophobic comments made by some of its candidates.
Mr Pickles insisted that Ukip was xenophobic. "Xenophobia is the fear of anything that's different, anything that's unusual, that's slightly foreign," he said.
"In a way, they are a sort of übernationalist party."
Senior Conservatives have in recent weeks repeatedly refused to say whether they regard Ukip as racist, despite criticising the comments made by the party's candidates. Mr Farage was criticised over his appearance on LBC radio. A party aide tried to stop the interview as Mr Farage was asked whether he would submit the party's European expenses to an official auditor.
The Ukip leader has previously said that hearing foreign languages on public transport makes him feel "awkward" and "uncomfortable". Asked whether that applied to his wife, a German speaker, Mr Farage said: "I don't suppose she speaks it on the train, you know."
Mr Farage also stood by comments made earlier this year that he would be "concerned" if he had Romanian neighbours. Asked why they would be different to Germans, Mr Farage replied: "You know what the difference is."
He added: "We want an immigration policy that is not just based on controlling not just quantity but quality".
Mr Miliband refused to set a target for the number of foreigners who should be allowed to enter Britain.
The Labour leader insisted that he would "bear down" on immigration but declined to make "false promises" to voters about the numbers of foreigners coming to Britain.
He said previous Labour administrations had "too often dismissed people's concerns" about immigration.
Document DT00000020140517ea5h0007w
