{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"2901"}
____
  
News
FAKE ID for sale
SIMON WRIGHT ; KHURRAM SHEIKH   
1,211 words
30 March 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; National
8,9
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
We infiltrate gang selling Romanian identity cards... so illegal immigrants can claim British benefits and free NHS treatment
AN UNDERWORLD gang selling fake identity cards to illegal immigrants hiding in Britain has been smashed by a Sunday Mirror investigation.
In a dramatic end to our month-long undercover operation, dozens of police and immigration officers seized suspects in two raids on Friday night.
The swoops came after our investigators did a £1,000 deal for a fake Romanian ID card after a series of secret meetings.
The cards are perfect for illegals from many different countries wanting to hoodwink UK authorities because Romanians have been able to live legally here since January 1. The IDs, which are in the name of a real person living back in Romania but carry a picture of the illegal immigrant, give immediate access to free NHS treatment, jobs and benefits.
And the ultimate irony is that the Romanian gangs selling them are using their new European Union legal status to run their money-spinning operation in Britain.
The Sunday Mirror was alerted to the fake IDs scam by an underworld tip-off.
Our undercover reporters, posing as businessmen interested in buying up fake cards, first met a Romanian husband and wife team of 'introducers' on March 13. The couple live legally in Ellesmere Port, Cheshire.
During the hour-long meeting, the pair calling themselves Andreea and Eddie, explained how the cards were made to order in Spain - and revealed the scale of the operation.
SPECIAL Holding their seven-month-old daughter in her arms, Andreea said: "We can do Romanian ID and driving licence. I think we can do one other too. Not only Romanian."
When asked if the name on the card would be a real, unsuspecting person living in Romania, Eddie replied excitedly: "Yeah, yeah, yeah.
"Only the picture is wrong. There is a special number. All very good. Always the people are the same, it is just the picture that is different.
"You give me the picture for the new card but the name is always there."
He took out his own genuine Romanian ID, around the size of a credit card, and showed us special marks only visible under ultra violet light. He said: "This is real Romanian ID. I can put a light here and show you the mark. They (the fakes) are very, very good. They are roughly the same."
At the first meeting Andreea also revealed an international dimension to the alleged scam - and the size of it. When we asked how many they could make for us, she replied: "How many do you want?" She told us: "The pictures have to go to Spain. We send by special delivery. The guy who makes is in Spain."
Her husband Eddie later added: "It has been big business in Spain with those IDs for six years. But it is hard in Spain now so we come to Britain."
Andreea confidently assured us that if we wanted the fake cards they would be delivered back to the UK in just a few days.
We agreed to buy one and on March 16 the couple drove 40 miles from their home to collect our investigators from a Manchester hotel.
They took them to the home of the scam's alleged 'Mr Big' - called Vasile - in a suburb of the city. As a giant widescreen TV showed a Romanian satellite channel in his smart living room, Vasile took a handful of cards from a brown envelope and held one up.
Then he bragged: "Somebody with this, they go to Cheque Converters. The cheque was for £2,800. They go with their ID - the fakes - and they take the money."
He was careful to emphasise that the name on the ID was not fake. "The person is in Romania. You understand?" he said. "The real details of someone who really exists." He produced an ultra violet lamp used by banks to check for fake notes.
Laughing as he showed us a sample fake card, he said: "You take the card to the bank and you walk out with money.
"This is a Romanian card. I make the ID for you for one year. Romania is now in Europe and cheques can be cashed with the card.
"I know someone who used this in a bank to cash a cheque. The bank checked the card with a UV and everything was OK. They are checking the name and the picture and it is OK." Our men placed an order for a card and also a fake Romanian driving licence which he said would take a few days to deliver.
He told us: "Maybe the cards will be ready in two days and maybe one week. I will ring you when they are ready.
"Don't ring me after two days and say, 'Are they ready?' You understand? Maybe one week. Maybe two. It's my job. It's normal. Just wait."
When we asked his name, he said: "Maybe you don't want my name."
In the meantime, our investigators took their evidence and undercover footage to Immigration Enforcement and Greater Manchester Police.
Our men gave statements and attended three top level meetings with a dozen senior officials and detectives. On the basis of our evidence, Operation Coyote - led by Immigration Enforcement - was immediately set up to crack down on the alleged scam.
Last week our team finally received a call that the cards were ready for collection on Friday. The rendezvous was at a tiny basement flat in the centre of Preston, Lancs.
POUNCE Filmed by our hidden cameras - and monitored by police as 40 cops and immigration officers waited to pounce - we handed over £1,000 in cash to the couple we had met in Ellesmere Port.
Eddie explained: "The address, the name, it is all good in Romania. I can do 10, no problem. You can go to the bank and the Jobcentre." Smiling, the man counted the money and then gave us near perfect copies of a Romanian ID card and a Romanian driving licence.
Moments after we left, officers moved in to arrest the couple. Meanwhile, another police team swooped on the home of Vasile in Manchester.
The suspects were taken away in handcuffs to separate police stations as forensic search teams filled evidence bags with items seized from their homes, including what appeared to be more cards.
Last night, detectives were sifting through evidence seized at two properties.
An investigation was underway to trace the alleged gang's activities across Spain, Italy and Romania.
Government Immigration and Security Minister James Brokenshire last night praised our investigation. He said: "I am grateful to the Sunday Mirror for helping to uncover evidence of suspected dealing in false documents.
"The arrests show that we will take swift and robust action when suspected immigration crime is brought to our attention."
Assistant Director Dave Magrath, from Home Office Criminal Investigations, who headed the operation, said: "Specialist crime teams are tackling all forms of immigration fraud. Those who are involved in this organised criminality can expect to face arrest, jail and removal from the UK."
simon.wright@sundaymirror.co.uk ADDITIONAL REPORTING: MAHMMODUL HASSAN
Document SMIRR00020140330ea3u000ax
