{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"251"}
____
  
News
Cameron backs EU freedom of movement, but only for workers
Laura Pitel   
646 words
12 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
10,11
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
European elections 2014
David Cameron has defended the free movement of labour in Europe, as he braces himself for new immigration figures expected to show a rise in the numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians living in Britain.
The prime minister said that he wanted to return the principle of open borders to its "original concept" rather than fundamentally altering it as part of his plans for EU reform.
"I think free movement in the European Union is important but it needs to be returned to the original concept which was the freedom to go and work in another country," Mr Cameron told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC One.
"Many British citizens go and work in other European countries; other European citizens come and work here. Freedom to apply for a job to go and work in another country is one thing, but I think what we've seen recently is something else."
He raised the prospect of imposing a minimum threshold for GDP per capita before countries joining the European Union qualified for full freedom of movement. Such an arrangement, he said, would be a way of avoiding the "big migratory flows" that resulted when poorer countries, such as Poland, joined the union.
A new analysis yesterday estimated that an extra 30,000 people came to Britain from Bulgaria and Romania in the first three months of 2014 compared with the same period last year, an increase of 25 per cent.
The figures by economists at the University of Oxford's migration observatory, which were published in The Sunday Telegraph, come before employment statistics are released on Wednesday that will provide the first assessment of new arrivals from the two EU accession countries since a temporary ban expired on January 1. They are expected to compound Mr Cameron's woes over a promise to cut net migration to the "tens of thousands" by the 2015, a figure that he was already on course to miss.
The prime minister said that he would instead focus on restricting access to benefits for those who come to Britain from other European Union states.
He reiterated a series of pledges on plans for reforming Britain's relationship with Brussels as he seeks to counter the threat posed to the Conservatives by Ukip. The anti-EU party is a strong contender for first place in European elections at the end of this month.
A Ukip victory would put intense pressure on Mr Cameron to take a tougher stance on immigration to win back supporters at the general election in May 2015.
The Conservative leader repeated a promise that he would not take on the role of prime minister for a second time unless he could guarantee that his promised in/out EU referendum would take place in 2017.
He said that "perhaps the most important" tenet of his plan for reforming Europe was an end to the concept of "ever closer union", the founding principle of the European project.
The Tory leader accepted that this would require treaty change, which fellow leaders on the continent are reluctant to agree to.
"Some of the things I'm calling for will require treaty change and that is one of them," he said.
Mr Cameron will today make a joint appearance on the campaign trail with Boris Johnson, the mayor of London. It comes amid intense speculation about whether or not Mr Johnson will stand for parliament in 2015 in order to provide a launch pad for a leadership bid in the event of a Conservative defeat.
Writing in The Sunday Telegraph yesterday, Mr Cameron said that "real" patriots should vote Tory rather than be tempted to support Ukip. The Conservatives are expected to be beaten into third place behind Ukip and Labour in the European elections on May 22.
Document T000000020140512ea5c000ax
