{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1086"}
____
  
News
Ukip candidate is now 'relaxed about gays'
Francis Elliott   
567 words
7 May 2014
The Times
T
2; National
2
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip's candidate to win its first Westminster seat acknowledged yesterday that his opponents would mine a record of statements about homosexuality, but insisted that his personal views had become "more relaxed".
The odds on Ukip winning the Newark by-election lengthened after it announced that it had chosen Roger Helmer to fight the critical contest on June 5. Party sources described the East Midlands MEP, who defected from the Tories two years ago, as a veteran campaigner who would give Ukip a fighting chance of taking the constituency, which was left vacant by the resignation of the disgraced Tory MP Patrick Mercer.
Activists opted for a man with strong local links but a past sure to be targeted by the Conservatives. Mr Helmer was rebuked by Mr Farage for suggesting that laws to allow gay marriage could lead to the legalisation of incest. He has previously stated that some found homosexuality "viscerally repugnant".
Speaking to The Times, he insisted that his views had changed. "I was raised in a very traditional home and I guess I grew up with those attitudes, but hell we are now in the 21st century and my position is exactly the same as the party's position: that we are a broadly libertarian party and what two consenting adults, or indeed more than two consenting adults, choose to do together is none of my business, none of the party's business and as far as we're concerned, they're free to get on with it."
Mr Helmer said that Ukip was right to fight against gay marriage. Asked if he would accept an invitation by friends to a same-sex wedding, however, he said: "I dare say I would."
He declines to say when his views changed or why or to discuss how he would react if a close family member came out as gay. "Twenty years ago I didn't like classical music, now I'm nuts about it," he said.
"I am not the anti-gay MEP; I am the MEP who is concerned about the major issues that affect this country today, who made a couple of remarks many years ago, which have been scraped off the bottom of the barrel and they are not the issue on which we are interested. The people of Newark are interested in issues that affect them today — they're interested in immigration and energy prices and so on."
He said it would be an "amazing experience" to be Ukip's first MP and that he stood a good chance of overcoming the Tories' 16,000 majority. "We are going to be motivated, hyped up as a party, and I am very, very confident that we will have very large numbers of Ukip activists ... They think we've got a pretty good chance of winning and I think they're right."
Mr Farage will seek to counter charges that Ukip today is racist by posing alongside black and ethnic minority candidates. Mr Helmer repeated his admission that not enough was done to weed out those with unsavoury views but maintained that the party was careful not to admit former BNP activists. "We are an insurgent party, we are a rather colourful party, we tend to attract colourful characters and a swash-buckling style. But we are extremely clear and extremely careful."
Document T000000020140507ea570009f
