{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1149"}
____
  
NEWS
Try one of our workers - not an immigrant, Iain Duncan Smith tells British firms
By Christopher Hope Senior Political Correspondent   
528 words
20 March 2014
21:43
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
British companies should “try one of our workers” before hiring an immigrant, the Work and Pensions secretary says
British companies should “try one of our workers” before hiring an immigrant, the Work and Pensions secretary has said.
Iain Duncan Smith said he was encouraged that more jobs appeared to be going to British workers after being surprised by the number of migrant workers used to construct the stadia for the 2012 Olympics in London.
He told The House magazine: “I was in a Job Centre at the time of the Olympics in my area of Waltham Forest. We were in the Olympic boroughs and there’s a big debate about how much work actually went to those boroughs.
“I was talking to a plumber and a carpenter, trained, qualified individuals. And I asked them about the Olympic sites. And they said ‘They’re all or mostly people coming in from Eastern Europe who undercut us because they all hotbed in these areas and then they’re gone.
“’I can’t compete with them on this because I’ve got a house, I’ve got kids, I’ve got commitments, there’s only so far I can go on salary, otherwise it’s worse for me than being on benefits’.
“Now more jobs are going to British workers than went originally. So that is the beginning of a change, but I’m very keen to thrash that out so ‘try one of our unemployed people first before you go anywhere else’.”
Mr Duncan Smith defended comments by James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, who had claimed a “wealthy metropolitan elite” had benefited from “an easy supply of cheap labour”, at the expense of “ordinary, hard-working people”.
Mr Duncan Smith said: “He was saying the benefits of this, such as they are, tended to be in this group but not down at the bottom end, where they’ve tended to see the problem.
“He’s right in that by the way. That is the issue. People that I deal with every day, they feel very squeezed by people who come in, under cut them in price.”
Mr Duncan Smith also addressed claims made in a recent book that George Osborne, the Chancellor, does not think he is “clever enough”.
He said: “I don’t mind really, it doesn’t bother me at all. I never really care what people say or think. Everyone has their axe to grind. People grind them away.
“I’m content to see what history’s judgement of me will be, not what my contemporaries think of me. Politics is a silly game.”
He pointed out that critics had also questioned the intelligence of Margaret Thatcher and Winston Churchill – two of the greatest Prime Ministers of the 20th century.
He said: “I don’t compare myself to the two of them but I simply say honestly, snap judgements like that are invariable not what people remember. What they remember is ‘did we get the job done?’ And this has never been about me personally anyway.”
Document TELUK00020140320ea3k004bl
