{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"1662"}
____
  
Observer New Comment Pages
Beware the fake patriots' anger on immigration
Nick Cohen   
1,105 words
20 April 2014
The Observer
OB
43
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
No cause is as dead as the campaign to provide an amnesty for illegal immigrants. Far-sighted politicians once found it intolerable that criminals could abuse and exploit the half a million among us who were living beyond the minimum wage, the tax system and the rule of law.
The recession killed their humane concern. The church-led movement to turn "strangers into citizens" hardly exists now. Only in unvisited web archives can you find its arguments that we should admit people who could prove that they were honest and hardworking into mainstream society. George Osborne, a politician for whom the phrase "You could carve a better man out of a banana" might have been coined, will damn Boris Johnson by quoting his courageous support for an amnesty when they face each other in the next Tory leadership election. Conservative propagandists have found that the weapon has a satisfyingly devastating effect. They used Nick Clegg's support for an amnesty to puncture the Liberal Democrat bubble in the 2010 general election campaign.
Rather than give rights to people who have been here for years, living in slums and paying no income tax, everyone who reads the polls and the papers agrees that "soft-touch" Britain needs to butch up. There must be crackdowns and purges; night arrests and dawn deportations. Opposition has fallen as the cost of living crisis has grown. Labour is terrified the electorate will see it as weak. The BBC confesses its liberal line on immigrants was biased, when many of us would have said that was the smallest of its prejudices. Everywhere, hard-faced men and hatchet-faced women are triumphant, even though their policies are failing in front of our eyes.
Last week, Labour discovered that Home Office appeals for the public to inform on illegal immigrants had resulted in 4,535 arrests and 1,585 deportations. If you think these figures are low, you would be right. Immigration officers tell me that only a third of the arrests led to deportations because denunciations of illegals are notoriously unreliable. People report a new neighbour because he has a black face. The owner of an Indian restaurant reports the Chinese restaurant over the road to hurt the competition and the owner of the Chinese restaurant returns the dirty trick a few months later.
As telling are the 4,535 arrests. According to the best recent estimate of the size of Britain's underground world, the number of illegal entrants, refused asylum seekers, and tourists and students who have overstayed their visas lies between 410,000 and 860,000. The current rate of expulsion is 14,000 enforced and 28,000 voluntary removals a year. It would take a decade - maybe much longer - to remove them all. Even assuming that no one else comes, which they will.
Ineffective though it may be, asking the public to play the informer makes the home secretary and Conservative party look as though they are in control in a political world where looks are all that matter. As if to prove the point, Theresa May has turned immigration enforcement officers into props in the Tories re-election campaign: a visible rather than an effective force; more ornament than use.
She makes them travel in vans with a striking turquoise and navy blue chequer pattern along their side. Above it, in bold letters no one can miss, runs the logo "Immigration Enforcement". The sight may convince voters to stay with the Tories rather than vote Ukip. But, as Lucy Moreton, general secretary of the Immigration Service Union, tells me, branded vans are no help in catching illegal immigrants. As soon as her members announce their presence by driving to the front doors of sink estates, illegals nip out the back. Not that their superiors care. All methods, however facile or devious, are acceptable if they allow the Home Office to pretend that it is assuaging public anger. Moreton says it is common practice for officers to tour airport departure lounges, find immigrants who are leaving Britain anyway and serve them with deportation notices just before their flights take off. The managers and politicians are happy and approve. With one trick - eureka! - the targets are met.
It is a little too easy, however, to pretend that nothing has changed. The phoney war cannot go on for ever. If fear and outrage make it impossible to offer a proportion of illegals a path towards respectable lives, the state will reach for nastier options. My guess is that, in order to save British culture from foreigners, our rightwing patriots will undermine it by instituting a system of identity controls.
May is heading in that direction. Already, employers must check the immigration status of applicants before hiring them. She will make landlords and NHS receptionists do the same. In theory, this sounds a ferocious deterrent. Who wants to come to a country where they cannot work, rent a home or receive medical treatment? In practice, it is another stunt from the publicity hounds at the Home Office. All kinds of foreigners have pieces of paper that entitle them to live in Britain. EU nationals, their partners, European Economic Area nationals, Chinese citizens with work visas, American citizens with student visas. . . There are dozens of valid documents and that's before you get to the forgeries.
All hospital administrators and landlords will do is what employers already do: photocopy the patient or tenant's documents and say, if the police question them, that they appeared to be genuine. The only way to turn a stunt into an effective policy is to issue identity cards for everyone in or visiting Britain. Only identity cards can meet the demands of public and press. But in meeting them they will destroy a notion of British freedom, which, call me a sentimentalist, I find worth defending.
We are a common-law democracy, with limits of the power of the state. We are not a country where police officers can demand to see your papers or stop and search you without reason. We are not a country where you have to prove you are entitled to treatment before a doctor will help you. The talk-radio hosts' screams and the tantrums of Ukip and the Tories will tear that old country down and create, for all their Euroscepticism, a Britain far closer to a Napoleonic Europe.
As they do it, they should remind you that no one does as much damage to a country as the patriots who profess to love it the most.
Document OB00000020140419ea4k00019
