{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"709"}
____
  
Features; Review
Certain to cause a führore
CAROLINE JOWETT   
448 words
4 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
40
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
Weekend Books www.express.co.uk/books
LOOK WHO'S BACK **** by Timur Vermes MacLehose Press, £12.50 (RRP £15)
HE'S BACK and he's führious. Is the world ready? Ready for a satire on the most reviled figure of the 20th century? Vermes' book on the resurrection of Adolf Hitler went down a storm in Germany where it sold 1.5 million copies and spent a staggering 70 weeks in the top 10 bestseller lists.
It has been translated into 38 languages and the film rights have already been sold.
Springtime For Hitler it ain't. This is an audacious assault on a modern taboo based on the premise that the Führer has been catapulted through time to reappear on a patch of Berlin wasteland in 2011.
Still in his uniform Hitler struggles to relate to a new Germany run by a woman and peopled by immigrants.
His luck changes when he is mistaken for an impersonator. Footage of his rants appears on YouTube and he goes viral. TV execs marvelling at his flawless performance and refusal to come out of character give him his own show. Audiences love him.
All this adulation is catnip to a megalomaniac adapting to our brave new electronic world.
Before long he is harnessing the power of social media with an efficiency that would impress Goebbels and putting his plans for world domination back on track.
If he's thrown by the Turk–run Blitz Dry Cleaners and the moral laxity of German youth he loves his new website.
He thinks that the representatives of the modern Social Democratic party the NPD are a bunch of wusses not worthy of his legacy but manages to outsmart a magazine intent on exposing him for what he is.
THE result is a shockingly plausible cautionary tale about how easily the wrong leader might emerge given the right kind of unthinking support.
It is a compelling indictment of our shallow celebrity–driven society. Hitler himself is a strangely alluring mix of naive curiosity and rampant lunacy.
It is frequently laugh–out–loud funny. When asked whether he has any flyers to send out Hitler barks: "Don't talk to me about the Luftwaffe. In the end they were a complete failure."
Yet it is also unsettling and at times repellent, most obviously when discussing his treatment of the Jews.
Vermes' tale is never less than thought–provoking. Even the jacket, all white except for the Führer's distinctive black hair and toothbush moustache, will make you look twice.
An uproarious, disturbing book that will resonate long after you turn the final page.
CAROLINE JOWETT
Document THEEXP0020140404ea440003n
