{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2876"}
____
  
News
Visa rules creating 'nasty Britain feel', says senior Tory
316 words
29 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
18
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
GEORGE OSBORNE'S fatherin–law has criticised the Government's immigration policy, saying visa restrictions were creating a "nasty Britain feeling" among foreign students and businesses.
Lord Howell, a senior Conservative peer and a former foreign office minister, said businesses were being deterred because of a "tangle of regulation", while students were close to "despair" at the restrictions imposed on them.
He said the immigration policies were creating a "blot" on Britain's reputation.
"Being open for business means we've got to welcome the right people, including a lot of students and brilliant skilled people who add to our power in the world," he told the BBC. He added, however, that "we've got to keep out those obviously who would do bad things to Britain and damage us".
A House of Lords report found that gifted immigrants were being frightened off because of heavy–handed immigration and visa policies. The peers called for students to be removed from net migration targets and for a change in tone from the Government on immigration.
The committee called for a strategic unit to be created at the heart of the Government that could deal swiftly with potentially damaging policies or messages coming out of Whitehall departments.
Lord Howell, who chaired the committee, said: "We are not getting it right. All our witnesses who came before us – and we had 24 hearings and a vast amount of written evidence – said the visa policy and some of the handling of immigration policy was creating rather a blot, creating a nasty Britain feeling."
The report said the Government should be wary of introducing policies "which, however inadvertently, undermine the attractiveness of the UK as a place to do business with".
It urged the Government to improve visa application processes for key growth areas such as India and other Commonwealth nations.
Document DT00000020140329ea3t000at
