{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1023"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Ukip leader 'regrets' comments about Romanian migrants
Christopher Hope   
330 words
19 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
1,4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Farage: We're still on course to make history
NIGEL FARAGE has gone on the defensive to deflect claims of racism after a poll suggested his attempts to cause a political "earthquake" at Thursday's European Parliament elections might be blown off course.
The leader of the UK Independence Party has taken out a newspaper advertisement today insisting his stance against Editorial Comment: Page 23 Romanians is not racist and tomorrow is planning to lead a "carnival" for black and ethnic minority voters.
Last night the Ukip leader admitted that he regretted his comments in which he suggested that there was a "difference" between Romanians and other Europeans, a comment which has been interpretted by some as racist. Mr Farage said "sometimes I get things wrong".
However, he claimed he was still confident his party was on the brink of "a historic moment" and would become the first minor party to win a nationwide election in nearly a century. Addressing voters in Thanet, Kent, he urged them to "join the People's Army" and vote Ukip.
His pleas came as the other main party leaders – Ed Miliband, Nick Clegg and David Cameron – criticised the Ukip leader over his divisive policies, with one saying that his "mask" of bonhomie had slipped. Tomorrow, Labour's shadow immigration minister Yvette Cooper will accuse Ukip of "hostility and extremism".
Polls over the weekend delivered mixed results. ComRes gave Ukip an 11 per cent lead over second–placed Labour, but ICM had Ukip in third place, four points behind Labour.
Mr Farage has gone on the defensive after seeing his reputation dive following a bruising radio interview when he was accused of being a "divisive racist".
Last night Mr Farage spoke of "regret" at the comments, telling ITV News: "I was completely tired out and I did not use the form of words in response that I would have liked to have used."
Document DT00000020140519ea5j00011
