{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3846"}
____
  
News
Asylum-seeker refuses to leave over FGM threat
SARAH MORRISON AND JUSTIN CASH   
457 words
26 April 2014
The Independent
IND
1ST
17
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News
An asylum-seeker who fears that her two young daughters will become victims of female genital mutilation (FGM) if they return to Nigeria could be detained in Britain, alongside her children, after refusing to board a flight home yesterday.
Afusat Saliu, 31, a victim of FGM, was reportedly too worried about her daughters Bassy, aged three, and Rashidat, one, to voluntarily return to Nigeria yesterday. She now may be forcibly removed.
Last night, Ms Saliu's MP, George Mudie, was in talks directly with the immigration minister's office, asking for her case to be reconsidered. More than 100,000 people have signed a petition calling on the Home Office to review her claim. Yet a last-minute legal attempt to get her case reconsidered earlier this week failed.
"It's one thing taking the chance on sending an adult back," Mr Mudie told The Independent. "But these are two defenceless children. The minister has to assure me they've got good grounds for believing they will be safe… the consequences of getting it wrong are so grave."
Anj Handa, who is leading the campaign to prevent Ms Saliu's deportation, said that "many have questioned why, given our Government's stated strong line on eradicating FGM in the UK and abroad, that it is willing to send the girls to this likely fate." A leading barrister, Felicity Gerry, QC, who has provided support for Ms Saliu, said "the idea of a mother and children trying to argue their case from abroad and survive traditional cultural pressure… is beyond comprehension and hopefully someone in Government will look at the matter afresh."
Ms Saliu, from Leeds, West Yorkshire, said she fled Nigeria in 2011 after her stepmother wanted her eldest child to undergo FGM. She said she applied for asylum in 2012 but was refused. Subsequent appeals have been quashed.
She told The Independent earlier this week that she was fighting on behalf of her children. "It's so scary. I don't want them going through the same pain I went through," she said. According to the Home Office, families who remain in the country illegally could be sent to an immigration removal centre suitable for children.
After controversy surrounding the detention of children, the Government set up Cedars in 2011, a secure facility which accommodates up to nine families in self-contained apartments. The "pre-departure accommodation" is run by several agencies, including G4S and the charity Barnardos.
A spokesperson for the Home Office said: "We believe that those who fail to establish a genuine fear of persecution should return home voluntarily. If they do not, we will enforce their removal."
Document IND0000020140426ea4q0006j
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:28
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
