{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"330"}
____
  
Culture
Britain is still Celtic at heart
By Harry Mount   
672 words
2 May 2014
11:49
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
How exciting to discover that Amesbury in Wiltshire is the oldest, continuously-inhabited village in the country. Archaeologists have worked out that people have lived there since 8,820 BC.
That is pretty old. But, with Stonehenge and Avebury just down the road, it's not entirely surprising. Wiltshire was the popular heartland of ancient Britons.
But the whole of Britain still has an ancient skeleton, not very far below the surface, which still dictates the infrastructure of our villages and towns.
Even as much of the country gets covered in concrete, tarmac and out-of-town shopping centres, those ancient place names survive beneath it all, giving clues to how those places originally looked – and often still look. The vast majority of English place names are derived from the Old English spoken by Germanic immigrants who came here in the 5th and 6th centuries, after the Romans left in 410 AD.
There aren’t many Anglo-Saxon buildings remaining – there are thought to be only around 250 surviving churches with some Anglo-Saxon element in them. But the Anglo-Saxon names live on. Our language was only given the Anglo-Saxon name “English” – or “englisc”, in fact – in the ninth century. It was under the Anglo-Saxons, too, that England started to develop a distinctive English look. Not only did the Anglo-Saxons name most of modern England, but they also decided where most modern settlements are. Practically every modern village and town appears in the Domesday Book, a survey that largely consists of settlements founded before the Norman invasion.
Some Celtic terms, for ancient landscape features, such as penn (head) and cruc (hill, mound or tumulus), were borrowed by the Anglo-Saxons from the Britons who were there before the Romans. The Thames comes from the Celtic "Tamesa"; the Avon from "afon", meaning water, as does "isca", the root of the Rivers Usk, Esk and Usk. Celtic names survive in greater numbers in Wales and Cornwall, where the British fled the Anglo-Saxon advance. The popular Cornish prefix, "Tre-", as in Tremaine and Tregarn, comes from the Celtic "trev" or "tre", meaning a village or homestead.
But, otherwise, today's place names were mostly first used 1,500 or so years ago by those Germanic immigrants, to describe landscape contours. The names practically always survive; as do the contours, unless they’ve been completely concealed by new settlements or motorways. That connection between geography and name doesn’t exist in more modern countries that use borrowed names; like in, say, America, where Exeter, New Hampshire – unlike Exeter, Devon – doesn't mean the castra, or Roman camp, on the River Exe. In the mid-19th century, the American writer, Ralph Waldo Emerson, said his home country was "whitewashed all over by unmeaning names, the cast-off clothes of the country from which its emigrants came; or named at a pinch from a psalm-tune."
Margaret Gelling, the leading historian of British place names and president of the English Place-Name Society for 12 years, who died in 2009, aged 84, was always convinced that the ancient Celtic Britons weren't exiled to the fringes of the country by later invasions. Too many Celtic place names survive, predating the arrival of the Anglo-Saxons in the fifth century AD. Place names incorporating words like "avon" ("river") or "hamps" ("a dry stream in summer") pointed to a continued Celtic presence. Can you imagine, she said, Anglo-Saxons going up to the ancient Britons, and saying, "Look here, before I cut off your head, just tell me the name of this place."
It was more likely that the ancient Britons were allowed to stay on in their old haunts and stick to their old names. In 2001, Dr Gelling was proved right. DNA tests showed that most of us living in south England share DNA with pure-blooded Celts. Celtic traces don't just remain in our settlement patterns; they're in our DNA.
 
Document TELUK00020140502ea520025u
