{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"2887"}
____
  
Observer New Comment Pages
THE RULES AN ETIQUETTE GUIDE TO COMPETITION
Monopoly When one of the rich Russians successfully arranges for the death of the other rich Russians. Libertarian A rich person who thinks the state shouldn't intervene to stop him getting richer. L   
716 words
30 March 2014
The Observer
OB
42
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
Everyone is in favour of healthy competition, healthy, in this context, meaning "difficult for me to lose".
Rule: a company's enthusiasm for competition shrinks directly in proportion to the likelihood of its competitors being any good.
One way to compete in a marketplace is to sell things that are better than other people's things.
This works best with products such as puddings, where the proof of the quality is - according to ancient rules - in the eating.
However, this becomes tricky when trading in utilities such as gas and electricity, which don't come in different flavours. The advantage to selling utilities is that most people have no choice but to buy them. In that sense, it isn't really a marketplace at all, or at least only to the extent that even prisons have shops.
Another popular way to compete is by selling things cheaper than your rivals. The problem with this approach is that your rivals might then try to go even cheaper than you, which means you're back where you started but with less profit. The obvious solution is for everyone to agree on a nice high price and keep out pesky newcomers who try to join the party. This works a treat in utility markets, which is why they are regulated.
So a big rule of free markets is that to have proper competition you need proper state regulation.
The second rule is that politicians who claim to believe in free markets and competition must always call for less regulation.
The convention is that people who point out this contradiction are called Marxists. (Bona fide Marxists should despise regulated markets because they are a sop to liberal running dogs of capitalism and so legitimise bourgeois control of the means of production.)
Politics and competition
People on the right believe that competition is the motivating force that drives progress.
On the left, people are more inclined to see it as a process by which the strong trample the weak in their insatiable quest for riches.
The centre ground is therefore occupied by people who think of competition the way they think of their alarm clock. Without it, they might not get to work every day but that doesn't mean they have to like it.
Competition and
the public sector
There are some things that traditionally the state has performed without any type of competition from the private sector. The advantage of this system is that everyone is guaranteed to have the same level of service.
The disadvantage is that the service might be rubbish and there's not a lot anyone can do about it.
The government can try to get state services to perform better by asking nicely and by giving them money (called the social democratic model) or by denouncing poor performance as sabotage and shooting state employees (called the Stalinist model).
The competitive alternative is called privatisation.
This involves breaking up the state service and giving bits of it away to companies with different logos and names that don't mean anything, but do sound a bit like Bond villains.
The companies then continue to offer rubbish service, complain about regulation and demand government subsidies.
This is called Blairism.
Competition words
and phrases
Cartel When the business model of energy companies is hard to distinguish from the business model of Colombian drug gangs.
Oligarchy When a small number of rich Russians control the economy.
Monopoly When one of the rich Russians successfully arranges for the death of the other rich Russians.
Libertarian A rich person who thinks the state shouldn't intervene to stop him getting richer.
Lump of labour fallacy (1) The mistaken view of competition that imagines there is a fixed number of jobs in an economy, leading to the misperception that immigrants in the UK must be depriving Britons of employment.
Lump of Labour fallacy (2) The mistaken political view that if the opposition sit like a lump, not competing, Ed Miliband can still become prime minister.
Rafael Behr
Document OB00000020140329ea3u0001i
