{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"40"}
____
  
NEWS
Independent Scotland 'needs higher taxes or more immigrants to afford state pension'
By Simon Johnson Scottish Political Editor   
748 words
25 March 2014
06:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
One of Scotland's most eminent actuaries argues that taxes would have to increase by £700 or the number of workers would have to rise by a million by 2066.
An independent Scotland could not afford the current state pension without increasing taxes or admitting up to a million more immigrants, according to an analysis by a leading actuary.
David Davison calculated that around 1.1 million extra working people would be required in Scotland by 2066 to pay the state pension bill thanks to the country’s rapidly ageing population.
This influx is over and above an 800,000 increase already expected over this period, meaning Scotland’s population would have to increase from 5.2 million now to more than seven million.
Mr Davison warned that increasing the number of taxpaying workers to fund the state pension “is likely to require a changed stance on immigration policy” but this could backfire as “many of these new workers will choose to retire in Scotland.”
Without additional labour, he calculated that each worker in Scotland would have to pay an extra £700 per year to fully fund the current state pension.
Mr Davison said the state pension will also become less affordable in the reminder of the UK over the next 50 years but concluded that longer term costs are “likely to be much higher overall in Scotland.”
This is because there is predicted to be fewer workers to fund benefits for each pensioner north of the Border. The Scottish Government’s White Paper on independence suggests increasing immigration to help meet the funding shortfall.
Gregg McClymont MP, Labour’s Shadow Pensions Minister, last night urged Alex Salmond to be “honest” about the levels of immigration required to make good the gap.
He said: “The experts are clear – Alex Salmond could not afford to pay Scots the same pension as the UK unless he raised taxes, cut public spending, or increased immigration.”
Mr Davison, who sits on the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland’s pension committee, made his calculations using official figures referenced in the Scottish Government’s White Paper.
He agreed with SNP ministers that Scotland’s lower life expectancy may allow a lower state retirement age in the “very short term” but concluded this is “unlikely to be sustainable for very long”.
“The medium and longer term outlook appears much less favourable unless very significant additional worker population growth can be achieved and the associated implications effectively dealt with,” he said.
“Should the strategy prove unsuccessful then the result will undoubtedly be lower pensions or higher taxation costs to maintain pension levels.”
He said that currently each worker pays around £2,420 annually in tax towards the state pension but this would have to increase to £3,125, a rise of 30 per cent, without extra immigration.
According to the analysis, published on the website of Spence & Partners, his firm of actuaries, there are currently around three workers for each pensioner in both Scotland and the UK as a whole.
But by 2023 the “pensioner dependency ratio” in the remainder of the UK is projected to be 3.14 compared to 3.02 in Scotland thanks to lower projected growth in the working age population north of the Border.
To close the affordability gap with the UK, Mr Davison calculated a separate Scotland would need an extra 128,330 taxpaying workers.
This number would increase to 151,150 to make the state pension as affordable as it is now. By 2036, he predicted these totals would spiral to 272,200 and 599,200 respectively.
The analysis predicted there will be only 2.4 workers for every pensioner in Scotland by 2066 compared to 2.64 in the remainder of the UK.
Closing the cross-Border affordability gap would mean a separate Scotland finding an extra 301,420 workers.
Mr Davidson said this influx would have to increase to 1,091,650 if Scotland wanted to reach the same ratio of three workers for every pensioner that currently exists.
The Scottish Government argued last night that children should be included in the affordability calculations despite them neither paying taxes nor claiming a pension.
A spokesman said: “In an independent Scotland, pensions will be fully protected, paid in full and on time, as now, and the reality is pensions will be more affordable in an independent Scotland.”
Document TELUK00020140325ea3p000b8
