{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3042"}
____
  
News
Labour video portrays Cabinet as upper–class fools
Matthew Holehouse   
375 words
8 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
LABOUR has been accused of indulging in class warfare after releasing an election broadcast that portrays Conservative Cabinet ministers as yacht–owning, upper–class fools.
In a campaign video that parodies the science fiction film The Incredible Shrinking Man, Conservative ministers are portrayed as aloof toffs who do not know what the NHS is and are concerned only for bankers and their friends.
Labour has said David Cameron's government is for the "few at the top" and has sought to portray him as out of touch, but the advertisement marks a hardening of the campaign. Despite this, the party has said that it would not resort to "class war" by highlighting the privileged backgrounds of the Prime Minister and George Osborne, the Chancellor.
The film, titled The Uncredible Shrinking Man, attacks Nick Clegg as a diminished figure who accedes to every demand of Mr Cameron, who is portrayed as having a cut–glass accent and slicked hair.
The Deputy Prime Minister is portrayed as a naive idealist whose demand for "fairer" policies is rejected at a Cabinet meeting, causing him to shrink. Mr Cameron later feeds Mr Clegg crumbs of chocolate biscuits, before placing him in charge of his socks.
At one point Mr Cameron says, "Now, shall we lay off some NHS nurses?" to which a minister replies: "NHS?"
One minister exclaims: "In these times of austerity one should spare a thought for the wealthy." Another says: "I have a friend who is down to his last two yachts." A third adds: "Haven't our brave bankers suffered enough?"
The Incredible Shrinking Man was released in 1957, and starred Grant Williams as a businessman who shrinks after becoming enveloped in a radioactive cloud.
Henry Smith, the Tory MP for Crawley, said: "It is pretty pathetic and condescending to members of the public to try the tired old class–warfare message."
Ukip has been accused of hypocrisy after Eastern Europeans were paid to hand out fliers warning that immigrants pose a threat to British jobs. A company in Croydon, south London, hired Latvians to hand out fliers for the European elections. Gavin Barwell, the Tory MP, said: "Ukip's hypocrisy knows no bounds."
Document DT00000020140508ea580007n
