{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1872"}
____
  
NEWS
David Cameron confirms foreign nanny has become UK citizen; Spokesman says Prime Minister's Nepalese nanny epitomises 'those who want to work hard and get on'
By David Barrett and Georgia Graham   
453 words
6 March 2014
22:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
David Cameron has defended his family’s use of foreign nannies after the new immigration minister spoke of a “wealthy metropolitan elite" profiting from cheap overseas labour.
For several years the Camerons employed a Nepalese nanny who was then replaced by an Australian woman in 2012. Nick Clegg, meanwhile, admitted having a Belgian on his domestic staff.
The Prime Minister’s official spokesman on Thursday night confirmed the Camerons’ nanny has since become a British citizen.
“We have always said we want people who want to work hard and get on. Do we want the brightest and the best? Yes we do. And that would absolutely include, for example, Mr and Mrs Cameron’s nanny as someone who wants to work hard and get on," the spokesman said.
“As a result of coming to this country and working hard and getting on, she is now a British citizen."
Debate over the Cabinet’s use of foreign employees intensified as James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, launched a series of stinging criticisms of Vince Cable, his Liberal Democrat colleague, who he accused of “asserting falsehoods" on migration.
The Tory minister said: “Vince Cable said rising immigration is 'good news’. Well, I’ve news for him. Mass immigration puts pressure on social cohesion, on public services and infrastructure, and – yes – it can force down wages and displace local people from the job market.
“The winners are the haves like Vince, but the people who lose out are from working-class families, they’re ethnic minorities and recent immigrants themselves. Try telling them that rising immigration is good news."
He said Mr Cable had made “simply incorrect" claims about foreign students coming to Britain.
“He must read these statistics, so you have to wonder why he keeps asserting these falsehoods."
It emerged in October 2011 that Mr Cameron and his wife Samantha had hired a Nepalese nanny, Gita Lima, several years earlier and she moved with them from their home in Notting Hill, west London, to Downing Street after the general election.
In 2012 the Camerons hired a 24-year-old Australian, Sammi Strange, following a series of long-distance “video conference" interviews, to help with child care.
On his LBC radio phone-in, Mr Clegg disclosed that one member of his staff holds a Belgian passport.
On Thursday The Telegraph revealed in a preview of Mr Brokenshire窶冱 first speech as immigration minister, how he would say the benefits of immigration had gone to “employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour".
Document TELUK00020140307ea36000bf
