{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2750"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Merkel's visit is a chance to explain our EU vision
443 words
27 February 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
19
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
Angela Merkel's visit to Britain is historic. It falls in a year of significant anniversaries: 100 years since the outbreak of the First World War and 25 years since the Berlin Wall fell. Our guest embodies the new Germany. She was born in the communist East, is the country's first female chancellor and will become the first leader of a reunited Germany to address both Houses of Parliament.
This honour is an indication of how important Germany is in the modern EU, being by far the most successful economy in the eurozone. The country is also Britain's major ally in the effort to reform the EU. Certainly, German popular opinion favours change. A recent YouGov poll found that majorities in both the UK and Germany would like to see greater national control over migrants' access to benefits; police and criminal justice; and employment regulation. Sources in Berlin claim that Mrs Merkel is willing to grant "limited opt–outs" to Britain, as well as more flexibility in the implementation of regulations.
But there is also the potential for disagreement, for Mrs Merkel has criticised Euroscepticism and, on occasion, endorsed strengthening European institutions. If any diplomatic tension arises in the months to come it may be the result of differing ambitions and world–views. Mrs Merkel presumably expects Britain to push for a reformed EU, but a coherent and united EU none the less. In all likelihood, this is what David Cameron wants, too. After all, he has always said that he prefers Britain to stay in and will campaign for it to do so in a referendum.
But many Tory backbenchers, and most of the public, probably imagine that negotiations over the UK's relationship with the EU will result in Britain partially withdrawing from agreements that compromise its sovereignty too much – particularly on the issue of immigration. In some quarters, there is a growing vision of a nation that is part of the EU but which enjoys a status that serves its own interests. Germany would doubtless disapprove of such an arrangement.
The problem in all of this is that Mr Cameron has not actually laid out what he wants, and if he leaves it too long then he could disappoint the various parties involved.
All the while that the terms of renegotiation remain a mystery, expectations are raised – and the potential for misunderstanding builds. Germany, the Conservative Party and, most importantly, the British voters, need to know what Mr Cameron's vision for reform is, sooner rather than later.
Document DT00000020140227ea2r0004w
