{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1862"}
____
  
NEWS
Labour accuse No 10 of 'burying bad news' during Lawrence report; Raft of damaging stories are released as Home Secretary announces major inquiry into Stephen Lawrence and Metropolitan Police corruption
By Matthew Holehouse Political Correspondent   
537 words
6 March 2014
16:36
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Labour has accused the Government of burying bad news by releasing a series of damaging reports on the day the Home Secretary revealed Scotland Yard spied on the family of murdered teenager Stephen Lawrence.
A series of major reports into failing hospitals, immigration and a leaking nuclear reactor were released this morning, as Theresa May announced a public inquiry into “profoundly shocking" evidence the Metropolitan Police put the Lawrence family under surveillance.
Jon Ashworth, the shadow Cabinet Office minister, said: “David Cameron is up to his old tricks again - trying to pull the wool over people’s eyes by sneaking out a string of bad-news stories on the day the agenda is dominated by the shocking revelation that an undercover police officer spied on the family of Stephen Lawrence.
“The public will not be fooled by the Prime Minister’s underhand tactics."
In case you missed it: the rest of the news from Westminster
Immigrants didn窶冲 take British jobs
A Government report found “relatively little evidence" that migrant workers took jobs from Britons during the boom years.
A new analysis of immigration data suggests there has been “some labour market displacement" among “low-skilled natives" during the recession, but the impact is short-term.
There were claims the report had been buried because it undermined the Government’s drive to bring down immigration.
Ministers had cited previous research from the Migration Advisor Committee that 23 Britons were left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals from outside the EU.
Hospitals are still failing patients
Patients are waiting too long and suffer unacceptably poor outpatient care, experts have found in the first national report of a new NHS inspection regime.
Two thirds of outpatient services are overcrowded and have long queues, while A&E services are under strain and reliant on agency staff.
Nuclear submarine leak
HMS Vanguard, one of Britain’s nuclear Trident ballistic missile submarines, will be refuelled after a test reactor in Scotland was found to have an internal radiation leak.
Two years ago radiation was found around the cooling water at the test submarine reactor in Dounreay due to a breach in the cladding around the reactor’s core, the defence secretary told MPs. As a result HMS Vanguard’s reactor core will be replaced as a precaution at a cost of £120m.
Labour accused the Government of burying the news for two years. “Why is the House only being told today?" said shadow defence secretary Vernon Coaker.
Work programme provider fired
One provider under the payment-by-results work programme has been fired, employment minister Esther McVey told the Commons, while others have been told to improve their performance.
The contract in Yorkshire and The Humber, run by the Newcastle College Group, was found to be the lowest performing in 40 contract areas of Britain.
The bottom quarter of contracts, under a programme to find jobs for those out of work, have been told to put forward plans on how their performance can be improved.
Document TELUK00020140306ea36004pn
