{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"2223"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
There's no shame in employing skilled migrants
809 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
21
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Sunday Telegraph ESTABLISHED IN 1961
When Danny Alexander, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, appeared on the Today programme yesterday, he was asked a simple question: did he employ anyone from another country? First, he said that, yes, the Treasury does indeed employ talented people from all over the world. But that was not what the interviewer wanted to know. The real issue was, does Mr Alexander personally employ anyone from another country? "We use a brilliant British childminder," he said, "and a Portuguese lady occasionally comes into clean our home." There is nothing wrong about that, Mr Alexander insisted. But the awkward tone of his answers suggests that employing someone from overseas has become a potential political embarrassment.
It has been "revealed" that Theresa May, the Home Secretary, uses a Brazilian cleaner. Nick Clegg confessed on radio: "I have a lady who has a Belgian passport who helps us." Even the Prime Minister has owned up to employing domestic staff from Nepal and Australia since entering Downing Street. The former was hired from a charity that helps immigrant workers to escape from abusive bosses. None of this is illegal, none of this is unethical, none of this ought to cause shame. The only reason it is controversial is that James Brokenshire, the new Home Office minister, said last week that mass immigration works largely to the benefit of the "wealthy metropolitan elite". The losers are "manual and low-skilled workers who have to compete with an influx of people from poorer countries who are willing to work for less".
Mr Brokenshire should have known that he was setting his party up for a fall when he made that remark. He had been appointed to replace an immigration minister who was forced to resign after it was discovered that his foreign-born cleaner did not have all the right paperwork. Tories cannot talk too casually about the malign effects of the "wealthy metropolitan elite" because so many of the Conservative members of Cabinet can be counted among their number.
Moreover, the idea that employing foreign-born staff is an elitist thing to do is nonsense. Many middle-class Britons hire plumbers, cleaners or builders from overseas. Many businesses could not function without them. The contribution of these hard-working people to the economy is invaluable, and often their British employers are helping them to escape a life of poverty. A great number of those employers will also be Tory voters, and very surprised to discover that they have graduated to membership of the aristocracy just by having a Polish gardener visit them once a week.
Yet again, the Conservative Party has blundered into offending its own base by a foolish attempt to chase the zeitgeist. On this occasion, Mr Brokenshire's remarks are part of a "white van man" strategy to woo Labour's workingclass voters or those tempted by Ukip. The immigration issue is a legitimate one: there is evidence that mass immigration displaced some British workers during the recession. But populism of this variety is rarely helpful when it comes to forming coherent, sensible policy. It can mask some of the complexities of the issue. Nigel Farage has said that immigration has "jollified" Britain. More than that, it has enhanced our national culture and helped us to grow the economy. But it does have consequences. Labour promised us, when it opened our labour market up to Eastern Europe, that it would result in just a trickle of newcomers. Instead, millions poured in, placing new strains on already overstrained hospitals and schools. In other words, we do not need to stop immigration. We need to control it better. That should be the substance of Tory policy.
Current policy is clearly not working. Mr Cameron pledged to reduce net immigration to the "tens of thousands" but figures for 2012-2013 show it rising to more than 200,000. As Liam Fox, the former defence secretary, wrote in this newspaper last Sunday, talking about "net migration" (those coming in balanced against those going out) obscures the raw data, the actual number entering the country; it is that figure which overloads public services. As Dr Fox put it: "There needs to be a clearer narrative on immigration, stressing not only the need to restrict numbers, but also to determine which individuals, with what skills, enter our country."
Getting the terms of the debate right is important. Otherwise, we end up with the sort of discussion about who employs whom, and from where, that Mr Alexander called "poisonous" in his anxious interview. Immigration will be a dominant issue in the 2015 election, and voters will reward those who are straightforward about the statistics and offer serious proposals for better management of our borders. Tory class warfare will not work.
Document STEL000020140309ea3900068
