{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"907"}
____
  
News; Opinion; Columns
Not racist, just sick of being ignored
CAROLE MALONE   
631 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; National
25
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
OK, so UKIP have got more than their fair share of nutters. There's the racists, the homophobes, the misogynists. They also have blokes who say they really like women but only if they're scrubbing a floor or giving them a good seeing to. But pop into any Tory Party fringe meeting in the Home Counties and you'll hear armies of old boys coming out with exactly that kind of offensive tosh.
However, in the weeks leading up to the Euro elections, and when Farage and his party are getting even more flak than usual, the question we have to ask ourselves is why do UKIP have such huge support in this country? Why are their poll ratings sky high despite the slew of embarrassing stories? Why is it predicted they'll take 38 per cent of the vote at this month's Euro elections even though they've been slated as a racist party? And more importantly - why do people who aren't racist support them? And the answer's simple. For years the British people have been bullied by all the mainstream parties who decreed that anyone who dared question immigration or voiced concerns about it should be branded a bigot. And they're sick of it. They're sick of being told that if they complain about our housing lists, our schools and health services being at breaking point, that's also racist.
They're sick of being told that being worried about immigration makes them disgusting people. And they're sick of being lectured about immigration by parties who flung open this country's doors not because they gave a damn about immigrants, but as a cynical ploy to grab votes. But the real tragedy here is that for decades the British have welcomed people to these shores. They were glad to give them opportunities they didn't have in their own countries, not to mention a safe haven if they needed one.
They were rightly proud of their own compassion and kindness.
But that changed when their hospitality and their compassion was abused. When successive governments gave priority to the needs of newcomers over those born here or already living and working here. When British jobs were sold cheap to Eastern European immigrants willing to work for a pittance. But especially when politicians began slating people's concerns about all of that as racist. The British people aren't and never have been racist but you can't keep telling them they are and be surprised when they tell you to shove it come election time.
Farage has tapped into that anger. Instead of insulting the electorate he tells them they're right to be worried. That controlled immigration isn't racist. That they aren't disgusting for wanting to limit the numbers coming here.
What Farage is doing to get people on side isn't rocket science, yet the sense of it is lost on mainstream parties who only now - when it's too late - have realised that branding huge swathes of the population as bigots when they're not has cost them votes.
Yes, UKIP attracts nut jobs and racists.
Yes, what some of its members say IS foul and offensive (but mostly stupid). But that's not putting people off. Nothing sticks to Farage and our three main parties have only themselves to blame for that.
And whatever success UKIP has is thanks to the arrogance of those parties. And only when their politicians start listening to and respecting the British people's needs might they get some of that respect back in the form of votes.
Branding people bigots when they're not costs the main parties votes
Document SMIRR00020140504ea54000ae
