{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"656"}
____
  
News
Our £2m bill to kick illegals out of Greece
Anil Dawar   
368 words
10 March 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
5
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
BRITAIN is splashing out £2million of taxpayers' money trying to persuade hundreds of asylum seekers and illegal immigrants to return home - before they enter the UK.
Foreigners caught coming across the EU's furthest border in Greece are being offered free flights home.
The Assisted Voluntary Return and Reintegration project, backed by the Home Office and Foreign Office, is paying to persuade 1,500 illegal immigrants - at an average of £1,300 each - to return to their countries.
Whitehall officials will not say how they identify those to benefit from payouts but claimed the scheme will target migrants from "high risk" countries such as India, Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Though the Home Office denied that anyone returned would be given cash to use in their native land, a pilot funded by the department in 2012 saw migrants handed hundreds of pounds each as well as plane tickets home.
Britain already contributes to beefing up Greece's immigration controls through its work with the EU's border agency Frontex.
About 90 per cent of all illegal migrants into the EU come across the border between Greece and Turkey.
Alp Mehmet, of MigrationWatch UK, said: "What we are effectively doing here is providing £2million in aid to another EU state to remove illegal immigrants from its own territory. It is straight out of the theatre of the absurd."
The Government claims the scheme will avoid costly legal battles once the migrants arrive in Britain.
In 2011, it emerged the Home Office paid out almost £80million in resettlement grants at a rate of £1.2million a month to 21,506 people who reached the UK. The Assisted Voluntary Return programme in the UK gives up to £2,000 of "in kind" support for those willing to return home without appealing against removal.
This latest Greek scheme was announced in Athens a fortnight ago by British ambassador John Kittmer.
The project is run by the International Organisation for Migration, a body that organises migrant removals for governments globally.
A Home Office spokesman said: "The purpose of this project is to save British taxpayers money by preventing illegal migration to this country."
Document THEEXP0020140310ea3a0004h
