{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3616"}
____
  
NEWS
Two cities the size of Leeds needed to house new migrants; Prediction likely to put further pressure on David Cameron to deliver on pledge to reduce levels of net migration to tens of thousands
By Steven Swinford Senior Political Correspondent   
558 words
23 February 2014
21:34
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Two cities the size of Leeds will be needed to accommodate a new generation of immigrants over the next decade, official figures indicate, amid fears that new arrivals are pushing up house prices.
An analysis by the independent House of Commons library has found that over the next decade, migrants will be responsible for 629,000 new households, equivalent to one in three formed in England.
The analysis will put further pressure on David Cameron to deliver on his pledge to reduce levels of net migration to “tens of thousands" by the next election after restrictions on Bulgarian and Romanian migrants were lifted.
Senior Conservative ministers including Theresa May, the Home Secretary, and Nick Boles, the planning minister, have raised concerns in the past that uncontrolled migration will push up house prices.
Alp Mehmet, vice-chairman of MigrationWatch, said: “It is entirely logical that mass migration will have an impact on house prices. If you get demand going up while supply remains stationary, house prices will rise.
“The higher the prices, the more young people and first-time buyers are going to find it difficult to get their own place.
“I think the political classes haven’t factored in the impact on housing. If you look at particular areas like London and the South East the pressure is even greater because so much migration takes place into those areas."
A total of 1.8 million people have come to Britain since 2004, with net migration peaking at 250,000 in 2010. Immigrants are estimated to have formed the equivalent of 795,000 households, two thirds more than in the previous decade.
The House of Commons Library
forecasts that between 2011 and 2021 a further 1.4 million migrants will come to Britain, forming the equivalent of 629,000 households. There are 320,000 households in Leeds.
James Clappison, the Conservative MP and member of the home affairs select committee who requested the research, said: “Labour pursued an open door immigration policy and gave no thought to the consequences. The worry must be that a future Labour government will do that again."
Carlos Vargas-Silva, a senior researcher at Oxford University’s Migration Observatory, said the arrival of new migrants could push up house prices.
He added that new migrants were likely to push up rental costs, and boost the buy-to-let market, meaning there would be fewer houses for sale.
He said: “Most migrants when they arrive in the country rent, and that is where the main impact is. Indirectly, this could have an effect on house prices because it encourages people to buy to let. Over the long term, if migrants stay then they are more likely to buy houses and potentially put pressure on the housing market.
“The increase in the rents may displace British nationals. They may end up going into social housing because the price of rent is too high."
According to the figures, which are based on forecasts provided by the Office for National Statistics, immigrants will form 629,000 of the 2.2 million new households between 2011 and 2021.
Document TELUK00020140224ea2n000rt
