{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"78"}
____
  
NEWS
CBI tells Salmond his independence plans 'don't add up'
By Auslan Cramb and Hamish Macdonell   
801 words
26 March 2014
06:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Business leaders deliver damning critique of SNP White Paper on separation
Britain’s biggest business organisation has delivered a withering assessment of Scottish independence with a warning that Alex Salmond’s blueprint for the break-up of Britain “does not add up”.
The Confederation of British Industry, whose members employ 500,000 people in Scotland, said the SNP White Paper on independence ignored the need for deficit reduction and promised at least pounds670 million of “unfunded” spending commitments.
John Cridland, director general of the CBI, also warned that the “lack of clarity” in the document could put the future success of a separate Scotland in jeopardy.
In a critique that condemns almost every part of the SNP blueprint, the confederation also appeals to Mr Salmond to come up with a “Plan B” on currency following Westminster’s refusal to share the pound.
The CBI response to the White Paper is the latest in a series of business warnings about the perils of independence.
Standard Life, one of Scotland’s most successful companies, said earlier this year that it was preparing contingency plans to move some operations to England in the event of a Yes vote in September.
However, the CBI’s all-out attack was being seen at Holyrood as one of the most significant interventions by business leaders so far, partly because of the size of the organisation and partly because of the hard-hitting tone.
Mr Cridland said the business case for independence was deeply flawed because independence would introduce new barriers to trade.
He added: “The minute you draw a line between Gretna and Berwick, Scotland starts to drift apart from its biggest market and loses a significant amount of economic clout.
“The economic plan outlined in the White Paper does not add up. It ignores the need for deficit reduction, instead promising more unfunded spending.
“On the key issues that are critical to jobs and growth, the White Paper’s lack of clarity runs the risk of jeopardising an independent Scotland’s future success.
“Independence would force Scotland’s major industries to grapple with two lots of red tape and lead to Scots facing higher borrowing costs on loans, mortgages and credit cards.”
He added that a separate Scotland would also have to “negotiate hard” to get back into the EU and would temporarily lose access to the world's biggest trade area.
The report warns that:
• Independence would leave Scotland with a larger deficit than the rest of the UK
• The best currency option for Scotland is to keep the pound, but the only way to do that is to reject independence
• Separation would lead to increased costs for businesses and consumers on both sides of the border
• Scots would have to pay higher mortgage repayments while credit card debts and loans would cost more to service
Alistair Darling, leader of the Better Together campaign, welcomed the report and said recent warnings about the risks of separation from Scotland’s largest employers, like Standard Life, RBS, shipbuilders, Shell and BP, made clear that independence would cost jobs for thousands of Scots.
He added: “The CBI is right to call for Alex Salmond to set out a Plan B on currency. A currency union isn’t going to happen, as it would be bad for Scotland and for the continuing UK.
“The idea that Scots can go to the polls blind on this most fundamental issue simply isn’t credible.”
The CBI response adds: "Our conclusion is that the White Paper does not offer a coherent vision for how or why an independent Scotland would be better off from erecting barriers between itself and its biggest export market.
"The loss of many of the strengths of the union would open the nation to a higher risk from economic shocks. Independence would be a major economic upheaval with uncertain consequences.”
A spokesman for Nicola Sturgeon, the Deputy First Minister, said the paper misrepresented the realities of independence in several key respects, and an independent Scotland would still enjoy “barrier-free trade” with the rest of the UK.
He added: "The CBI recognises the Scottish economy has key strengths, and that we are one of the wealthiest countries per head in the world, but for some reason this one-sided report ignores the positive impact of growth policies in Scotland's Future, such as giving Scottish business a competitive tax advantage, cutting air passenger duty, a sensible immigration policy, plans to transform childcare and grow the working population, increase the number of women on company boards and a range of levers necessary to counter the massively unbalanced nature of Westminster economic policy-making which favours London and the south-east of England.?
Document TELUK00020140326ea3q0008d
