{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3680"}
____
  
NEWS
Expenses scandal helped to create 'the next Nigel Farage'
By By Peter Dominiczak Assistant Political Editor   
944 words
22 May 2014
12:51
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Chris Wood, Ukip's parliamentary candidate in Gosport and a potential future party leader, was working for a Conservative during the MPs' expenses scandal
Five years ago, perhaps the most egregious example of an MP fiddling their expenses helped to create one of the rising stars of the UK Independence Party.
Chris Wood, 24, was a young Tory activist doing work experience in the parliamentary office of Sir Peter Viggers, the former MP for Gosport, when The Daily Telegraph disclosed that he had spent £1,645 of taxpayers’ money on a 5ft duck house for his garden.
That infamous event helped to push Mr Wood out of the Conservatives and into the welcoming arms of Nigel Farage and Ukip.
Mr Wood, the son of a Falklands veteran and a former Navy trainee, is now the party’s parliamentary candidate for Sir Peter’s former seat and has spearheaded the local and European elections campaign in the area.
Some tip Mr Wood as a future Ukip leader. Mr Farage calls him “extremely talented” and says that he is “going to go a long way in Ukip”.
“I worked on work experience for two weeks with Peter Viggers just as the duck house scandal broke,” Mr Wood said. “I was there as it broke. I saw his reaction. I was there when Cameron asked him to pay back the money.”
He added: “You sat there thinking, ‘hang on, we elect these people who have no interest in some of the constituents. It was clear that some of the Conservatives were not interested in their constituents. You saw how some of them looked down their noses at some of the letters they received. It put me off.”
Asked if being an eye-witness to the duck house scandal taught him “what not to do in politics”, Mr Wood said: “Absolutely. That’s why I’m very pleased we don’t claim travel expenses.”
Mr Farage believes that that young, popular candidates like Mr Wood show that descriptions of Ukip as “a one-man band” are a “deliberate, wilful, total misunderstanding” of the party.
Both Mr Farage and Mr Wood are predicting a “political earthquake” at the elections in Gosport, one of a set of south-coast constituencies Ukip believes it can dominate.
However, although it looks certain that Ukip will dominate the European polls, beating the Conservatives and potentially Labour into first place, the local elections could be a different story.
Local Conservatives insist that recent allegations of racism and homophobia from Ukip candidates across the country are damaging the party’s chances.
Mark Hook, the Conservative leader of the council, said: “People are a bit more discerning and they recognise the difference between the European elections, where people want to do a protest, but locally they are voting for the candidate or party that they believe will do the best job.
“What we’re seeing is that we’re picking up the local vote but not the European ones.
“Over the last couple of days [voters] have reconsidered what they are doing. Before, Ukip was always held up to be squeaky clean but now the pressure has got to them a bit more and exposed them for what they are.”
Peter Edgar, a Conservative councillor, added: “It started off pretty badly with quite a number of people saying that this time they were going to vote Ukip.
“But for whatever reason that seems to have tailed off. I can only assume that some Ukip councillors getting into trouble, that does seem to be having an affect on the attitude of the electorate.”
However, Mr Wood is undeterred and predicts that Ukip will pick up a number of seats and will go on to win a number of seats in Parliament in 2015.
Gosport has a strong military presence. With naval bases nearby and battle ships dominating the view from the bottom of the high street, Mr Wood said that voters in the area are concerned that immigration is changing the culture of the area.
“This is quite a traditional area because of the Naval links, the MoD links,” he said. “There are large-scale cultural changes, people coming in who can’t speak the language is a problem. People feel uncomfortable when people don’t come in and learn the language. [They] think that’s wrong.
“Even if you walk down the high-street now you find people who are talking the language they were brought up with in the individual countries they come from.”
Asked to name the countries where people are migrating from, Mr Wood said: “Well, in all fairness I…I know there is some who have come over from Turkey. But, yes, Eastern Europe. I couldn’t name the individual countries I’m afraid because I just don’t know. But yes, eastern Europeans have come quite a bit and that does cause some unrest especially if you have such a high level of unemployment in the area.”
As Mr Wood and Ray Finch, the local Ukip leader and an MEP candidate for the South East, walked through the local streets a number of locals voiced their support.
One female pensioner, however, urged the pair to “take control of some of the people in the party”.
Asked about the allegations of racism, Mr Wood said: “It’s very unfair. We’re not a racist party at all. It’s a shame you even have to ask the question, quite frankly, because it’s not true. If it was true I wouldn’t be a member.”
Document TELUK00020140522ea5m002jp
