{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3821"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: THE WEEK IN BOOKS: Thatcher and the Orwell prize; a literary revenge; Write, Decorate, Sell
Alison Flood John Dugdale   
1,365 words
26 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
5
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
✒ Charles Moore's authorised biography of Margaret Thatcher has been shortlisted for the Orwell prize, the prestigious literary award for political writing set up in honour of George Orwell.
The award, which aims to reward the book that comes closest to Orwell's ambition "to make political writing into an art", had already drawn fire for its longlisting of the rightwing journalist's biography of the late former prime minister, with Conrad Landin suggesting in the Independent that Orwell would have had "cutting words" about a prize "heaping laurels on establishment figures who write about fashionable establishment subjects", instead of rewarding writers who "say the unsayable". But the director of the prize, Jean Seaton said she had "lost count of the number of people who come up to me and wag their fingers and say they know Orwell would be turning in his grave about this or that".
"Orwell was never one for not noticing reality, and she mattered," Seaton said of Thatcher, and Moore's biography. "I think he would say that the book is incredibly adept and sharp and astute about her. Personally, I think it is an extraordinary book, a psychological insight into her, although just at the end he arrives on the side of her politics."
Orwell, Seaton speculated, "would have read [the biography] but what he would have thought of it I don't know. That's the thing about Orwell - he is not predictable. And I'm not going to let Orwell be captured by some parts of the political spectrum. He was a radical, both in his ideas and his extraordinary integrity."
Moore's biography is competing for the pounds 3,000 award with former home secretary Alan Johnson's memoir of his childhood, This Boy, and David Goodhart's controversial claim that mass immigration is damaging, The British Dream. The prize shortlist is completed with James Fergusson's in-depth look at Somalia, The World's Most Dangerous Place, Gaiutra Bahadur's Coolie Woman, the journalist's pursuit of her great-grandmother's story - a pregnant woman who sailed from India to Guyana as a "coolie" in 1903 - and Frank Dikotter's history of the Chinese revolution, The Tragedy of Liberation
The six books were chosen from 235 entries by judges Sue MacGregor, Robert McCrum and Trevor Phillips, with the winner to be announced on 21 May.
The shortlist:
Coolie Woman by Gaiutra Bahadur (Hurst)
The Tragedy of Liberation by Frank Dikotter (Bloomsbury)
The World's Most Dangerous Place
by James Fergusson
(Bantam)
The British Dream by David Goodhart (Atlantic)
This Boy by Alan Johnson
(Bantam)
Margaret Thatcher: The Authorised Biography by Charles Moore
(Allen Lane)
Alison Flood
✒Literature about literature is booming. The early months of 2014 alone have seen novels depicting Thomas Hardy (by Christopher Nicholson), Mr and Mrs Hemingway (Naomi Wood), Nuala O'Faolain (Hugo Hamilton), Baudelaire (James MacManus), the Blakes and the Mandelstams (David Park), Conan Doyle (Valerie Martin) and EM Forster (Damon Galgut). John Banville produced a homage to Raymond Chandler, Val McDermid an affectionate update of Jane Austen.
Among the highest profile titles have been a memoir-like "novel" about the life of a novelist (Karl Ove Knausgaard's A Death in the Family), and a novel about a novelist researching a biography of a novelist, generally assumed to be based on VS Naipaul (Hanif Kureishi's The Last Word
Soon joining this festival of self-consciousness will be Edward St Aubyn's Lost for Words, which, like Howard Jacobson's most recent novel Zoo Time - published after he surprised himself by winning the Booker, but conceived and at least partly written before then - is an act of revenge on the book world.
A Booker shortlistee (unlucky to lose, many felt) with Mother's Milk in 2006, who then saw At Last omitted even from the longlist in 2011, St Aubyn constructs a farce centring on the judges of the Elysian prize: bored backbench MP Malcolm, Oxford English don Vanessa, civil servant and thriller writer Penny, actor Tobias and columnist Jo.
Though St Aubyn is careful to include details that prevent one-to-one correspondence, the models are not hard to identify. Ex-MP Chris Mullin was the 2011 judge who voiced a bias in favour of books that "zip along", and Stella Rimington - formerly of MI5 rather than, like Penny, the Foreign Office - chaired that year's notorious panel. (St Aubyn seems to feel comparatively little need to conceal the fact that he's caricaturing her, and includes ruthless parodies of her Liz Carlyle thrillers).
The character of Tobias nods to the choice of Dan Stevens as a judge in 2012, while Vanessa can't fail to recall - in her job and probably her insistence on literary values, though not in other respects - Oxford don and former English professor Hermione Lee, who chaired the panel that picked Kiran Desai, and not St Aubyn, in 2006.
Only Jo lacks an obvious referent, as female columnists have judged other prizes but not the Booker: the novelist may, though, have in mind Susan Hill, a combative commentator on book issues who was a member of Rimington's team.
In ridiculing these thinly disguised figures, who in the course of the novel are subjected either to public humiliation or private pain, St Aubyn adds his name to a British tradition of literary revenge that includes giving a series of murder victims the names of theatre critics (Simon Gray), fooling a rival biographer with a fake letter (Bevis Hillier feuding with AN Wilson), naming a goat (Jilly Cooper's Chisolm, a whack at Anne Chisholm) or a pair of crooks (DJ Taylor's Davenport and Hines, hitting back at Richard Davenport-Hines) after hostile reviewers, or turning a disobliging interviewer into a frumpy, boozy hackette, as portrayed by Melvyn Bragg not long after being profiled by Lynn Barber. Probably not before, though, have prize judges been the targets.
John Dugdale
✒Elizabeth Gilbert (pictured) is selling her house in New Jersey, offering her fans an appetising opportunity to play a part in the inevitable follow-up memoir to Eat, Pray, Love, and so potentially become a character in the hit Julia Roberts movie's sequel. On a dedicated website called Eat, Pray, Crib, Gilbert deploys all her gifts for gush in depicting the nine-room "mini-estate" (confusingly described as "Italianate Victorian" in style) as so perfect that her need to move is puzzling.
Apparently it's so she and Jose - the Brazilian importer who provides the book with its happy ending, played by Javier Bardem in the film - can live closer to Two Buttons, their "pan-Asian emporium" in Frenchtown, NJ, which is so called because the two "lifelong travellers" were told by "a priest in Laos that we had so much love for life that we needed nothing more than two buttons in our pockets to get by in this world".
Happily, her subsequent book and film earnings mean the priest's words will never have to be tested, and the house sale - asking price: $999,000 - will take her further away from her years as a restless, far from affluent nomad hunting for a guy and a guru. Judging by Gilbert's paean to the property, though, it seems if anything to be underpriced: among its attractions are a 500-bottle wine cellar, a "chef's kitchen", a "powder room [with] an automated Japanese toilet-bidet and an exotic Balinese lava stone sink", and above all an attic "Skybrary" ("handcrafted for me over three years by a master woodworker") that is "too magical to be described".
What may surprise admirers with a spare million dollars, however, is the lack of dedicated spaces for spiritual activity - there's no shrine, and even yoga is only catered for in a brisk mention of a "tastefully designed workout/yoga/home gym area". Religion seems unlikely to figure in the title of Gilbert's next autobiographical volume, though it may be too cynical to guess that it might be called Write, Decorate, Sell. JD
Document GRDN000020140426ea4q0001k
