{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1560"}
____
Guardian Home Pages
Anne Perkins: Analysis Lib Dem turns from insurgent to insider
583 words
27 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
7
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Four years ago, Nick Clegg was the fresh-faced outsider with an almost invisibly low recognition factor. Last night in the LBC Europe debate he was the deputy prime minister with an approval rating of -40.
It was the moment when Clegg had to overcome his personal unpopularity enough to persuade people that the debate about Europe had to be more nuanced than a brawl about immigration and human rights.
On a personal level, it was a contest between insider and insurgent, the minister v the bloke at the bar. Given the current popularity of politicians, the result was a bit of a no-brainer.
But the latest polls are showing a small lead for staying in Europe rather than coming out. And whatever you think of his politics, Clegg is a class performer who can frame a decent argument. He knows the facts and he knows Brussels.
The trouble is that in an argument about Europe, that's not what most people who are engaged in it want to listen for. Those who want to come out, want to come out much more than those who want to stay in, want to stay in. And voters are not ready to forgive Clegg his tuition fee treachery. So in YouGov's instant poll on the rival performances, he was trounced, the vote going almost 2 to 1 against him.
Ukip supporters immediately declared Nigel Farage the unchallenged leader of British Euroscepticism. The debate had hard lessons for all the main parties. David Cameron will be disappointed but not surprised that Conservative supporters preferred UKIP and Farage by 3 to 1 over Clegg. Labour, whose position on Europe is close to indistinguishable from the Lib Dems, will be much more dismayed to find their vote split almost evenly between the two men.
That's not only Cleggophobia. Those figures fit with Manchester University research about where Ukip support comes from: working class Labour "left behind" voters - older white men - in northern cities, many of whom report they voted Tory at the last election and have transferred across to Ukip.
The hour long debate was blunt, sometimes verging on brutal and it sometimes sounded as if Farage and Clegg were engaged in separate conversations. They were talking to different audiences, mainly their own supporters, in language that resonated comfortably with their prejudices.
Farage has a deep seam of outsider rebelliousness to mine. He can tap into popular discontent on issues like the refusal to hold a referendum, where Clegg can only defend his position with detail. It is the same on free movement of labour. Prejudice is invariably resistant to fact. That is one explanation for Farage's big lead in the popular vote despite looking hot and bothered as he was pressed to explain some of the wilder claims he and his party have asserted as fact.
Clegg tried to capitalise on a weakness he had anticipated. He came armed with a poster bearing last year's UKIP bonkers by-election claim that 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians were queuing to come into the UK, a million more than the entire population of both countries. Farage ended the debate with the astounding assertion that Europe had blood on its hands over the Ukraine. That's one that might make his supporters wonder whether he really is any judge at all of the merits of the case for Britain in the EU.
Document GRDN000020140326ea3r000bq
