{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1904"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Will voters swallow Clegg's sausage strategy?
ISABEL HARDMANT   
884 words
7 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
18
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Having spent months placing blame, the Lib Dems' latest wheeze is to take the credit
Do you remember the Liberal Democrats' "sausage machine"? This was something Nick Clegg used to talk about in the days when his party wasn't quite so obsessed with disagreeing with everyone else on almost every policy. The idea was that politicians should be grown–up enough to give the voters an insight into the gory details of the different ideas and disagreements that had gone into a policy, before it emerged as a fully formed government position. They could see which bits the Lib Dems had suggested, which the Tories preferred, then decide for themselves who to praise – or blame.
Over the past couple of months, however, the two parties have spent most of their time accusing each other of peddling dodgy ingredients. Yesterday, they were locking horns on immigration: Nick Clegg and Vince Cable accused the Tories of pandering to Ukip, even as the Tories accused them of being part of an out–oftouch "metropolitan elite". Indeed, on issues from Ofsted to climate change, the Lib Dems have so many manufactured rows ready that they almost need a grid to space them out. As a result, animosity is brewing, with arguments between some ministers becoming so personal that the temptation to leak details is too much to resist.
Now, though, the Lib Dems are going to try something different: they want to remind voters not just that the Coalition sausage still has its tasty bits, but that it's the Lib Dems' recipe that's responsible. This weekend, at their spring conference in York, the party will focus on Europe and tax. Clegg's thoughts on the former have been well rehearsed, particularly since he challenged Nigel Farage to a public debate. But he also wants to point out that it was a Lib Dem idea to raise the personal tax allowance to £10,000 – a policy the Tories are shamelessly claiming credit for, since their polling shows most voters have no idea about Clegg and co's role.
But there are other successes the Lib Dems want to flag up. A source close to Nick Clegg cites the "City Deals" to promote self–government; help with local infrastructure funding; and various pieces of greenery. These, he says, were "all Nick's ideas and wouldn't have happened without us in government. This is what we're about: regional policies, local government, that's all Lib Dem stuff." It also sounds suspiciously like what the Tories call "localism", but never mind.
What do their Coalition partners make of all this positioning? Well, they claim to be deeply amused by such credit–hogging – one adviser even calls it "quite cute". "Cleggy can talk all he likes," adds a senior minister. "He's so keen to get on the radio now that his words are like a currency that has suffered hyperinflation."
Yet in reality, they're more nervous than they seem. For instance, the Tories are very keen to ensure that just because Mr Clegg oversees the department responsible for the City Deals, he doesn't get to announce them all. For one thing, doling out goodies is the fun bit of government. For another, such sweeteners are rather helpful if you have marginal seats in the area concerned.
Claiming credit for their successes also helps the Lib Dems make their case to wavering voters. Party officials might joke privately about Mr Alexander being a bit too Toryish at times. But George Osborne's deputy has recently beefed up his own team – and is increasingly vocal about the Conservative policies that he's blocked, such as tax cuts for higher earners. Indeed, the Lib Dems' strategists view this kind of thing as hugely important in wooing soft Tory and Labour voters. Neither group trusts Labour with the economy – and the party's polling shows that having a minister tackling deficit reduction who has stayed united with his Coalition partners, in what one aide rather effusively describes as a "Gladstonian manner", helps convince them that it's safe to vote Lib Dem.
I understand that in his speech at the conference on Saturday, Mr Alexander will step things up a notch, claiming that the "DNA of the recovery" is a Lib Dem one. The focus, alongside the beloved personal tax allowance, will be on measures such as the British Business Bank, the expansion of apprenticeships, and deregulation (though you can bet on at least one speaker droning on about Lib Dems' victory in blocking the "fire at will" proposals in the Beecroft Report two years ago).
The question about the sausage strategy is whether the party's target audience will notice the Lib Dems' accomplishments in the kitchen – or whether they will have heard so many complaints about the dodgy things the Tories try to slip in that they refuse to give them the benefit of the doubt. The party's strategists think it's perfectly possible to claim credit for the tasty bits of government while complaining about the Tory gristle – but whether the voters will swallow it, we'll have to wait and see.
Comment on Isabel Hardman's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140307ea370005n
