{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2953"}
____
  
Features
MOVIES
Eleanor Relf   
683 words
10 May 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
27
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
YOUR ULTIMATE GUIDE TO THE BEST FILMS
FILM OF THE WEEK
HARRY POTTER AND THE ORDER OF THE PHOENIX TUESDAY 7.30PM ITV ****
Pottermania casts another spell on ITV with the fifth instalment, and the battle between Harry (Daniel Radcliffe, left) and Voldemort is hotting up. The Ministry of Magic denies rumours of the baddie's return, but Harry senses one hell of a ding-dong brewing. Imelda Staunton also joins in the fun.
FREEVIEW
THE DAMNED UNITED WEDNESDAY 9PM BBC4 ****
Professional chameleon Michael Sheen (above) turns himself into legendary football manager Brian Clough in this biopic - and he does it with aplomb. It's the tale of Clough's short reign at Leeds United, and his fierce rivalry with fellow manager Don Revie (Colm Meaney). Jim Broadbent and Timothy Spall also star in a brilliantly scripted and acted piece that's totally engrossing, even for non-footie fans.
TV MAGAZINE TALKS TO... BRYAN CRANSTON
You play a scientist in Godzilla, but do you get to do any action scenes?
Oh yeah, I do, I see some action. Some hot scientist action! Some scientist on scientist action. You can't miss it. Sometimes there's some three-way scientist action. Oh yeah.
Do you get close to Godzilla?
He's usually back in his trailer. That guy is such an asshole. I gotta tell you, when he gets on the set, he really delivers, so I see why he keeps coming back to make movie after movie, because he's good. He's just a p***k.
What's it like to say the word "Godzilla"?
I haven't said the word. I'm not allowed to. There was a lot of secrecy about the whole thing. Early on, they were calling the film Nautilus, so I'm going through Canadian immigration getting my paperwork, and the guy was very efficient. "What are you working on?" "A movie." "What's the name of the movie?" "Nautilus." His eyes went up. "You mean Godzilla?" "Yeah." Even he knew.
How exciting is it to be in this film?
I love Godzilla. As a boy I loved Godzilla more than King Kong because he just destroyed everything without any apologies.
How was it pretending to look at a monster when it's added by computers after filming?
We see a laser pointer. Imagination is all part of an actor's bag anyway. If you don't have personal experience, imagine it. I think it was easier for my generation, because in the back seat of a car there was nothing to do, you had to just daydream. I never thought that my extensive daydreaming catalogue would come in handy someday. I wonder if this new generation that has instant entertainment will fully develop an imagination?
How was working with your co-star, French actress Juliette Binoche?
She plays my wife, and I rewrote a lovemaking scene and submitted that. You know, just some backstory for our characters. It didn't make it into the script, so then I suggested: "You wanna work on the scene outside of the set?!"
GODZILLA IS IN CINEMAS FROM THURSDAY
STAYING IN
DVD OF THE WEEK
12 Years A Slave (Out Monday) ****
It did the triple of Oscar/Golden Globe/BAFTA this year - a glowing endorsement of how good this film, about a man who's brutally enslaved, really is. Harrowing, but excellent.
BOX SET OF THE WEEK
The Trip and The Trip To Italy (Out Monday) ****
If you can overcome your jealousy of Steve Coogan and Rob Brydon spending two series eating gourmet food and bantering for Britain, this is a gently hilarious sitcom.
GOING OUT
IN CINEMAS THIS WEEK
THE TWO FACES OF JANUARY (OUT FRIDAY) ***
American Rydal (Oscar Isaac) is living in Athens when he meets glamorous couple Chester (Viggo Mortensen) and Colette (Kirsten Dunst). When Chester is involved in a murder, the trio must flee. Sun-drenched and beautiful, but lacks the edge of a true thriller.
Bryan plays nuclear scientist Joe Brody in a reimagining of the classic sea monster tale Godzilla
Document THESUN0020140510ea5a000kd
