{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3374"}
____
  
NEWS
Labour needs a straight-talking, pint-drinking man, says Gillian Duffy
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent in The Baum Pub, Rochdale   
511 words
17 May 2014
01:01
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Rochdale voter whom Gordon Brown branded a 'bigoted woman' likes Nigel Farage's style of politics. But has he won her vote?
Labour needs a "straight-talking leader" who is comfortable drinking a pint if the party is to reconnect with working class voters and reverse its slide in the polls, the woman who torpedoed Gordon Brown's re-election chances had said.
Gillian Duffy said that Mr Miliband is a "privileged" career politician who lacks the authenticity of Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader.
The Rochdale pensioner's comments come four years after she was called a "bigoted woman" by Mr Brown after she questioned him on immigration issues in the closing stages of the last election campaign.
With a year to go to the next general election, working class northern voters like Mrs Duffy are seen as a key target for all parties.
Recent polls have Labour behind the Conservatives for the first time in two years.
Meanwhile, Ukip are targeting Labour's electoral heartland in the North where Mr Farage says the established parties are failing to connect with ordinary people.
Mrs Duffy said that Mr Miliband is virtually unknown on the streets of Rochdale.
Speaking to The Telegraph at The Baum pub, she said it was Mr Farage who had the charisma that appeals to working class voters.
She said: "At the moment you have got David Cameron, you've got Nick Clegg, you've got Ed Miliband and they're all privileged. They have got a life which revolves around Westminster."
"You can't tell the difference. Put them all in a room and they'd all look the same."
It is fundamentally a question of changing the image, rather than policies on immigration or leaving the EU, she added.
"I like a pint. It's important for working class people," she said.
She of Mr Farage: "He likes a pint and a smoke, that's what we want; yeah, let's go along with that.
"And he wants us out of Europe and a lot of people think, 'well, what are we in Europe for?'"
Yet, despite her dismay at the main three parties and her concerns about immigrants "flocking" to Britain, Mrs Duffy will not vote Ukip.
She has already posted her council and European election vote for Labour.
Simon Danczuk, Rochdale's Labour MP and regular pub companion of Mrs Duffy since they met in the wake of "bigotgate", said her comments have done more to open up a public conversation about the benefits and downsides of immigration tha Mr Farage ever has.
However, Mrs Duffy said that Mr Brown's remark, caught by a television microphone as he was driven away, has stuck.
"As soon as I walk in the pub people say, 'Oh, there she is, the bigoted woman'.
"People say you can take anything they throw at you, but not always. That will follow me all the way."
Document TELUK00020140517ea5h00002
