{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"253"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion; Leading articles
Even More Free Schools
699 words
12 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
20
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Liberal Democrats have accused the education secretary of raiding his budget to divert money to free schools. This could be avoided by letting schools turn a profit
Over the course of a quarter of a century, since the 1988 Education Reform Act, under governments of all political complexions, Britain has undergone a notable revolution in the standards in its schools. The story of British education is, in fact, an unheralded success story.
A large part of the reason for the improvements that have taken place is that schools have slowly been freed up from excessive interference from local education authorities. First, the community technology colleges, then city academies and now free schools have been released from some of the curricular and regulatory requirements that held back schools in the past. Head teachers have been given the power and the outcome has been, by and large, salutary.
That is the context in which the latest spat between members of the coalition over schools policy should be viewed. Michael Gove, the education secretary, has been accused by senior Liberal Democrats of raiding a £400 million education fund to divert the money for his programme of free schools. Mr Gove is accused of cutting a budget known as Basic Need — which is used to create extra school places in areas of some need — and using the money to cover overspending in the free schools budget of £800 million.
This battle comes on the back of a report from the public accounts committee (PAC) last week which suggested that standards of governance and financial management in free schools were "not up to scratch". The PAC also said that the free schools programme was being rushed and that places were not opening in the areas where they were most required. This is a pungent criticism because a baby boom and increased immigration are putting great pressure on school places, especially at primary level and in particular in the major urban areas and towns in the southeast of England. The truth, though, is that seven out of every ten places in a free school are being created in areas of great need. It is also a less strong criticism of free schools to say that some are failing than is often thought. When new entrants are invited into the arena, not all of them will work out. The existence of failure is intrinsically a part of innovation and all the evidence from school reforms around the world suggests that improving practice comes from allowing new entrants. If parents choose to send their children to new schools — which they are doing — that judgment should be respected.
That is not to say, however, that the criticisms of the free school programme are invalid. The first point to make is that the education secretary does seem to spend an awful lot of time — if not money — on a project that provides the tiniest fraction of the nation's 24,000 schools. There are more problems in British education than are solved by the programme of free schools. So far, the trickle of interested parties keen on establishing new schools has been rather slow and the competitive pressure on the existing schools in poor areas is almost nonexistent.
Greater success in the free schools programme would, in fact, bring with it new problems. The education secretary is committed to providing the capital requirements of any free school. It is quite possible, in due course, that this capital requirement will be very onerous.
At that point, when money is tight, it is reasonable to ask whether the money is being spent where it is most needed. Mr Gove could step around this problem easily enough if he consented to allow schools to turn a modest, regulated profit. That would allow him to demand that such schools had to bring their own risk capital, which would lift the demand on the taxpayer to fund new school places. Whenever there is criticism of the free school policy it is assumed that the answer must be more planning and oversight. It is more likely that a better answer is that there should be less.
Document T000000020140512ea5c0006l
