{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3800"}
____
  
News
The $80m tea stains brewing up trouble in the art world
Tony Allen-Mills   
811 words
27 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
3
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
As collectors and experts are convulsed by a huge forgery scandal, Tony Allen-Mills explains how they came to be duped by the works of a Chinese street artist
It began on a Greenwich Village street corner, where a struggling Chinese immigrant artist named Pei-Shen Qian churned out swiftly drawn portraits of passers-by for barely enough money to pay his rent.
Everything changed when a charming Spaniard who called himself Carlos stopped to watch Qian at work at his easel on West 4th Street, and one of the most improbable scandals in New York art history was born.
The arrest in Spain 10 days ago of Jose Carlos Bergantiños Diaz — the man Qian knew as Carlos — has added what may prove a final chapter to an $80m art forgery in which imitations of the works of Mark Rothko, Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning sold for up to $17m a canvas. According to New York prosecutors, Bergantiños masterminded the fraudulent "ageing" process that turned the Chinese artist's work into convincing period forgeries. He is alleged to have personally netted $33m from a scheme he ran with his brother, Jesus Angel, and his Mexican former girlfriend, Glafira Rosales.
Qian, 75, fled back to China months ago. When questioned by reporters, who had tracked him down, he insisted that he had no idea his works were being passed off as masterpieces. He told Bloomberg Businessweek that he had been paid only a few thousand dollars for paintings he was told would be sold to art lovers who could not afford the real thing.
"The FBI said [my paintings] were done by the hands of a genius," he said. "Well, that's me.
How strange it feels!" According to US authorities, it was Bergantiños who urged Qian to copy the styles of famous painters. Court documents show that the artist was paid between $5,000 and $9,000 a canvas for works he created using old materials scavenged from flea markets.
Bergantiños would sometimes used tea-stained canvases to give the appearance of age, and further doctored the paintings by leaving them outdoors or heating them with a hair dryer. With his brother and Rosales he would then concoct elaborate stories to explain the provenance of previously unknown works that appeared in no official catalogue.
The scam took off when Rosales met Ann Freedman, then president of Knoedler &Company, a renowned New York art dealer that had been in business since 1846.
For the next decade and a half, Rosales supplied Knoedler and another New York dealer with at least 60 of Qian's works.
Freedman has since claimed she had no idea that the paintings she sold were fake, and that all of them passed muster with the experts who viewed them.
The bubble burst in November 2011, when Knoedler went out of business, and a swarm of lawsuits followed as the full extent of the forgery scam became clear. The first alarm was sounded by Pierre Lagrange, a London-based hedge fund investor who had paid $17m to Knoedler for a canvas attributed to Pollock.
Lagrange submitted the painting to forensic testers, who discovered what Knoedler's experts had missed: one yellow pigment used in the paint had not become commercially available until years after Pollock's death in 1956.
Freedman insisted to New York magazine that she had gone to great lengths to seek corroborating opinions from art experts before she put the paintings supplied by Rosales on sale. Yet all her experts were fooled by an ageing artist who professed astonishment last year that anyone could have regarded his fakes as real.
"Nobody would take [my imitations] seriously," Qian told Bloomberg. "It's impossible to imitate [the real masterpieces] — from the papers to the paints to the composition. It's impossible to do it exactly."
Among the victims of the scam were several prominent collectors who are now suing Knoedler for their money back. They include John Howard, a financier who paid $4m for a fake de Kooning, and Frank Fertitta III, a billionaire Las Vegas casino owner who claims to have paid Knoedler $7.2m for a knock-off Rothko.
Meanwhile, Qian is believed to be living quietly in his native Shanghai, with little to show for his artistic skills. He may yet face charges in America, but not everyone in the New York art market would like to see him locked up.
"While forgery is very clearly an economic crime, it may not always be an artistic or aesthetic one," noted Blake Gopnik, an art critic and the author of a forthcoming biography of Andy Warhol. "If a fake is good enough to fool experts, then it's good enough to give the rest of us pleasure."
@taminusa
Document ST00000020140427ea4r000my
