{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3478"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion; Columns
Can Gospel Dave's values win the election?
Francis Elliott   
1,204 words
22 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
17
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Tories must choose between the PM's big-picture message and the chancellor's old-fashioned political handouts
Imagine for a moment that you are a Conservative MP in a highly marginal seat preparing your first campaign leaflet. The question arises: what do you do with the picture of David Cameron? On the cover or tucked away inside? Or, indeed, entirely omitted in favour of, say, George Osborne? After Mr Cameron spent Easter at the lectern, Ukip brought politics back to earth with a poster launch on immigration yesterday. "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose job are they after?" demands one due to be plastered across hundreds of billboards.
How do the prime minister and the chancellor respond? By good fortune both are hosting a joint press conference today. In public their answers will be identical — but behind the united front it is possible to see diverging strands. Crudely, should "winning back our little purple friends", as the effort to regain Ukip voters is described in No 10, be a job for Gospel Dave or Retail George? Mr Cameron's post mortem of why he failed to win outright in 2010 includes an admission that he left it far too late to fix in place campaign structure, strategy and message. It's a mistake that Lynton Crosby is employed not to repeat. The structure is simplicity itself: Mr Crosby takes the key decisions with Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne only.
Even the Chancellor's most senior aide, Rupert Harrison, finds himself firmly shut out of this innermost circle.
Some of the dispossessed mutter about the sapping effect that this has on morale and creativity but the Australian strategist will not tolerate any witness to disagreements. He is said to have once torn a strip off Mr Osborne for differing with Mr Cameron over a small tactical point, not for voicing a contrary opinion, but for doing so in front of others.
The main political message is straightforward: the claim that the Tories have a "long-term economic plan" will be drummed in daily for as long as the recovery continues. (When discussion veers to subjects that Mr Crosby thinks of concern only to the political and journalistic classes, he treats the offender as a pub bore with a tart request to "pass the beer nuts, mate".) It is true that since the Tories must fight on three fronts, Labour, Lib Dem and Ukip, the strategy is a little more complex. Of the three battles Mr Cameron is most confident of the first, the battle with Labour. He thinks, one on one, he has the beating of Ed Miliband. He thinks the Labour leader has repeated his own mistake as opposition leader of flying into the gathering storm with far too many loose ends flapping crazily in the wind. The Lib Dem fight is summarily waved away as the "least important", a dismissal consistent with a general approach to deny the junior partners relevance.
It is the third — the "blue, purple" fight — where it is most possible to detect uncertainty and tension. Mr Cameron continues to poll ahead of his party although only by a handful of points at most. His personal ratings among Ukip voters are far from disastrous. Faced with a choice between Mr Cameron and Mr Miliband, Ukip voters prefer him as prime minister by 33 to 2 per cent, according the last YouGov survey.
But his allies think that to win Ukip voters back to the fold they need more than the blunt threat of "Vote Nigel, Get Ed". They believe Mr Cameron needs to find a way to their hearts. "The Ukip battle requires a more subtle, supple, emotional response," said one.
Cabinet ministers say that Mr Crosby likes to cite the 1984 US presidential race in previewing next year's UK contest. Although credited with a strong economic recovery, Ronald Reagan faced narrowing polls in the summer before the election. It was the genius of the late Richard B Wirthlin, the long-term Republican pollster, to craft a response that persuaded Democrat-leaning voters that, even if they disagreed on policy detail, Reagan shared their values. Parleyed into today's UK scene, the insight is: "Don't just read out a list of economic statistics; give the recovery a bit of gospel choir backing."
Mr Cameron had his first stab last month. It was not soul music. In a speech officially entitled "The Values that Underpin our Long Term Economic Plan" Mr Cameron said: "This is more than some turnaround team of accountants rescuing a failing business ... It's not just what we are doing that matters: it's why. It's all about values."
In this rendering of the government's programme of fiscal consolidation, welfare reform and immigration are all about rewarding responsibility while education is principally a matter, not of ideology, but "our values", including of discipline and rigour. Mr Cameron's "fundamental mission in politics", meanwhile, is "to deliver economic security and peace of mind for every family in Britain".
Dick Wirthlin, the son of a Mormon bishop as well as the high priest of modern polling techniques such as the dial and tracker, would surely have been more approving of Mr Cameron's recent strikingly forthright affirmations of his faith. His speech to Christian leaders and article in the Church Times have kept the prime minister — and his Anglican values, strongly held if imprecisely formulated — in the news through the Easter holidays. Declaring that "Jesus invented the Big Society" was a gamble that called to mind an earlier version of Mr Cameron, one who was prepared to question multiculturalism or insist that some people bear a personal responsibility for being poor or fat and who won plaudits for being brave enough to speak uncomfortable truths.
Some traditional Tories will be reassured to hear Mr Cameron praise his parents' contribution to the family's local church in a Berkshire village: other Ukip-minded voters will say: "Save us the sermon and show us the bottom line."
An alternative approach to "winning back our little purple friends" was on display in the budget: bribe them. The saver-friendly package — aimed squarely at the older demographic that supports Ukip — was politics at its most retail. Tax breaks for Isas, the annuity reform, a generous plan to boost the state pension scheme: the chancellor carpet-bombed the retired with handouts. A year ago the number of Ukip voters who believed that Mr Osborne was doing a good job stood at 26 per cent. Late last month that figure had climbed to 47 per cent. Indeed more Ukip voters believe him a good chancellor than Lib Dems do. The approval rating is a notable 15 points better than Mr Cameron's.
Mr Crosby, of course, will say that it is possible to have both Gospel Dave and Retail George. But which should you put on the leaflet cover? Francis Elliott is political editor.
Rachel Sylvester is away
No 10 talks about Ukip voters 'as our little purple friends'
'Pass the beer nuts, mate' is Crosby's reply to off-message chatter
Document T000000020140422ea4m0001j
