{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2277"}
____
  
Business
Ed Conway
1,037 words
21 May 2014
The Times
T
1; National
39
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
If politicians ignore the causes of the housing crisis, they will be punished
"One may as well begin with the housing market. Sick though you may well be of reading about property, there's a good bet that it will dominate the debate in the run-up to next year's election.
'' And rightly so. For in housing we have an issue that, one way or another, affects us all. It is one that successive governments of both stripes have repeatedly and consistently botched.
Little wonder that Mark Carney, the country's new economic surveyor, has concluded that Britain's property market has "deep, deep structural problems".
Those structural problems are hardly new. To understand how they came about one needs to look back a hundred years or so, to the beginning of Britain's love affair with housing.
Until the Edwardian era, the majority of middle-class Britons were quite content to rent rather than own, but then something changed. EM Forster depicted the moment in Howards End on the face of it, a novel about spiritual connection but, in reality, "primarily a hunt for a home", the author admitted.
The Schlegel sisters, leaseholders in London, fell in love with the idea of owning Howards End, a home on the edge of suburbia. Prices in the capital were rising fast as the city grew, but the absence of planning restrictions meant that smaller houses, including the Schlegels' home on Wickham Place, were being torn down and replaced with mansion blocks. London was stretching its tendrils into the countryside. Though Forster never specified where the house that gave the book its name was located, it's a good bet that within a few years of publication it would have become engulfed in the suburbs — a bit like Croydon.
As the 20th century wore on, government after government encouraged voters to buy their own homes. A promise to open up home ownership to all became a permanent feature of Conservative and Labour manifestos alike. Over time, they introduced policies to make it cheaper to buy: tax was waived on mortgage interest, capital gains tax was exempted from families' first properties, incentives were introduced to encourage council tenants to purchase their homes with Right to Buy. The proportion of households owning their property rose from 23 per cent in 1918 to 71 per cent by the turn of the millennium.
This rising tide of home ownership obscured policy mistakes beneath the surface. While plenty was done to increase demand for homes, government policy gradually served to reduce the supply. Draconian restrictions such as those brought in with the Town and Country Planning Act of 1947 resulted in the erection of green belts around big towns. The preposterous upshot is that there is now considerably more land lying undeveloped throughout England, protected by the green belt 13 per cent than is built upon less than 9 per cent.
This policy blunder would have been unforgiveable enough were it not accompanied by many other discrete policies that have ratcheted up demand yet further: a rental regime that protects tenants less than in almost any other country; a permissive immigration policy; evercheaper mortgage finance thanks both to financial innovation and successively looser monetary policy. Help to Buy's mortgage guarantee scheme is only the latest in a long line of wheezes to stoke our appetite for property.
It doesn't take a genius to work out what happens when one cumulatively puffs up demand while limiting supply. Prices rise, pushing property out of reach for first-time buyers. Existing owners who benefit from those price rises buy second homes, with the result that Britain has one of the highest shares of multiple homeowners in the world.
Most dangerously, the financial system becomes ever more dependent on mortgage business. As it becomes more difficult to work out what property is really worth, recurrent bubbles become inevitable. All three of the big banking crises faced by this country over the past century were, in large part, due to problems in the mortgage industry.
To top it all off, the very apparatus of homebuying is deeply archaic. Astonishingly, given that buying a home is the most significant financial decision in anyone's life, estate agents remain unregulated. The process of bidding and agreeing a property purchase is capricious and unpredictable gazumping and gazundering are commonplace, particularly during periods of big price changes. Stamp duty is a perversely structured, medieval tax. Those opportunities there have been to modernise this system have been wasted (home information packs, anyone?).
One probably shouldn't be surprised. Homeowners rather like the notion that merely by occupying their property they are making money (£10,000 a month, according to the most recent Hometrack calculation).
Little matter that short of downsizing or moving abroad, there is no way of crystallising this gain or, more significantly, that it simply represents an economic transfer to homeowners from those off the ladder (often their children). Homeowners are significantly more likely to vote than their renting counterparts.
Or so went the narrative of the past hundred years. Then, a decade ago, something changed: home ownership levels quietly peaked, and then fell. They are now down to 65 per cent and, for the first time in a century, those in their 30s and younger are less likely than their parents to get on the housing ladder.
This was hardly sinking in at the 2010 election, when each political party's manifesto pledged to safeguard the green belt. However, those who are trapped off the housing ladder are getting older, and are more likely to vote. The longer politicians ignore the root causes of the housing crisis, the more likely they are to be punished."
Ed Conway is economics editor of Sky News. His new book, The Summit, is published on May 29 ''
Prices rise as supply falls ONS Index values, UK all dwellings February 2002=100 UK housing starts 200 190 180 170 160 150 140 130 Index value 000s 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Source: Regulated Mortgage Survey 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 1969-70 1979-80 1989-90 1999-00 2009-10 Northern Ireland Scotland Wales England
Document T000000020140521ea5l0008t
