{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2971"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Potholes, badgers and Ukip: Lib Dems primed for battle: Farage challenge and local issues exercise spa town Clegg's party battling to retain control of council
Steven Morris   
874 words
10 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
8
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The bullet points on the whiteboard at the Liberal Democrats' headquarters in Cheltenham remind its candidates and activists of the wide range of subjects they may face on the campaign trail in Gloucestershire: the economy, Europe, the badger cull, the bottleneck on the A417 dual carriageway.
"But what most people want to talk about on the doorstep at local election time is the very local stuff - potholes, refuse collection, recycling, things like that," said party worker Chris Ward. "I suppose some might think it's boring, but it is important for people."
With the local elections less than two weeks away, the Lib Dem office bustles with activity. Workers are in and out to pick up leaflets, study lists of voters, talk strategy. "It's no problem getting workers up for it," said Ward, who describes his role as geeing up the volunteers. "They're keen and motivated."
Which is just as well. The local elections in Cheltenham are important, not just on a local level but as a test of where Nick Clegg's party is at as it gears up for next year's general election. According to most polls, 22 May is not going to be pretty for Lib Dem supporters, but the party's spinners insist that every battle is fought on the ground, on local issues, and not necessarily its national record.
The Lib Dems and Tories have long fought for control of the spa town, best known as the spiritual home of national hunt racing - the highlight is the March festival - and the headquarters of GCHQ, the intelligence and security agency.
In 2010, the Lib Dems won an overall majority on the borough council. It was also one of the few places in the country where the orange vote held up strong at the 2012 local elections when the national party's dalliance with power was alienating supporters almost everywhere else.
At that point, with 25 members, it was in firm control of the 40-strong council. Since then, the grip has loosened a little: one member became an independent after falling out with the party over plans to build on green spaces and the Tories pinched a seat in a byelection.
This time round, half the seats are up for grabs. The Lib Dems are defending 12 of them. And the Ukip factor will play a bigger part than ever before. Nigel Farage's party won three Gloucestershire county council seats last year and is fielding 11 candidates in these local elections - more than Labour. It is not inconceivable that the Lib Dems could lose overall control of Cheltenham.
Council leader Steve Jordan accepted that the election was an important test of the party before next year's general election, when MP Martin Horwood will be defending a 4,920 majority.
"This is a dry run for that," said Jordan. "We're working hard in areas we might not usually work quite so hard in, partly so we'll be ready for next year."
Jordan believes the Lib Dem message that it has worked hard - within the coalition - for the country was getting through. "I think people see we have done good things. I also think people are up for a conversation because of the uncertainty over things like the coalition and Ukip.
"People used to be certain about their politics - you were born Conservative or Labour and we were the third party. There's less certainty now."
Ukip claims it is doing well in a wide range of neighbourhoods, from working class areas (as working class as Cheltenham gets) to upmarket rural settlements.
The party is campaigning hard on that sticky issue of building homes on greenfield sites, as it did when it beat the Conservatives into third place at the Eastleigh parliamentary byelection last year. But Christina Simmonds, the Ukip branch chair, said she believed her party's core messages on Europe and immigration were making sense here.
"We're finding people are coming to us rather than us having to go to them. We're hoping for a couple of seats or more."
The Tories] have produced a glossy manifesto outlining cost-cutting policies, including reducing the number of councillors and moving the authority out of its Grade II-listed, town centre municipal offices. It also claims it will reduce council tax by 3%. "I think we can take seats off the Lib Dems this year," said Tory group leader Rob Garnham. "They are running out of ideas and looking tired."
Andy Williams, a Lib Dem campaigns assistant, was having none of it. "It's all about getting out there, interacting with the voters, talking. We're good at that. People won't vote for you if they don't know you. It's bloody obvious really."
25
Number of seats out of 40 Cheltenham Lib Dems held in 2012. Since then, they have lost two: one to Tories and one independent
Captions:
Defending a majority - Steve Jordan, right, Lib Dem leader of Cheltenham council and party worker Chris Ward Photograph: Adrian Sherratt
Document GRDN000020140509ea5a000dt
