{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3577"}
____
  
News
If Cameron is serious about winning, he's got to send for Gove
By Iain Martin   
1,328 words
22 February 2014
19:11
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Every prime minister fears having a Winter of Discontent moment, when a crisis that had seemed controllable suddenly becomes a career-curtailing catastrophe.
For Jim Callaghan, it was a wave of industrial unrest. For John Major, it came on September 16 1992, when the pound fell out of the ERM. In both cases, the sense of mounting chaos seemed to confirm a bigger truth about the governing party: that it was either incompetent or had simply spent too long in power, and needed to be removed.
Now, in the age of 24-hour television news and incessant social-media chatter, leaders must stay even more alert, for fear that a poor response to a foot-and-mouth outbreak, or an explosion of summer rioting, or a period of record rainfall, will cause voters to conclude that the government has lost control.
Earlier this month, as the flood waters rose, it seemed – for a few days – as though the Prime Minister was about to be swamped. Realising belatedly how serious the situation had become, David Cameron took personal charge of the government response. Since then, he has rarely been seen out of wellies and black fleece, worn day after day.
But unless another epic deluge falls on low-lying land in the next week or so, it now seems clear that Mr Cameron has weathered this latest storm. Although the clean-up is going to take months, and the terrible distress goes on for those whose homes were submerged, the crisis is no longer leading the national news, and the waters are no longer lapping at the front door of No 10. So the Prime Minister can get back to the urgent task of working out how to sink Ed Miliband.
More on this story
• Calls for Owen Paterson to be sacked are reprehensible• Will the next election be 1992 again, or 1997?
• David Cameron takes on the Archbishop 窶  and the Left
On his return from the floodplains, Mr Cameron will find that the electoral fundamentals have not altered much. The Tories had hoped they were narrowing the gap, due to the improving economy, but Labour remains stubbornly ahead. Occasionally, a poll shows the Conservatives getting very close, but generally Mr Miliband’s party holds a lead of around five points or more.
Presented with this evidence, Tory veterans point out that the party has been here before. The Labour lead is, they say, surmountable. At the equivalent point ahead of the 1987 general election, the Tories were stuck in the low thirties, and Neil Kinnock – with a lead pretty similar to Ed Miliband’s now – appeared to be heading for Downing Street. Margaret Thatcher went on to win with a majority of 102 seats.
Those, however, were very different days. For a start, Mrs Thatcher did not have to deal with Ukip – although she would certainly not have been as blas about a new party emerging on her Right flank as Mr Cameron was, or have dismissed distressed voters worried about immigration and declining living standards as “fruitcakes".
She was lucky, too, in that it was the Left that was split in the Eighties, whereas it is the Tory tribe that has now suffered a fracture. Ukip is regularly polling around 10 per cent, having attracted many previously loyal Tory voters and activists who cannot stand the sight of Mr Cameron.
Mrs Thatcher was also lucky in having Mr Kinnock as an opponent. Whatever his virtues as a brave reformer of a party that had lost its marbles, he was not a leader many Britons could imagine standing on the steps of No 10. And therein lie the main Tory grounds for hope.
Ed Miliband’s struggle to look prime ministerial has been a desperate battle, but it is being fought in vain – and I speak as someone who has said from the start of his leadership that he should not be underestimated. Yes, he is tougher than he looks, and the electoral arithmetic is in his favour. But Mr Miliband’s failure in the last three-and-a-half years to establish a connection – any connection – with the electorate leaves him badly exposed.
Ask yourself when you last heard a Labour voter, never mind a Labour MP, express unbridled, transparently genuine enthusiasm for the idea of Mr Miliband moving into Downing Street. Knowing this, the Tory high command aims to devote the year ahead to “Kinnockising" Mr Miliband, presenting him both as the heir to Gordon Brown and as a Westminster geek not up to the job.
The remaining Tory modernisers tend to find such talk distasteful. In recent months, they have pleaded with Mr Cameron to offer some optimism, some positive vision, rather than negativity. Of course, hope should form a part of the Tory offer. But if the party wants to win, there is also going to have to be a good deal less squeamishness.
Consider what is at stake. For all that it is fashionable to claim that the differences between the parties are vanishingly small, at the next election it will simply not be true. Mr Cameron and Mr Miliband have dramatically contrasting outlooks, rooted in radically different views of human nature.
Mr Miliband is quite clear that he is a high-tax statist, intensely suspicious of private enterprise and individual responsibility. Mr Cameron wants the state to be smaller and more effective, and individuals, families and businesses to have the freedom to create prosperity.
As business has started to wake up to this, and to work out what it would mean in terms of taxes and regulation if Mr Miliband should win by default, terror about the economic consequences of a Labour victory has begun to spread across the City and beyond.
The Tories know that by polling day, they must make such concerns a preoccupation of mainstream voters. To do so, they must marmalise Mr Miliband, until every floating voter, every Tory even slightly tempted by Ukip, has nightmares about what lies in store.
They must also remind such waverers that, if they want an In/Out referendum on the EU, they will not get it by flirting with Nigel Farage and letting in Labour.
What remains to be seen, however, is whether Mr Cameron and his team are prepared to do all that is necessary. Ahead of the toughest and messiest election in a generation, the Tories still do not have all of their best players in the right positions.
Mr Cameron urgently needs a big beast in CCHQ, one capable of elegantly bashing Mr Miliband on the airwaves while demolishing the proposition that Britain’s economic recovery should be gambled away on another round of Ed Balls.
Such a change would mean reshuffling the enthusiastic Grant Shapps, who now occupies the post of party chairman. The man for the job should be Michael Gove, the Education Secretary. His epic work on school reform is done (for this parliament, at least) and the legislative heavy-lifting is over – indeed, his closest advisers have already left government.
If the Prime Minister suggested such a move, Mr Gove would doubtless chain himself to his desk in the Department for Education and plead to stay there. But he is by far Mr Cameron’s best option. And while George Osborne has never wanted a powerful Tory chairman who could build a rival power base, he could potentially be squared due to his close working relationship and strong friendship with Mr Gove.
If the Conservatives are serious, they will soon need to rise above petty internal concerns and do everything within their power to win. It is time to throw the kitchen sink at Mr Miliband.
More by Iain Martin:
Salmond and Farage are both blowing up at the same time
The Archbishop is wrong on welfare
We should launch a campaign to return Clooney to America
Document TELUK00020140223ea2m0002w
