{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1172"}
____
  
10 things no one tells you about being female radio presenter
By Emma Barnett Women's Editor   
2,352 words
21 March 2014
08:51
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Monkeys, Page 3 girls and hate mail: Emma Barnett reveals all about life behind the mic on a radio programme, as she calls time on her LBC show and embarks on her next radio chapter
1. People share more on radio than they would tell their closest friends
2. Freedom of speech can be too free
3. You never know who is listening
4. Radio is a lifeline
5. The original social network
6. Web trolls are listening and they speak!
7. Radio loyalty is tribal
8. Breaking news: women like women’s voices
9. Having a forgiving husband is key
10. Always trust a monkey
Nearly three years ago I stepped into a radio studio for the first time and began presenting. It was one of the most frightening moments of my life. And yet, as I was also fulfilling my other childhood ambition (the other one was writing for a newspaper), it was also one of the most exhilarating.
I was doing the official graveyard slot on LBC radio – 1 to 4am for a week’s trial and I had no idea if any words would come out of my own mouth, or if, even more dauntingly, the listeners would call.
If they didn’t, I would be left with 30 minutes of air time to fill (newsbreaks and ad slots are only every half hour at that time of the day), a dry mouth and very moist palms.
You see there are very few jobs where you are essentially road-tested in front of thousands of people. Live. But there is no other way for radio controllers to know whether a person can handle controlling the airwaves.
I knew live speech radio at its very best was simply one massive, energetic and impassioned conversation – especially where phone-ins are the centrepiece of a show. God knows I’ve been an avid listener for long enough. But I simply had no idea whether anyone would want to talk to me. Sure people like talking to me in real life (well ok sometimes); so would it be the same on the wireless?
Brilliantly I needn’t have worried. Boy oh boy they rang in, in their droves; especially when I kicked off with a story about male circumcision and nervously admitted that if I had a son, he would have the snip – what with being a Jew and all that. And that was the first brilliant lesson in radio learned – you have to show your hand as a presenter, no matter how exposing it feels, if you want your listeners to connect with you and trust you enough to pick up the phone. It’s a classic case of ‘I’ll show you mine, if you’ll show me yours’.
I also didn’t know that religion formed one part of the holy trinity of the three topics always guaranteed to peak callers’ interest: religion, war and immigration. Jackpot.
The next three hours went by in a flash and I walked out into the early morning sunshine feeling on such a high I could have floated to my bed. I learned so much. I’d spoken to streetwise bouncers coming in off their nightshifts; argued with opinionated students pulling all-nighters and been enlightened by frazzled lawyers cramming for cases. I was, dear reader, hooked.
Soon after I was rewarded with LBC’s Sunday drive-time slot and that heady feeling has never left me.
However, after nearly three years of amazing conversation, I decided to call my show a day, as I felt it was the right time to explore some of the new exciting radio prospects I have on the horizon.
With radio listening figures at the highest since records began in this country, I thought it a pertinent time to share a few of my learnings from behind the mic to date:
</br>Once night falls, radio becomes a very special place indeed. It becomes a whole lot more intimate. Daylight hours still yield incredible stories – but something very different happens once day becomes night on the radio.
I was taken aback how every week post 6pm, or during my short late-night stint, how much people are willing to divulge on air.
Because radio is a faceless media and an aural one at that, callers really feel like they can share so much more. Also their honesty really helps others.
Week-in, week-out, listeners rang up to tell me about their addictions, losses of family members, experiences of homelessness. You name it – we went there.
The facelessness of radio cuts through taboos like you wouldn’t believe.
So many of the stories I was privy to will remain etched in my memory – such as the man who left his home to call me from a park bench nearby to talk about his wife’s post-natal depression. He explained how he just didn’t know what to do to repair their marriage. And then he broke down live on air. Hundreds of calls offering him support, empathy and advice quickly followed.
</br>Live radio has still got its danger zones. To borrow a phrase from Anchorman’s Ron Burgundy, you do want the conversation to ‘stay classy’. While immigration, war and religion are the holy trinity guaranteed to garner calls, you have to be on your guard.
While each caller speaks to a producer first - to share their views, to check they make sense and aren’t going to abuse airwaves or turn them blue - guess what, people still lie, even when calling a radio show. Some callers just want to get on air and abuse a certain group. And while spirited opinion is the order of the day on a decent radio show – hatred, swearing and prejudice are not.
That’s why it’s important to have your finger on the mic fader button and not be afraid to use it.
For instance I’ve had many a fruitful chat about immigration before during my LBC shows – and we’ve taken it as near the line as possible. But when people (and they do) start going ‘They’re coming here and taking our jobs, houses and women/men…’ Your finger gets fader-ready pretty damn fast.
</br>I once debated the merit of The Sun’s Page 3 and as always, found myself surprised by the range of views on the topic. Some found it outdated; some a brilliant tradition of the paper – but mostly people who actually buy The Sun, skipped over it in their morning hunt for information – not ‘news in briefs’.
But then something even more surprising happened. (Sure fire sign of a bloody great call? My producer starts flapping his arms). The first ever Page 3 girl rang in to give her take. Yes that’s right. Stephanie Rahn dialed in. Pretty much the most perfect guest had just heard the debate raging and simply picked up the phone. Her view? It’s time to retire Page 3. But no, not for the reasons you’re thinking. Rahn doesn’t think the girls today are natural enough. In her day, boobs and everything else were all exactly what God had given you – nothing added, nothing taken away. Genius! I was buzzing for days.
</br>Quite simply radio gives power to those who often feel powerless. I suspected this was the case as a listener. But until you see the switchboard burn bright with hundreds of calls when you start a conversation about disability or blindness, you have no idea what a lifeline it is.
Blindness is a topic I feel particularly passionate about as I have struggled with my own vision and the huge response I have always received when asking what it’s like to live as a blind person in Britain today, is overwhelming. I have often been moved to tears.
I was also overcome when presenting an emotional show about the closure of Remploy factories . Remploy was set up to help employ people who cannot find any other work. I quickly learned, from the many who rang in to tell me of their heartbreak of losing their long term jobs, that the Government’s ambition to use the money currently given to these factories (which lost more than £60m last in 2011) to retrain disabled people for jobs in mainstream society is unrealistic and short-sighted.
It was a major eye-opener.
</br>I always say that radio stations, especially speech ones such as LBC, are the original social networks.
Presenters pose a question, make a comment or impart some breaking news – and the listener responds and reacts in real-time – every single hour of every single day.
In fact the whole experience is even better in many ways as it is editorialised. On the web nothing is moderated in real-time. People can write dreadful things to each other on the likes of Twitter or Facebook and there is no immediate editing.
But when creating a live radio show, presenters and producers plan the topics and guests. And each call, text, tweet and email is checked before making it on air – just to ensure the conversation will be enhanced by every contribution and not stalled or disrupted in any way.
Facebook and Twitter have yet to put enough editorial controls in place that pre-emptively disallow harmful words or edit the content flow to make it a more enjoyable experience. Radio – with all of the listeners’ amazing calls, tweets, texts and emails – is still leading the way on that front.
It is a true democracy – one minute you’re talking to a judge in Kensington, the next, an ex -convict in a high-rise. Quite often they agree with each other.
</br>I block between 10 to 15 people a week on Twitter for being generally abusive. The bulk of my blocking happens when I get off air – so I knew some of my trolls were also listeners. Why don’t I ask them to call me, I thought. (This was at the height of the online abuse one female campaigner had been facing). I’d never knowingly spoken to one before. And whoah – two duly rang in .
One explained how rape was a ‘metaphor’ (go figure) and the other told me how ‘women were asking for it’. It was utterly compelling and quite frightening radio. Cue hundreds of blokes ringing in to apologise for their fellow men. Aw sweet. (It actually was).
The Twitter bomb threat afterwards? Less sweet.
</br>When I first started out, I obviously took over from another presenter, who was moved to a different part of the schedule. Whoah. The hate mail in the first two weeks was strong. Like a ripe brie but with little satisfaction for the suffering.
They missed him. What on earth did I think I was doing? My voice wasn’t his. My views weren’t the same.
This response, I knew, (although it did smart at the time) is a testament to the bond radio listeners build up with presenters and to the schedule. Radio isn’t like other broadcast media. It’s personal. It’s aural. It’s one to one. And that’s why I love it.
You are in people’s ears and it’s a real privilege. But woe betide anyone who messes with someone’s radio schedule or favourite presenter.
</br>Contrary to that old urban myth (that no one can find any research to support) that women don’t want to listen to other women on the radio, I can faithfully add my voice to the chorus of female presenters to confirm that’s utter tripe.
It was an interesting twist to be one of the few women on LBC; one of three main presenters to be precise, out of a nearly 20-strong presenting team.
Radio still has a fair way to go in order to even out the gender ratio – both in front and behind the mic – which is why I salute Sound Women– but it does make a difference having women at the helm and I don’t just mean for the purposes of young girls having role models (albeit that's very important too). We sometimes pick different stories, draw out different angles and I can certainly attest that many of my callers on LBC were regularly women – who may or may not have called in to share the same difficult story with a man.
</br>Sometimes things just slip out live on air. In print you have the time to decide what will or won’t make the cut. But my lovely husband has no time to have a say when I just start waxing lyrical on air about some aspect of our lives together – i.e. the first time I met his wonderful parents – having stayed over in their home after our first date…
</br>One of the best tips I was given at the start of my radio career was to always make my shows sound like I was talking to someone – and not just straight out into a cold mic to nobody. Radio is a conversation after all, as I said at the beginning.
Cue Curious George. And I really am sharing a lot here. Yes, that’s right. For the first three months of my radio show, I took a small stuffed monkey into the studio with me. He was my pal to whom I spoke to before the listeners started calling. I retired him a fair while ago. But he is still prone to the odd guest appearance here and there…
Emma Barnett is the Women's Editor of The Telegraph. She is guest-presenting BBC Radio 5 Live’s Weekend Breakfast Show next month. Emma is also a regular guest presenter of Woman窶冱 Hour, chair of the programme’s Powerlist 2014 – on which she presents a podcast and a documentary maker for BBC Radio 4. Tweet her your thoughts @emmabarnett .
Document TELUK00020140321ea3l000pm
