{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2001"}
____
  
FINANCE
Grosvenor Estates sale marks top of London property market
By Anna White Enterprise and property correspondent   
547 words
29 April 2014
19:09
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Duke of Westminster's property group has sold off £240m of its property portfolio in the Capital in the face of a cooling London market
Controlled by the Duke of Westminster, Grosvenor Estate s, which owns swathes of mansion blocks in Belgravia and Mayfair, has sold off £240m of its London portfolio, a further sign that the prime property market in the Capital is starting to cool.
The international real estate group reported a 38pc rise in pre-tax profit for the financial year ending March 2014, driven by the sale of super prime property in the West End at historically high prices.
The privately-owned company announced a bumper set of results today, with pre-tax profit coming in at £506.9m, while revenue profit moved from £84.5m to £175.1m over the period.
“We doubled our revenue profit, chiefly through timely disposals in London which took advantage of favourable conditions,” said Mark Preston, the chief executive officer of the Grosvenor Group. “We are always buying and selling in London as a matter of course but we have been concerned about the high level of residential prices for some time and wanted to harvest some returns.”
Finance director, Nicholas Scarles, said: “Higher real estate lending margins, driven by a combination of increased bank capital requirements and better risk-based pricing by lenders, translate into increased potential profitability for commercial real estate lenders. The result is increasing levels of new debt and rising maximum loan to value ratios. There is a risk that a bubble is developing.”
In December the group offloaded five luxury homes on Grosvenor Crescent for £114m and pumped the sale proceeds into rental schemes in more affordable areas of London, such as a five hectare site in Bermondsey, just south of London Bridge.
“We have redirected [funds] to another segment of the London market,” Mr Preston said, “There’s a midmarket professional cohort of people who live and work in London and are priced out of the market when it comes to buying and are therefore looking to rent - but there is not enough supply to satisfy that demand. We are developing at scale which is not possible in the West End where land values are not viable.”
Mr Preston said this strategy will allow domestic and international talent to continue to locate to London. It is thought that the company's London portfolio makes up around £5.8bn of its entire assets. While concentrated in the affluent areas of W1, 25pc of units in its London estates are affordable housing.
“The group is well placed to tolerate volatility,” he said, and cited the Crimean crisis, Scottish independence and Britain’s potential exit of the European Union as “potential peaks and troughs. “For London to retain its safe haven [investment] status [for overseas buyers] a lot of things have to continue to go right here and wrong elsewhere, such as economic growth, favourable tax and immigration policies. We wouldn’t bet against london but we are keen to diversify and manage our risk,” he added.
Grosvenor Group evolved from the Grosvenor family’s property estate which has owned land in central London since 1677.
Document TELUK00020140429ea4t003ed
