{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"649"}
____
  
News
Human rights laws being exploited in a third more court cases
Tom Whitehead   
447 words
10 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
12
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE number of criminals, migrants and others exploiting human rights laws has increased by almost a third despite government pledges to stop the practice.
Human rights were cited in a total of 367 court cases last year compared with 283 in the previous 12 months, with the majority involving criminal or immigration matters.
But the figures show the influence is spreading to all aspects of law after the number of tax cases which invoked human rights laws doubled.
Ministers have tried to stop foreign criminals and illegal migrants from using the right to family life to avoid deportation but the courts have regularly ignored the new rules.
The latest figures, obtained by Thomson Reuters legal business, show a 30 per cent rise in cases in 12 months.
Dominic Raab, the Tory MP and campaigner for reform, said: "The rights inflation, driven by judicial legislation from Strasbourg and the Human Rights Act, is eating away at our law enforcement and deportation capacity. We need to overhaul the law."
Chris Grayling, the Justice Secretary, said: "The Convention on Human Rights was drawn up in the aftermath of the Second World War, with the noble intention of protecting people's fundamental rights – such as the right not to be tortured or the right to a fair trial. But it seems a bit of a damming indictment of Labour's Human Rights Act that now it is being used as such a ready recourse for people wanting to bring claims for issues that would have been far from the minds of the convention's original creators."
Last year it emerged that the terrorism suspect who evaded police by wearing a burka was suing the Government for allegedly breaching his human rights.
Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed remains at large but his lawyers are continuing to sue the Government for alleged mistreatment during his arrest and detention in Somaliland in 2011.
Figures in November also suggested that thousands of foreigners arrested in Britain routinely avoid deportation.
Theresa May, the Home Secretary, has said the Conservatives to repeal the Human Rights Act if they win the next general election.
However, in January, David Cameron, with the help of Labour and the Liberal Democrats, blocked a Tory back–bench move to toughen human rights laws.
More than 90 Conservative MPs voted for an amendment to the Immigration Bill intended to make it harder for foreign criminals to avoid deportation, but Mr Cameron said the plan was unlawful.
The latest survey also showed that the number of tax–related court cases involving human rights claims had increased from 12 to 25 last year.
Document DT00000020140310ea3a0003k
