{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3771"}
____
  
News
Ukip hopefuls 'racist and un–British'
Steven Swinford ; Christopher Hope   
604 words
28 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
2; National
2
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Nigel Farage's party attacked by minister over candidate's Lenny Henry remarks ... and still takes new lead in the polls
THE UK Independence Party is attracting racist candidates who make "disgusting" and fundamentally "un–British" comments, a Cabinet minister has said.
Jeremy Hunt, the Health Secretary, said Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, should denounce one of his candidates who suggested that Lenny Henry, the comedian, should emigrate to "a black country".
The gaffe was the latest embarrassment for Ukip, which last week was forced to suspend the "poster boy" of its European election broadcast after it was revealed he had posted a series of racist comments on Twitter. However, weekend polls suggest the rows have failed to dent Ukip's popularity, giving Ukip a lead over Labour for the first time.
The survey by YouGov for The Sunday Times gave Ukip 31 per cent of the vote in next month's poll, ahead of Labour (28 per cent), the Conservatives (19 per cent) and the Liberal Democrats (9 per cent).
In the latest row, William Henwood, a Ukip candidate for Enfield, responded to a recent speech by Henry in which he suggested that there were not enough black and ethnic–minority people on British television.
Mr Henwood said: "He should emigrate to a black country. He does not have to live with whites." Mr Henwood later told the BBC: "I think if black people come to this country and don't like mixing with white people, why are they here? If he [Henry] wants a lot of blacks around, go and live in a black country."
Mr Hunt told BBC Radio 5 Live's Pienaar's Politics that the tweeted comments about Lenny Henry were "absolutely disgusting". He added: "It's for Nigel Farage to make clear that isn't Ukip's official view, but also to explain why so many people with those kinds of views seem to be attracted to becoming candidates for Ukip. I think it is racist.
"I think it is totally unacceptable – he is as British as you and I are. There is a broader risk for Ukip here. They position themselves as a patriotic party, they plaster the Union Jacks all over their leaflets but actually there's something very un–British about this kind of language, very unpleasant. We are not a divisive country – there are some real dangers for Ukip."
He suggested that the rise of Ukip was partly because they were attracting protest votes. He said: "People who want to vote for a protest vote party are angry."
But he went on: "Look at what George Osborne has done with the economy since 2010, look at what Iain Duncan Smith has done with the welfare state. Look at what Theresa May has done with immigration. These are big changes." Mr Hunt's comments suggest the Tories are changing their approach to Ukip.
The Conservatives have been reluctant to criticise the party in recent months.
Neil Hamilton, now Ukip's deputy chairman, said the party would investigate the comments.
He blamed "social media archaeologists that are employed by Labour, the Liberal party and the Tories to try and track down any unknown Ukip member or activist who may have said something unpleasant on social media – every party has got them".
Labour voters are defecting to Ukip, according to one of Ed Miliband's closest allies. Lord Glasman, a policy adviser, told The Times Labour had become too "middle class" and Ukip would damage them "in the heartlands".
Ukip's week of woe: Page 15
Document DT00000020140428ea4s0006j
