{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1142"}
____
  
News
If it's presented as immigration versus investment, Britain will vote to stay in the EU
By Daniel Hannan   
860 words
6 May 2014
09:10
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
We’re losing, we Get-Outers. Every opinion poll shows that opposition to EU membership has fallen over the past 12 months. Most now have a majority for staying in and, while one or two still have secessionists in front, all show the same trend.
The deeper you drill, the worse it gets. The most recentsurvey has ussouverainistes clinging on to a slight lead: 49 to 41 per cent. But the really significant finding concerns respondents' motives. The top reason to leave is “stronger border controls” (56 per cent); the top reason to stay in is “good for trade” (63 per cent).
Which is precisely what you’d expect, looking at how the debate is currently being conducted. A visitor from another planet, judging the parties wholly by their posters and election literature, would think that Ukip was a single-issue anti-immigration party, and that the Tories were the broader Eurosceptic movement. The argument is dangerously close being framed as “more immigrants versus more prosperity”. And that argument can have only one outcome.
I’ve blogged before about the way in which, as support for Ukip rises, support for Brexit falls. Sunder Katwala calls it the Nigel Farage Paradox; but, if you think about it, it’s not so paradoxical. Ukip is doing what any political party in its position would do, namely trying to maximise its vote. It is doing so, quite sensibly, by targeting the people who share its values, not by addressing the undecided. Immigration is indeed the issue that energises its potential supporters; but it is leaving swing voters cold. Ukip leaflets are designed to galvanise, not to convince.
The In/Out referendum will be decided on economics. If one side talks about trade and investment while the other talks about Romanians and Bulgarians, the first side will win. And that, broadly, is what is happening now. The pro-EU campaign is trying very hard to imply (it knows it can’t make such a false claim outright) that our trade with the EU depends upon our political association with it. The phrasing is deliberately vague: millions of jobs are said to be “linked to our trade with the EU” – which the casual observer is intended to hear as “linked to our membership of the EU”.
In fact, no one in Brussels has suggested that Brexit would prejudice our commercial relations with the EU. Now that Ukraine is signing a Partnership Agreement, the only state in Europe not to enjoy free movement of goods and services with the 28 members is Belarus. The idea that the United Kingdom, if it left, would not have the same trade access that, say, the Channel Islands have is preposterous.
It is true that Britain would no longer have its 8 per cent say over the framing of future legislation. But this supposed disadvantage becomes less relevant with every passing month as the EU’s share of our exports falls. More important, it would be offset by two massive advantages. First, we wouldn’t need to apply EU standards to the businesses that don’t sell to the EU. This is especially important in such fields as financial services, where costly and sometimes downright envious Brussels regulations put London at a disadvantage vis--vis New York, Geneva, Hong Kong and Singapore. Second, we would be outside the EU’s Common Commercial Policy, and so able to sign our own bilateral free trade agreements with China, India and other growing economies.
I’ll tell you the real paradox. It’s that the economic arguments in favour of the EU are being made most loudly just as their rationale collapses. A study published today by Civitas blows the business case for EU membership to cinders and gledes. The share of our overall trade taken by the EU has fallen slightly over the 41 years of our membership. Our exports to non-EU states, such as Iceland Norway and Switzerland, have doubled while our exports to EU members have flatlined. The countries whose exports into the single market are growing fastest are all outside Europe. In fact, looked at empirically, there is no evidence that EU membership has made the slightest difference to our European commerce.
This is the case that needs to be made: the case for a global Britain, interested and involved in the affairs of every continent, including Europe; for an open Britain, which does not ask its citizens where their parents were born; for a modern Britain, which has outgrown a 1950s trade bloc; for an optimistic Britain, confident in its democratic institutions.
Heaven knows there is cause enough for optimism. We are now the fastest-growing major economy in the world. Depending on which measure we use, our economy has either just overtaken or is set to overtake France’s and will overtake Brazil’s later this year, making us the fifth largest economy on Earth. Do we really not think we can prosper as a maritime, commercial nation? Are we so diminished as a people?
Document TELUK00020140505ea55003s5
