{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"2755"}
____
  
News
Chancellor arrives on crutches to defend the European dream
David Charter; Francis Elliott   
1,266 words
27 February 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
8,9
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Merkel visit
Angela Merkel will set out the case for Britain to stay in the European Union in her address to both Houses of Parliament today, while warning that there are limits to the powers that can be won back from Brussels.
Mrs Merkel will say that Germany and Britain have a common interest in reforming the single market, in a speech designed to be supportive of David Cameron's desire to stay in the EU after renegotiating the UK's relationship with it.
The German Chancellor will underline that the free movement of workers is a core principle of the single market, making clear that she will not support those MPs who want to impose restrictions. She will tell Mr Cameron, however, that she is sympathetic to measures to stop the misuse of the freedom of movement for benefits tourism and that she has commissioned a government report into the extent of the problem.
Berlin and London both played down expectations that the German leader will ride to Mr Cameron's rescue in his attempt to win back powers from the EU. One exasperated German official said: "The British press are full of expectations, but we do not know where they get them from. Not from us."
In London, there was also nervousness that expectations had been allowed to run ahead of reality. "The hype has come from the fact that she is meeting the Queen, but let's face it this a renegotiation that isn't going to start in earnest until and unless the Prime Minister is re-elected," said a government source.
Reports about a series of opt-outs, including on the Working Time Directive, were termed as "not unreasonable guesswork about where we are working", by an official. "But is she arriving with a great big offer? Of course not."
Downing Street was keen to stress its gratitude, however, pointing out that the Chancellor's visit to London came at a personal cost. She will have to address MPs and peers on crutches following a cross-country skiing accident. The injury to her pelvis has complicated the logistical arrangements, with uncertainty last night about whether she would sit or stand during a Downing Street press conference. Other German Chancellors who have visited London include Gerhard Schröder, who met Tony Blair in 2002, and Helmut Kohl, who met John Major in 1996 and Margaret Thatcher in 1982.
Mrs Merkel is the second German Chancellor to address both Houses of Parliament after Willy Brandt, the head of West Germany, did so in 1970. Richard Von Weizsäcker, the president of West Germany, also addressed bouth Houses of Parliament in the Royal Gallery in 1986.
Mrs Merkel's speech will concentrate on the benefits and future possibilities of the EU in a signal that it is the best direction for Britain. She is expected to say that now is the time for Europe to pull together again to succeed in the global race, for example by agreeing a far-reaching trade agreement with the United States.
Although Mrs Merkel is aware of Britain's desire to exempt more businesses from existing EU rules, she has not yet been told by Mr Cameron which powers he wants to reclaim to Westminster. She will only respond once she has had a chance to see the proposals. She is opposed to any new EU treaty but is open to ideas for new protocols and add-ons like the Fiscal Compact of 2011, a German-inspired set of economic rules for balancing budgets, which Mr Cameron vetoed.
Mrs Merkel will publicly back the centre-Right candidate Jean-Claude Juncker, the former Prime Minister of Luxembourg, to become the next European Commission president, much to the dismay of Downing Street because of his ardent federalism.
She has been bounced by her party into supporting Mr Juncker and will privately discuss back-up candidates with Mr Cameron. Names that they have in common include Enda Kenny, the Irish Taoiseach, and Jyrki Katainen, the Finnish Prime Minister, whom Mrs Merkel regards as extremely impressive. In addition to the top jobs, they are expected to discuss progress in the EUUS trade negotiations, Ukraine, Iran and the Middle East peace process. Leading article, page 20
Angela Merkel's itinerary
12pm Arrives in the Royal Gallery in Westminster to address both Houses of Parliament
12.45 Talks with Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, and Nick Clegg, leader of the Lib Dems
1.10pm Formal bilateral meeting over lunch in Downing Street with David Cameron 3pm Press conference at No 10
4pm Visits the Queen at Buckingham Palace
5pm Departs
Cameron's biggest hopes for the talks Repatriation Cameron wants
To negotiate powers back to national control from Brussels to help to win over voters in a referendum on EU membership in 2017. Merkel does not believe that this is possible, but she does favour giving Britain special deals to help to keep it in the EU.
Powers back over immigration, linking future freedom of movement to the strength of each member state's economy.
For Merkel a non-starter: freedom of movement is a sacrosanct principle in the EU.
Powers back over welfare payments to combat benefit tourism. Merkel is keeping an open mind on this. She has commissioned research on the true extent of benefits tourism in Germany.
Powers back over social and workplace regulation Merkel can support an evidence-based case to support national traditions in the public services, such as NHS working hours.
To exempt small and medium-size businesses from EU red tape. Merkel can support a sensible proposal that does not go too far.
Powers back over environment regulation.
Merkel feels that flexibility could help the German car industry so there is perhaps room to deal on this.
An end to the commitment to "ever closer union".
Merkel believes that this is not necessary and is unlikely to support this.
Personnel
Cameron wants to block the most federalist candidates for President of the European Commission and install a businessfriendly north European in the autumn.
He favours Enda Kenny (centre-right Irish PM); Jyrki Katainen (centre-right Finnish PM), Valdis Dombrovskis (centre-right ex-Latvian PM); and Helle Thorning-Schmidt (centre-left Danish PM). He is keen to stop Martin Schulz (centre-left German President of European Parliament); Jean-Claude Juncker (centre-right Luxembourg ex-PM); and Guy Verhofstadt (Liberal Belgian ex-PM).
Merkel also wants a businessfriendly north European but her Christian Democratic Union Party has formally backed the federalist Mr Juncker. She is reluctantly giving public support to Mr Juncker, Donald Tusk (centre-right Poland PM), Mr Kenny and Mr Katainen.
She is also keen to stop Mr Verhofstadt and may reluctantly be forced to accept Mr Schulz if centre-left parties win the most votes in May's European Parliament elections.
Reform
Cameron wants protection for non-euro countries from decisions taken by the 18 nations in the currency, which have an unbeatable qualified MAJORITY. This sounds like a sensible reform that she can live with.
To complete the single market in services, energy and digital.
Merkel believes that this is worth giving a try.
A bigger role for national parliaments in blocking EU legislation.
Merkel is openminded on groups of parliaments having a bigger say, but against a return to individual national vetoes.
Repatriation and reform written into a new EU treaty. Merkel is against a new treaty, but has an open mind on legal opt-outs and provisos attached to existing treaties.
Document T000000020140227ea2r0002p
