{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1063"}
____
  
Ukip fliers handed out by firm employing Latvians
By Steven Swinford and Peter Dominczak   
450 words
7 May 2014
19:44
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip in new hypocrisy row after firm handing out fliers warning about impact immigrants on British jobs admits to employing Latvians
Ukip has been accused of hypocrisy after claims that Eastern Europeans were paid to hand out fliers warning that immigrants from the EU pose a threat to British jobs.
Latvians have been hired by a company in Croydon, Essex, which has been handing out fliers for Ukip ahead of the European elections on May 22.
It comes after the party used an Irish actor in a poster earlier this year about Britons missing out on jobs.
David Cameron yesterday criticised Ukip's negativity and accused Nigel Farage of acting like Britain does not have a "bright future".
The Prime Minister suggested that Ukip’s policies are only negative and that Nigel Farage’s party does not want to talk about the “success story” of Britain.
In what will be seen as one of Mr Cameron’s most direct attacks on Ukip, he attempted to portray the Eurosceptic party as downbeat and pessimistic.
Asked whether Ukip engages in the politics of fear over immigration, Mr Cameron said: “Britain has benefited from being an economy that is open to investment and open to people coming who want to contribute and work hard here.”
Yesterday it emerged that Ukip fliers were being delivered by Eastern Europeans hired by Fast Leaflet, a company in Croydon.
Andrew Spalis, the company's director, told the Huffington Post that many of his employees are from Latvia and 'only yesterday' his company been working for Ukip.
He said: "I've got my phone book full of names and telephone numbers of people who want to make lots of money, and I call them when I need people. Sometimes I take English people, but not very often."
Gavin Barwell, Conservative MP for Croydon central, said: "Ukip’s hypocrisy knows no bounds. They say they are against Europeans taking our jobs and then, when they have a chance to offer some British people work delivering their leaflets because they can’t find volunteers to do it, they employ European workers."
Speaking in the Commons yesterday, Mr Cameron said: “So much of [Ukip’s] view seems to be that we don’t have a bright future in this country. I absolutely believe that we do.
"If we get our deficit down, we get our economy growing, we invest in apprenticeships, we show that we can be one of the success stories of the 21st Century. We’re making progress and that is the way to challenge their world view.”
A spokesman for Ukip declined to comment.
Document TELUK00020140507ea57005h9
