{"newspaper":"The Independent","id:"3367"}
____
  
News
'Germans and Romanians? I think you know what the difference would be'
ANDY MCSMITH   
617 words
17 May 2014
The Independent
IND
2ND
4,5
English
© 2014. Independent Print Ltd. All Rights Reserved.   
News | Farage commits gaffe when pressed about his views on race
Nigel Farage's image as a plain-speaking politician suffered a severe blow yesterday when he became so rattled on live radio that his chief spin doctor intervened to try to bring the interview to a halt.
In a tense 22-minute confrontation on LBC, the Ukip leader looked increasingly uncomfortable as he was asked about his views on race, on "idiots" in his party, and his parliamentary allowance.
Mr Farage had once said he would be uncomfortable if a group of Romanian men moved in next door to him. But the MEP - who is married to a German and has bilingual children - was asked by the presenter, James O'Brien, to explain what the difference would be if a group of German-speaking children moved in next door.
"I think you know what the difference would be," Mr Farage replied. "We want an immigration policy based on controlling not just quantity but quality as well." He went on to talk about poverty in Romania and the discrimination against the Roma minority in that country.
Asked about a comment he had once made about travelling on a train in Britain where the only languages he heard spoken were foreign, Mr Farage said the experience had made him "slightly uncomfortable". Asked if his wife spoke German, he replied: "I don't suppose she talks it on the train. That's the point I'm making."
He was also challenged about a Ukip candidate in Gloucestershire who had tweeted: "I rather often wonder if we shot one 'poofter', whether the next 99 would decide on balance, that they weren't after all?"
Mr Farage said that he did not know about the tweet. He complained: "All anybody ever wants to talk about are the idiots in Ukip. There's never a conversation about the idiots in the Labour Party."
Mr Farage was also asked if he would submit the £3,500-a-month allowance he receives as a member of the European Parliament to the same scrutiny as Labour MEPs submit theirs. He replied: "They have an auditor to make sure they spend in accordance with the rules."
"You say that as if there is something wrong with it," Mr O'Brien retorted.
At that point, Ukip's director of communications, Patrick O'Flynn, interrupted to say the interview had gone "massively" over length. It had lasted just over 21 minutes, when Mr Farage had agreed to appear for 20 minutes.
Afterwards, the programme prompted hundreds of comments on social media, almost all of which were scathing about Mr Farage's performance.
'NUISANCE' CAMPAIGN CLOSES UKIP FREEPHONE
Ukip has suspended its Freephone number after a campaign of calls to push up the party’s costs. Less than a fortnight ago the party dropped its Freepost service after being sent blood and faeces.
Last night callers were met with a pre-recorded message that told them: “Unfortunately, this Freephone number has been subjected to a concerted campaign of malicious nuisance… as a result we have been forced to suspend this…”
Meanwhile, Ed Miliband moved to shore up workingclass Labour support from the threat of Ukip by pledging that his party would never “turn its back on people who are worried about immigration”.
The Labour leader hinted that a future government led by him could double the length of time migrants have to wait to claim out-of-work benefits while also promising to protect the rights of British workers.
However, he equally insisted that Britain would continue to welcome immigrants without set migration targets.
Document IND0000020140517ea5h0003y
