{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3002"}
____
  
Features
Gary Becker
999 words
9 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
51
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nobel prize-winning economist whose analysis of social interaction earned him a reputation as a daring and original thinker
Feminist economics is predicated on a single thought: women are men's equals and entitled to be treated as such. Gary Becker, winner of the Nobel prize for economics in 1992, did not dissent from this — he embraced it. He did, however, point out that the ascent of women in the workplace must logically be balanced by a decline in the relative condition of men. Though growth could disguise this fact, making it possible for both sexes to improve their incomes and living standards, the reality remained that the end of male domination was not, in strictly economic terms, to men's advantage. Becker's 1981 study A Treatise on the Family examined the economic implications not only of men and women living and working together, but the effects of social organisation on children and the elderly. From his eyrie in the University of Chicago, Becker analysed work and domestic environments. He argued that an efficient division of labour between men and women "is perfectly consistent with exploitation of women by husbands and parents — a patrimony system — that reduces their well-being and their command of their lives." The gain to men from exploitation, he argued, tended to increase when the allocation of resources beween the sexes became more efficient and raised the output of goods and services.
It would be a mistake, therefore, to conflate Becker's work with simple support for equal pay for equal work. As his many books and papers (often co-authored with friends and colleagues) reveal, he was interested in every aspect of gender economics, from cradle to grave. It was in recognition of the breadth, as well as the humanity, of his academic range that the Nobel prize committee awarded him the economics laureate. He had, they said, "extended the domain of microeconomic analysis to a wide range of human behaviour and interaction, including non-market behaviour." Among the phenomena he examined over his career were the economics of old age (specifically the burden imposed on children and the state by the increase in life expectancy); the breakdown of the traditional family structure, leading to more divorce and more resources being devoted to childcare; and the idea that wealth could be inherited, but not debt.
At all times, though politically conservative and a firm believer in freemarket principles, Becker took a sympathetic line, drawing on his own experience of close-knit family life. A Treatise on the Family was strongly influenced by his relationship with his second wife, Guity Nashat, professor of Islamic and Middle Eastern history at the University of Illinois, whom he married while in the middle of his research. Nashat has written extensively on the condition of women in Iran and, more generally, of women in history. As an adviser to the World Bank on gender economics, she reaffirmed his core beliefs, acting as both sounding board and confidante. He, in turn, acknowledged this: "The personal and professional compatibility she [Guity] provides has made my life so much better."
Gary Stanley Becker was born in Pottsville, Pennsylvania, in 1930. His father Louis Becker, who was Canadian by birth, had left school in Montréal at the age of 14 in a bid to make his fortune in America. Becker's mother, Anna (née Siskind), was a New Yorker of East European immigrant stock who also left school early to look for work. The couple moved home several times before settling in Pottsville, and later Brooklyn, where the young Becker, his brother Marvin and their sisters Wendy and Natalie attended elementary and high school.
For a time, Becker was more interested in sports than his studies. As his ability in mathematics became apparent, he began to focus more on exams. When his father lost his sight, Becker kept him in touch with the stock market by reading him the latest prices each day, as well as newspaper commentaries on the struggling economy. After winning a place at Princeton, he discovered to his dismay that his subject, as taught, largely ignored the social consequences of economic analysis. It was not until he transferred to the University of Chicago, where he studied for his doctorate under Milton Friedman, that he became convinced of the need to bridge this gap. His thesis, The Economics of Racial Discrimination, was a turning point and sparked his long academic career.
He taught at Chicago for several years before moving to New York, where he obtained a professorship at Columbia University. He returned to Chicago in 1968, however, having disavowed what he saw as Columbia's lax response to a spate of violent anti-Vietnam War protests. The change did him good. Working closely with others, notably George Stigler, he began to turn out book after book, building up a reputation as one of the most daring and original economists.
A kind and popular man, he was not without ego. "For a long time," he told the Nobel prize administrators, "my type of work was either ignored or strongly disliked by most of the leading economists. I was considered way-out and perhaps not really an economist. But younger economists were more sympathetic. They may disagree with my analysis but accept the kind of problems studied as perfectly legitimate."
In 1954, he married New Yorker Doria Slote after meeting in Central Park. They had two daughters: Catherine, who now works in the retail industry, and Judy, a film production designer. Becker and Slote remained together until her death in 1970. From his second marriage he had two stepsons — Cyrus, an entrepreneur, and Mike, a communications director.
Becker received the US Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2007. He was, according to Friedman, "the greatest social scientist who has lived and worked in the last half century".
Gary Becker, economist, was born on December 2, 1930. He died after a long illness on May 3, 2014, aged 83
Document T000000020140509ea590003t
