{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"2714"}
____
  
News; Front Page
NEW MIGRANT FLOOD ON WAY
Macer Hall   
538 words
2 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; Eire
1,2
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
Half a million to come from EU in next 5 years Call for 5-year ban on migrant benefits
BRITAIN is facing the arrival of more than half a million immigrants from the European Union in just five years.
It is the equivalent of the population expanding by the size of Manchester every four years, a report warned last night.
Ministers were told that only far tougher curbs on welfare will prevent the massive influx, with a recommendation that new arrivals should not be able to claim benefits for at least five years.
The prediction, in a report from pressure group MigrationWatch UK, further dented David Cameron's hopes of reducing annual net migration to the "tens of thousands" by the general election next year.
MigrationWatch UK expects up to 130,000 migrants a year to head to Britain "over the medium term". Its chairman Sir Andrew Green said: "The good news is that immigration from outside the EU is coming down steadily as the Government have promised. The bad news is that migrants from the EU have driven the policy off course.
"It was crazy to have opened up our labour market and our benefit system to 100 million people from countries with a standard of living less than a quarter of our own. There must now be a determined renegotiation."
MigrationWatch UK said the Government's drive to reduce overall net migration was at risk of being "undermined by continued and large-scale immigration from the EU".
While it had succeeded in signifi-cantly cutting immigration from outside the EU, the numbers coming from within it were rising. Both the EU's expansion to the east and the crisis in southern Europe were to blame.
The report forecasts that growing numbers of migrants from southern Europe are likely to head for Britain. Figures showed a link between rising youth unemployment in Spain, Italy and Portugal and the numbers of new National Insurance numbers issued.
MigrationWatch UK called for far tighter curbs on benefit applications.
A five-year ban would go far further than the Government's policy of barring claims for three months from their arrival. But any attempt to further deny them access is almost certain to bring the Government into conflict with Brussels. Ukip spokesman Patrick O'Flynn said: "Time and again the forecasts of Sir Andrew Green and MigrationWatch have been borne out. Britain must withdraw from the EU and take back full control of its immigration policy."
The Home Office said: "We must slow full access to labour markets until we can be sure it will not lead to mass migration - for example by requiring new member states to reach a certain level of income or economic output per head before full free movement is allowed."
OPINION: PAGE 12
YEs: 0901 792 5304 no: 0901 792 5305 Yes text DXWEDYEs to 86611 no text DXWEDNO to 86611 Texts cost 35p plus standard charges. Calls cost 36p from a BT landline, calls from other networks and mobiles may vary. SP: Spoke, London, W1B 2AG. Helpdesk: 0870 010 8656 (charged at national rate). Lines close at midnight tonight. q Should Britain halt all migrants?
Document THEEXP0020140402ea420000c
