{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"1348"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Labour must face up to its past mistake
728 words
2 March 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
27
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The Sunday Telegraph
Yesterday was supposed to be the day that Ed Miliband rebranded the Labour Party. At his special conference in London, he spoke of reforming the trade union link, increasing membership and expanding democracy. Many eyes, however, were not on the party leader but on his embattled deputy sitting next to him. Harriet Harman has found herself infected by a scandal that is metastasising fast.
Ms Harman still refuses to apologise for the relationship between the Paedophile Information Exchange (PIE) and the National Council for Civil Liberties (NCCL), the latter of which she, her husband Jack Dromey and Patricia Hewitt all worked for in the Seventies. She has expressed regret, but that is all. Ms Hewitt, formerly Labour's health secretary, has had the good sense to apologise. Last week, she said sorry for failing "to take stronger measures to protect NCCL's integrity from the activities of PIE members". But Ms Hewitt insisted that she did not personally "support reducing the age of consent or legalising incest".
However, she did express support for both of these things on behalf of the NCCL - and it is staggering that any rational person should have willingly done so. Her name appeared on a press release dated March 1976 that said the organisation "proposes that the age of consent should be lowered to 14, with special provision for situations where the partners are close in age, or where consent of a child over 10 can be proved". It went on to opine, "In our view, no benefit accrues to anyone by making incest a crime when committed between mutually consenting persons".
Now, new evidence has come to light tying Ms Hewitt even closer to those abominable positions. In April 1976, a teacher wrote to NCCL expressing his disgust with its recommendations. Ms Hewitt replied that the NCCL believed that the police should not intervene in cases of consenting sexual activity between two young people: "It is clearly the case that a number of young people are capable of consenting to sexual activity and already do so."
Whatever the truth about the responsibility of Ms Hewitt, Ms Harman and Mr Dromey for the infiltration of PIE and its agenda into the NCCL, it is clear that in the Seventies, parts of the Left embraced a radical libertarian agenda that made it a Trojan horse for perverted men. This branch of the Labour movement was once dubbed the "loony Left" and it is striking how many of its anti-establishment champions went on to occupy important roles in the New Labour establishment. Perhaps they matured and put their naivety behind them, but that does not mean they do not have to acknowledge properly and publicly the sins of the past, rather than retreating behind a carefully phrased insistence on non-culpability.
When the Jimmy Savile abuse scandal first broke, Ms Harman demanded a judge-led inquiry and rejected the idea that anything that happened in the Seventies should be contextualised by the different morality of the time. That Ms Harman and the Labour Party have responded very differently to this scandal shows how inconsistent and insensitive to public opinion they can be. Both Ms Harman and Ms Hewitt have claimed that they are the victims of a smear campaign, as though the story were simply a partisan attack by Right-wing newspapers. But it most definitely is not. The NCCL scandal is a serious matter with obvious public interest, as is any matter that deals with children's safety.
This might be the strongest example to date of the kind of political immaturity that has dogged Mr Miliband's leadership and explains why he has failed to sustain a substantial lead over the Conservatives, despite all of the advantages of opposition. He has not been able to convince the voters that Labour knows that it made serious mistakes in the past, partly because he is always reluctant to admit failure. He waited until 2012, for example, to concede that Labour's open-door immigration policy had been wrong-headed. Mr Miliband prefers to deal in political theatre, rather than reality, of which his special conference yesterday was a prime example. This time, however, his performance will be largely overlooked, because the public's mind is, rightly, on other things.
Document STEL000020140302ea3200081
