{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3246"}
____
  
News
CHILD BENEFIT BAN FOR NEW MIGRANTS
TOM NEWTON DUNN   
314 words
9 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
14
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
A BAN on immigrants claiming Child Benefit as soon as they arrive in Britain was announced last night.
Newcomers will not be entitled until they have been in the country three months.
The same will apply to Child Tax Credit — in a fresh bid to deter scroungers. The ban — from July — comes after immigrants were last year barred from getting the dole during their first three months in the UK.
But it falls short of PM David Cameron's pledge just months ago to halt ALL Child Benefit payments for foreign workers whose kids live abroad. The scandal costs taxpayers £55 million a year — but Downing Street last night admitted it can be stopped only if other EU countries agree to a crackdown.
Other measures last night unveiled by ministers include curbs on providing armies of interpreters in job centres for new immigrants.
Only those already here will be entitled to translation services — saving £3 million a year. Newcomers will be expected to speak enough English to cope. Those who have not improved in our native tongue within six months will face having their dole docked. Treasury Economic Secretary Nicky Morgan said: "These changes send a strong message our welfare system is not open to abuse and will deter those who think they can move to the UK primarily to claim benefits. "Making work pay is part of our long-term plan to ensure Britain's growing economy and dynamic jobs market deliver for those who work hard and play by the rules."
Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith said on Sunday the three-month dole ban was not long enough.
He wants to extend it to up to a year.
But the Government fears the threat of legal action from Brussels if he does so.
t.newtondunn @the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUN0020140409ea4900083
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:36
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
