{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1088"}
____
  
News
Florence fear after woman 'crucified'
James Bone   
431 words
7 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
29
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Italian police fear a new "Monster of Florence" is on the loose after a prostitute was found crucified on the outskirts of the city. A cyclist spotted her body taped by the wrists to a road barrier, with her head slumped back.
She was naked but for gym shoes and socks. Her clothes and handbag were found half a mile down the road.
The victim, killed on Sunday night, was identified as Andrea Cristina Zamfir, 26, a Romanian immigrant and drug user. Preliminary evidence suggested that she died a slow and agonising death from internal bleeding after being assaulted with a metal rod. Bruising around her wrists indicated that she struggled to escape.
Police believe the killer may have struck before. Comparisons were being drawn with the infamous "Monster of Florence" who killed 16 people, preying on courting couples in lovers' lanes around Florence from 1968 to 1985 in a case that was never solved.
Pasquale Checcacci, a neighbour in his 80s who was summoned to the scene by the cyclist, was quoted as saying that the body "looked like it was crucified".
Ms Zamfir might have been saved if neighbours had intervened. Patrizia Ruggiero, 40, who lives in the last building on Via del Cimitero — Cemetery Road — said she had heard screams but was too scared to do anything. "At 11.30pm I heard moans. My puppy wasn't barking, but I was afraid because I was by myself. My boyfriend wasn't there, so I barricaded myself in my house," she told La Nazione newspaper.
The case has been assigned to the prosecutor Paolo Canessa, who worked on the "Monster of Florence" case. Ms Zamfir was at least the fifth woman to have been attacked in a similar way in the desolate area beneath a motorway flyover at the end of Via del Cimitero in Ugnano.
Another prostitute was taped naked to the same road barrier last year and assaulted in a similar manner, but was rescued when a resident heard her screams. She identified the suspect as a short, chubby, balding man in his 50s with a white car, who spoke Italian.
Also in the area in January, a young immigrant fled an attacker and sought help from neighbours. Refusing to go to hospital, she asked for clothes and ran away. Another prostitute complained of a similar assault in the area in 2006.
A further attack took place last month when another prostitute was found tied to a pole nearby. She said her customer did not want to pay her.
Document T000000020140507ea5700053
