{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1572"}
____
  
News
It's rhetoric, not facts, that wins a crowd
Benedict Brogan   
451 words
27 March 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Analysis
THEY say the Devil has the best tunes, and we heard them loud and clear in the first debate on our future in the European Union. Nick Clegg was on the defensive from the start because Nigel Farage mastered the easy, populist answers, on immigration, jobs, criminal deportations, that cause such panic in Downing Street.
The Deputy Prime Minister wins points for daring to take on Ukip's greatest weapon – he's got to go through it again next week – but those who want Britain to stay in the EU must now acknowledge that they have a fight on their hands.
Neither politician will have changed how he is perceived. Mr Clegg was sincere and worthy, but struggled to escape his image as a member of the Euro–elite whose personal concerns are far removed from the fears and anxieties of the white working classes troubled by the changes – real and imagined – the EU has brought. "It's simply not true," was his plaintive refrain, as he struggled to make pithy the truths he was defending.
Mr Farage, for his part, confirmed he is quick–tongued, great at picking holes in complex arguments with easy one–liners. At times he looked a bit manic and tended to shoutiness. There was less of his trademark bonhomie and humour, though he did acknowledge Europe has given us better food. His challenge was to protect his position as the outsider of politics, a well–paid politician who lets people believe he isn't part of the problem.
In the 2010 debates the catchphrase was "I agree with Nick". In 2014, Mr Farage used "I'm sorry Nick" to correct the Deputy Prime Minister's arguments, demonstrating a grasp of policy detail that will surprise some. "People like Nick think we're just not good enough," Mr Farage said, reinforcing his idea that Europe is something done to us by others.
"Leave the rhetoric aside for a minute and stick to the facts," Mr Clegg said after a blistering sally from Mr Farage about the "abomination" of European law. His problem, it became clear, was that rhetoric finds an audience and populist answers hit home. His facts, on the other hand, are often complex and difficult to grasp.
Where was David Cameron? Many Conservatives will wonder when their leader will make his appearance. Tory MPs in particular will have had their anxieties reinforced. Does the Prime Minister really agree with Nick, that Britain is "better off in"? What does he offer to those Conservatives who will have listened to Mr Farage and nodded along? It is possible to lose from the sidelines.
Document DT00000020140327ea3r00062
