{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"223"}
____
  
News
Killer wins right to stay in Britain
David Barrett   
341 words
13 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
12
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A FOREIGN killer has won the right to stay in Britain indefinitely – and to keep his identity secret – after claiming that his human rights would be breached if he was separated from his extended family.
The Somali man, who can only be identified by the initials MAI, was jailed for five years for manslaughter and has a string of other convictions.
Even though he is unmarried and has no children, the 38–year–old claimed he could not be deported by the Home Office because it would breach his human rights to separate him from his mother, grown–up siblings, and other family.
Immigration judges ruled that he would have his rights infringed under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which protects the right to "private and family life".
The man also claimed he would be attacked in his homeland by relatives of the man he killed.
The judges granted him anonymity, meaning he can never be publicly named. Dominic Raab, the Tory MP who is campaigning for reform of human rights legislation, said: "It can't be right that such a dangerous man, a convicted killer, with a string of other violent offences to his name, can frustrate his deportation so easily by claiming family ties here.
"This is not even a case involving children or any other dependents. Frankly, his feet shouldn't touch the ground."
MAI has a long and violent criminal record. He was convicted of the manslaughter of another Somali, known only by the initials FA, in 1998 at Cardiff Crown Court.
After his release from prison, in December 2004 he was convicted of affray and handed a community order, and then a nine–month jail term four years later for unlawful wounding.
In February 2012 he was fined for being drunk and disorderly, and in May that year – his most recent offence – MAI was jailed for six months for common assault.
The Home Office said it would appeal against the judges' decision.
Document DT00000020140513ea5d0003m
