{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2523"}
____
  
NEWS
Immigration minister blames middle class for influx of foreign workers; James Brokenshire, the new Conservative immigration minister, will accuse better-off families and big businesses of benefiting from the recent arrival of foreign workers in Britain
By David Barrett Home Affairs Correspondent   
704 words
6 March 2014
00:01
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
A “wealthy metropolitan elite" of middle-class households has helped to support mass immigration to Britain by demanding cheap labour and services, a minister will say on Thursday.
James Brokenshire, the new Conservative immigration minister, will accuse better-off families and big businesses of benefiting from the recent arrival of foreign workers in Britain. By contrast, “ordinary, hard-working people" have not felt the economic benefits of immigration, the minister will say.
He makes his remarks as the Coalition split over immigration widened further. Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat Business Secretary, will argue that Britain needs migrants because they are some of the most dynamic and imaginative workers in the economy.
In his first major speech since taking on the immigration brief last month, Mr Brokenshire will attempt to align the Conservative Party with working class voters who pollsters say are most unhappy about immigration, and most tempted to vote for the UK Independence Party.
“For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services – but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country," he will say in a speech to a London think tank.
The minister’s remarks about middle-class beneficiaries of immigration may be controversial not least since his predecessor, Mark Harper, was forced to resign after employing an illegal immigrant to clean his London flat.
Some economists and business leaders have said that Britain needs a steady supply of immigrant workers to fill skills gaps and boost economic growth.
Mr Brokenshire will reject the economic argument for immigration, saying the costs and benefits of foreign labour are not being fairly shared. “In the past year net migration from the EU has doubled, and this figure is – frankly – just too high," he will say. “Some have tried to claim that this rapid increase is somehow 'good’ for the country. Well, just like the Home Secretary, I disagree."
At an event in London organised by the think tank Demos, he will say: “Uncontrolled mass immigration can force wages down and house prices up and put pressure on social cohesion and public services. And let me be clear – it can also cause displacement in the labour market."
The Conservative Party has promised to reduce net immigration to the UK to under 100,000, but the annual total remains above 250,000. That has drawn suggestions the Tory target is impossible, but Mr Brokenshire will insist the aim remains.
Among the strongest critics of the Conservative migration target is Mr Cable, who will use a speech to City of London leaders to extol a liberal immigration policy. Mocking the Tory policy, he will say “bearing down on economic migration is a clear example of a restriction on trade" which could harm the UK economy.
He will say he is “intensely relaxed" about large-scale migration, as long as “they pay their taxes and pay their way". In a speech at the Mansion House, Mr Cable says: “Bear down on immigrants, and you lose some of the most dynamic, innovative and imaginative workers in your economy." Mr Cable will also highlight projections from Treasury advisers that a “marked reduction" in migration from EU countries will lead to “an increase in the budget deficit and a much slower reduction in the public debt".
The Coalition spat emerged after Downing Street was accused of suppressing a report which found that immigrants are not preventing as many British workers getting jobs as previously claimed. Theresa May, the Home Secretary, has repeatedly cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee that found 23 British workers are left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals.
A study by civil servants concluded that the “displacement" figure is much lower, according to the BBC’s Newsnight. No 10 said the report had not yet been released because it had not been finalised, adding that it will be published “shortly".
Document TELUK00020140306ea360015t
