{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"2380"}
____
  
News
Fight for first–choice primary places
Graeme Paton   
531 words
16 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
2
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
RECORD numbers of children are expected to miss out on their first choice primary school today amid warnings that parents are being forced to "play the system" to get the most sought–after places.
At least one in eight pupils nationally is likely to accept second, third or even fourth choice schools following a surge in the number of applicants this year.
In some parts of London the rejection rate is expected to grow to at least a third as an increase in the birth rate combined with the effects of immigration places a strain on provision. Some other councils, particularly in the South, are also reporting extra pressure on primary provision this year.
The Department for Education insists it is allocating £5billion over the course of this parliament to expand state primaries in England.
But the level of demand has led to claims that some parents are forced to extreme lengths to get their preferred place. This even includes getting children registered as having special needs to give them priority.
The disclosure was made as parents of more than 600,000 children find out which state primaries in England they will go to in September.
Reception class places will be allocated to four–year–olds as part of the first national "offer day" – when admissions are coordinated by all 152 local authorities in England. Previously, councils released allocations weeks or months apart. The Government said the coordinated admissions system would make the process less "confusing and stressful" for parents this year.
Figures obtained by The Daily Telegraph show:
Eighteen per cent of children have missed out on their preferred school in Bristol this year – compared with 14 per cent in 2013 – after demand for primary school places in the city increased by around a third in just six years;
In Brighton, 17.5 per cent of children failed to get their first choice, up from 16 per cent a year ago, and one in 20 pupils missed out on at least three schools;
The number of children without their first choice increased from 10 to 12 per cent in Milton Keynes, from 13.5 to 15 per cent in Kent and from 8 to 9 per cent in Wiltshire;
The London borough of Lambeth said just over 21 per cent of pupils missed out on their first choice, up from 18 per cent a year ago, and around 8 per cent failed to get any of their top three schools;
East Sussex reported that fewer pupils secured theirfirst choice schools this year while councils such as Derbyshire and Leicestershire also reported a drop. But the squeeze on places was not seen in some other parts of the country. Darlington, in Co Durham, Stoke–on–Trent, Hull, Rutland and Windsor and Maidenhead all showed a rise in the number of parents getting their first choice.
Nationally, it is believed that around 80,000 children – one in eight – will miss out on their first choice school.
A DfE spokesman said ensuring there were "enough school places for the growing population is one of the department's top priorities".
Parents missing out: Page 14
Document DT00000020140416ea4g0008t
