{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2603"}
____
  
News
Banging on about Eton is a Conservative gift to Ed Miliband and Nigel Farage
By Tim Wigmore   
548 words
18 March 2014
11:09
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Eight years ago, David Cameron told the Conservatives to stop "banging on" about Europe. Now, the PM should give his party some different advice: to stop banging on about where he went to school.
On Saturday, Michael Gove popped up to lay into the the "ridiculous" number number of Old Etonians in Mr Cameron's inner circle. Now, Baroness Warsi has joined in. She appeared on The Agendawith a mock-up front page –"Number 10 takes Eton Mess off the menu". Rather unhelpfully, it shows the PM and the three other Old Etonians involved in writing the manifesto (Jo Johnson, Oliver Letwin and Ed Llewellyn) in a pudding bowl."Michael was making an incredibly serious point," Lady Warsi said.
The charge sheet is simple: that it's utterly absurd for a Conservative Government in 2014 to resemble the chumocracy days of Harold MacMillan and Sir Alec Douglas-Home 50 years ago. The Conservative Party has never had a higher percentage of women, ethnic minorities or state educated people in the House of Commons; and the proportion of Old Etonians has never been lower either. This is why so why Tory MPs –David Davis, Nadine Dorries and Sarah Wollaston have also publicly spoken out– are in truculent mood about the number of Old Etonians who have the PM's ear.
But who really cares which school the PM and his advisers went to? Actually, rather a lot of voters seem to– especially Tory deserters who now support Ukip. It is a mistake to underestimate their visceral hatred of David Cameron; he is "a symbol of the university-educated, socially liberal and economically privileged political class" to Ukip supporters, as Rob Ford and Matthew Goodwin note in "Revolt on the Right". Ukip voters are more likely than anyone else to be sick of Old Etonians:54 per cent think that going to Eton and not understanding how normal people live makes someone unsuitable to be a politician. There seems no chance that interventions like those from Mr Gove and Lady Warsi will lead to a cull of Mr Cameron's Old Etonians. Instead, they will only remind Ukip supporters why they are fed up of Mr Cameron's Conservative Party. And they also help Labour, by adding potency to their attacks on the Tories as out-of-touch. As a senior adviser to Ed Miliband says of the latest Eton mess, "when we say it, it risks coming across as class war. When their own side say it, it's a warning light to them."
The other problem with these dissenting comments is that they create the impression of a Tory Party that prefers petty fighting to responsible government. Bickering over what school people went to reeks of preparing scapegoats for an electoral defeat next year. In the case of Mr Gove's intervention, the motive seems clear: by blaming the Old Etonians, it lays the groundwork for the "Stop Boris" campaign. But it is also making a Conservative electoral defeat in 14 months more likely.
More by Tim Wigmore:
Rising interest rates will mean much more debt
Tories will regret their reckless immigration pledge
Can the Conservatives win without ethnic minorities?
Document TELUK00020140318ea3i002sh
