{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2120"}
____
  
These weird Euro elections are the sunset of democracy
By Christopher Booker   
1,448 words
17 May 2014
23:23
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
There is no way Ukip or anyone else can take back control of our borders so long as we wish to continue trading with the EU’s single market
Everything is weird about this week’s Euro-election, and nothing weirder than the possibility that the party that comes top of the poll will be one that hasn’t got a single seat in Parliament. Our other parliament, in Brussels and Strasbourg, plays an important part in producing a huge proportion of the laws we must all obey. Yet on Thursday we shall only be choosing a bunch of unknown nonentities to represent us there, commanding just 9 per cent of the votes that can pass or reject those laws – and, hardly surprisingly, the majority of the British electorate will not even bother to turn out to vote for something they don’t begin to understand.
We look askance at what the major parties tell us this election is all about. Mr Miliband tells us we should vote for him because he will freeze energy prices, which he has done more than anyone to put up; Mr Clegg tells us we should vote for him, because the Lib Dems are the only party that will keep us in the EU; Mr Cameron tells us that his is the only party that will give us the chance to vote in a referendum to leave it, although he says there is no way he could ever support a vote for us getting out.
The central figure of this campaign has been Nigel Farage, which is why the press and the media have devoted so much coverage to vilifying him. I go back a long way with Mr Farage. We have often spoken on platforms together since 1994, when he was already the star performer for a Ukip that had barely got off the ground. Just before the 1997 election, he invited me to give the keynote speech at Ukip’s first national conference. In 1999, I accompanied him to Strasbourg, shortly after his election as one of the party’s first three MEPs, to report on just what a strange, unreal madhouse the European Parliament was, housed in a building that was like a cross between a Kafka novel and a Fritz Lang film.
But if one issue has dominated this present, equally unreal campaign, it has been that symbolised in Ukip’s election leaflet, showing a beaming Mr Farage under the headline: “Our politicians have allowed open-door immigration – Only Ukip Will Take Back Control.” This is as empty a pledge as Mr Cameron’s about that 2017 referendum, which can never happen. There is no way Ukip or anyone else can take back control of our borders so long as we wish to continue trading with the EU’s single market, with which our “open-door” policy is as inextricably linked as it is with our belonging to the Council of Europe, the UN and much else. The only way Britain could regain control over immigration would be to break every kind of international agreement, and to slam the door on the world.
It is equally disturbing that a party founded on a desire to extricate us from the EU should have no properly worked-out policy for how this could be done. Ask Ukip what are the practical steps whereby we could achieve a successful exit from the EU, and the answer is little more than a blank stare and empty platitudes.
The underlying reason, of course, why Ukip is likely to do well this week is that it is the only way in which we can express our anger and contempt for the entire political class, which we feel has betrayed us, lost in its bubble of trivial and meaningless make-believe. It is for that reason alone that, joining so many others across Europe flocking to support EU-sceptic parties, I will vote for them. But I shall do so well aware that this is only a gesture – all that is left to us as we see what remains of our democracy gurgling further down the plughole, and in the sad but sure knowledge that where there is no vision, the people must eventually perish.
You must not challenge our consensus, say the warmists
The climate sceptics have certainly got pretty excited over Dr Lennart Bengtsson – scarcely a household name but someone they can describe as “a leading climate scientist”. He is the former head of two prestigious European meteorological institutes, and a keen “climate modeller”, who recently defected from the international global-warming establishment to join the advisers of Lord Lawson’s Global Warming Policy Foundation. Then last week he had to resign because of “McCarthy”-style pressure from his old warmist colleagues, so intense that he feared for his health. And now he has made front-page news by revealing that a paper he co–authored, claiming that official global warming claims have been exaggerated, was rejected by a leading climate science journal because it would have given ammunition to the “climate deniers”.
All this has produced a storm of counter-protest from the sceptics, claiming that it shows how absurdly intolerant the warmists have become in their desperation to protect their beloved “consensus”. It is true that Lennart was once a cheerleader for their orthodoxy. And it is true that he has recently shown scientific honesty in his growing disenchantment with climate models programmed to assume that rising CO2 levels must inevitably lead to disastrous warming.
But the fact is that it has long been obvious to any dispassionate observer that, as global temperatures have so dismally failed to rise as they predicted, those computer models on which the whole theory rested were hopelessly flawed. Equally, it has long been clear, as we saw with “Climategate”, that the orthodox establishment will stop at nothing to protect its deluded belief system from criticism.
There must always be joy over any sinner who repenteth. But the real honour should go to those proper scientists such as Dr Richard Lindzen, who for years courted derision by pointing out that the emperor had no clothes, because they never lost their grasp on what genuine science is all about. As I once tried to reassure another of them, Dr Fred Singer, when he was in an unusually gloomy mood, “we have two invincible allies in this fight – one is nature, the other is truth”. In fact, the ridiculous hounding of Dr Lennart is only another tiny symptom of how those two allies are slowly winning the day.
'Immoral’ tax avoiders are only obeying EU law
'It’s not on,” said Mrs Margaret Hodge, stamping her little foot. What aroused her ire as chairman of the public accounts committee was the news that Amazon last year paid the Treasury a pitiful £9.7 million in corporation tax on its UK earnings of £4.7billion. But last November she was branding such tax avoidance as “immoral”, referring not just to Amazon but also to Starbucks, Google, Apple, Next, Vodafone, Pizza Express, the foreign-owned companies that sell us water and electricity, and all the countless other firms that manage to pay only minimal amounts of tax on the hundreds of billions of pounds they make from their UK customers.
What Mrs Hodge and all the other politicians and commentators who ritually wax righteous about this wholesale tax avoidance never seem to mention is Chapter 4 of the Treaty on European Union. Articles 63 to 66 of this treaty spell out very clearly that  “all restrictions on the movement of capital between Member States and between Member States and third countries shall be prohibited”; and it is this that makes it perfectly legal for companies to move their earnings to whichever country their tax liability will be lowest, whether elsewhere in the EU, Jersey, the Cayman Islands or wherever.
No one knows this better than Her Majesty’s Revenue & Customs, which, in 2007, lost a historic test case on the matter in the European Court of Justice.
So why are Mrs Hodge and co so unwilling ever to admit that, under EU law, there is nothing we can do about a racket which, according to one estimate, could be costing Britain as much as £120billion a year in lost tax revenue?
As I have written before, it is because this has become the biggest EU “elephant in the room”: so enormous and so embarrassing that it is better just to stamp your foot and regularly give off little squeaks of protest about how “it isn’t on”.
Document TELUK00020140517ea5h004ef
