{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1699"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Has the West fallen prey to crony capitalism?
JEREMY WARNER   
964 words
18 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
27
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
There are certainly signs of a wealth gap – but that will inspire the strivers and innovators
A round my area in north–west London, the housing market is again red–hot. The only stuff that doesn't sell is the obviously undesirable or grossly overvalued. But here's the more interesting thing about the latest boom: the vast majority of these sales, to judge by the "to let" signs that instantly go up as the "for sale" billboards are taken down, is for investment purposes – "buy–tolet" landlords, in other words.
If evidence were needed of the emergence of a new "rentier" class, London is surely it. Every man and his dog seem to be getting in on the act. By simply remortgaging an existing property and using the proceeds to buy the vacated flat down the road, you get yourself an apparently guaranteed source of income and capital growth. What could possibly go wrong? "L'Angleterre est une nation de boutiquiers", according to Napoleon; today we are perhaps better described as a nation of landlords. The cause is a familiar one – constrained supply in a relatively fast–growing economy, made worse by London's evident attractions to overseas nationals. To operate an open–door immigration policy without first addressing the restricted size of London's housing stock was an act of almost criminal negligence.
The problem could easily be solved by meaningful reform to Britain's archaic town and country planning laws, but, sadly, policy–makers suggest only politically easier, demand–side solutions – rent controls, higher property taxes, or restricting credit and migration – none of which would address the underlying problem.
In any case, growing rentier activity in the housing sector has become symbolic of a much wider complaint about the nature of modern capitalism, with wealth and income seeming to be ever more concentrated in the hands of a relatively small, privileged minority.
Without help from the "Bank of Mum and Dad", it's much harder to climb aboard the property ladder – traditionally the main source of wealth accumulation for most people – than it was, even allowing for present, ludicrously low mortgage costs.
What with a recovering economy, an increasingly vibrant jobs market and the resumption at last of real income growth, Labour's electoral message on both austerity and living standards has lost much of its resonance. But there is still plenty of capital, as it were, to be made from the "inequality" ticket. "Progressives" on both sides of the Atlantic point to a growing body of academic research to support the idea that the economy has become the captive of big business, finance and other forms of economic rent, with the rest left behind.
A new study by researchers at Princeton and Northwestern universities, which claims to demonstrate that public policy in the US is unduly influenced by the rich and powerful, rather than representing the wishes of the majority – a statement of the blindingly obvious if ever there was one – is just the latest example of this kind of world view, building as it does on the generally rave reviews for a new book by the French economist, Thomas Piketty, showing that capital accumulation has been growing at a much faster rate than wages and the economy as a whole.
It is not so surprising, given the damage inflicted by the financial crisis, that such apparent unfairness is once more gaining political traction. Nor do I doubt that there is something to it. Yet the assumptions on which it is based – that wealth and income inequality is innately wrong and must be countered by government intervention – are old and misguided.
At the dawn of capitalism back in the 18th century, it was easy to imagine, as Karl Marx later argued, that all the benefits of productivity and innovative gain would flow to the capitalists. But it didn't work out that way. Even the poor of today enjoy lifestyles that their relatively well–off forebears could scarcely have dreamed of.
Despite the setback of the financial crisis, there is no more reason for believing that the free market's capacity for raising living standards is any more broken today than it ever was.
What is more, in order to work effectively, it needs the incentives that income and wealth inequality provide. We know that taking a few pounds or dollars off the rich isn't going to diminish incentives very much, but too great a focus on redistribution from the top to the bottom most assuredly will. To brand the wealthy as the "undeserving rich", as much of the debate around rentier activity tends to, damages these incentives and thereby undermines aspiration, entrepreneurialism and innovation.
If we had a rentier class that used political influence to extract resources from others, then certainly you would want to re–examine that world and deregulate, or change economic institutions, accordingly. No doubt there are pockets of such behaviour. Yet to think of the whole system as institutionalised crony capitalism is a gross exaggeration.
The same is true of finance, where the need to contain baser instincts has to be balanced against its ability to allocate capital effectively, a vital function in modern economies, which distinguishes them from the oligopoly that exists in much of the developing world. In any case, what might be said about the supply–side constraints of the London housing market also applies to the free–market system as a whole. If capital is taking an ever greater share of output, it is because of restrictions in supply, leading to excessive returns. The solution is not redistribution by government diktat, but a supply–side revolution.
Comment on Jeremy Warner's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140418ea4i0004v
