{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3801"}
____
  
Features; Opinion Column
Clown prince Nigel to blame for Ukip falling on its face
LOUIS MENSCH   
435 words
27 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; Ulster
29
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
NO matter where Nigel Farage goes, hypocrisy follows him.
He says Ukip will account for every penny spent — they don't have expenses scandals. Yet he can't explain where the £60k spent running his free office went.
Not much of a fuss is being made. The Tories are holding off until after the Euros.
Yes, of course Ukip will do well there. The Euros are a meaningless election none of us cares about and only a handful vote in.
Those passionate about giving the establishment a kicking will head to the polls.
LOSER... But will it help Ukip get a single seat in Westminster? Absolutely not. Farage's anti-EU immigrant posters said they were "taking our jobs" — yet he's given a fat salary to his German wife as his secretary.
Asked when this job was advertised to Brits, Nige said that no Brit could do the job as it involved late-night typing.
On EU money, though? I bet a lot of folk would be willing to try.
Nige's secretary also "works" from his taxpayer-funded "home office" that he says is very expensive to run. Seeing a pattern here? Ever feel like you've been cheated? Hypocrisy is why Nasty Nigel will never get close to being an MP.
He's tried — and flopped — FIVE times. Bromley 2006? Third. Highprofile attempt on John Bercow's seat, 2010? Third.
All that chuntering from the MEP and nationwide publicity earned him a massive eight per cent of the votes.
invisible Farage not only can't win, he can't organise a p***-up in a brewery. Well, judging by his thirsty reputation, perhaps he could organise that — but politics, no way.
Ukip's Nigel When Boris was elected Mayor of London, Farage "forgot" to even put a Ukip candidate on the ballot.
If you dropped the racist posters and trousering of voters' money, Ukip could maybe form an alliance with the Tories but not with this clown leading them.
Nobody can name a single Kipper other than Farage — they're invisible.
This minority party needs a credible face. When it gets one, Ukip could join the mainstream of British politics — and enact change where it counts, at Westminster. Farage and his German secretary are what's holding Ukip back. Will anyone have the guts to mount a challenge? If my friend Dan Hannan MEP, our most Eurosceptic Tory, were to defect, he'd be a brilliant Ukip leader — and someone the Tories could do business with.
Document THESUN0020140427ea4r000rv
