{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2091"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Don't beat the rich: just join them
671 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
24
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
ESTABLISHED 1822
As it has since it was first published near the end of the Thatcher era in 1989, The Sunday Times Rich List will create a combination of envy, admiration and mild outrage. The 1,000 richest men and women in Britain have seen their wealth rise by 13% to £519bn over the past year and appear to have survived the financial crisis remarkably well.
Their combined wealth is now more than a quarter higher than it was in 2008, when the banks were falling like ninepins and required the helping hand of taxpayers. While savers have been squeezed by ultra-low interest rates, the rich have done well, helped by the actions taken by the Bank of England and other central banks to avert collapse, including large-scale asset purchases under quantitative easing.
The wealth of the 1,000 richest is equivalent to a third of Britain's annual gross domestic product, although interestingly it is only just over 5% of the latest official estimate of total household wealth, £9,515bn. The latest rise comes, however, at a time when it is not just savers who are feeling the squeeze. Average earnings are rising by more than inflation, but only just. The "hardworking families" beloved of politicians are still feeling the pinch.
We should put wealth in Britain in perspective. The combined wealth of the richest 1,000 is striking, as is the fact that according to the Office for National Statistics the wealthiest 10% of households own 44% of aggregate wealth. The rich are getting richer. You need wealth of £85m to gain a place on the Rich List today, compared with £40m a decade ago. The ONS notes that 10% of us are now millionaires as a result of property and pension wealth.
Although wealth is unevenly distributed, there is no evidence that it has become more unevenly spread in recent years: the ONS suggests wealth distribution is remarkably stable. The French economist Thomas Piketty has made waves with his Capital in the 21st Century, but Britain's wealth is more evenly spread than in most countries, including France. There is also, as the Institute for Fiscal Studies points out, an important life-cycle aspect to wealth. Younger people have more debt than wealth; older people build up money in pensions and housing equity.
The important aspect of the Rich List is what we can learn from it about the roots of success. Britain is no longer a nation of the landed gentry seeing the value of their country piles rise inexorably; of the fat cats growing ever fatter on the back of inheritance and the backs of the poor.
Instead, it is a picture of self-made millionaires and billionaires, many of whom have overcome educational disadvantage and personal setbacks — including poverty and the loss of a parent — to succeed. Most eschewed cosy normality, taking risks and putting their livelihoods on the line in their determination to succeed.
If Britain is to be successful in the 21st century we need the Rich List to be the tip of a large iceberg. Beneath the top 1,000, in other words, we need tens of thousands of others seeking to emulate them.
Fortunately, that appears to be the case. Nearly two decades ago John Major attracted some ridicule by declaring that Britain should be the enterprise centre of Europe. But it was a laudable aim and on many measures it has been achieved. Other countries in Europe can only envy the fact that this nation of shopkeepers is indeed becoming a nation of entrepreneurs.
That, of course, is never guaranteed.
The Labour party's anti-business agenda and UKIP's anti-immigration rhetoric have the capacity to do damage. Britain needs to be seen as a place where success is applauded, not one characterised by the tall poppy syndrome and a mistrust of foreigners. The Rich List celebrates success. Our politicians need to do so too.
Document ST00000020140518ea5i000lw
