{"newspaper":"The Sunday Mirror","id:"602"}
____
  
News
NOW DANNY'S COME CLEANER
VINCENT MOSS   
335 words
9 March 2014
The Sunday Mirror
SMIRR
1; National
2
English
(c) 2014 Mirror Group Ltd   
Lib Dem admits to migrant home help
DANNY Alexander yesterday became the latest Cabinet minister forced to defend his use of a foreign cleaner.
The Lib Dem Chief Secretary to the Treasury admitted he had a Portuguese cleaner - as he slammed the Tories for tearing the coalition apart by sparking a "poisonous" debate on immigration.
Ministers have come under pressure to disclose their use of foreign staff after Tory Home Office Minister James Brokenshire slammed the "metropolitan elite" for using cheap migrant workers.
Bungling Mr Brokenshire's own boss, Home Secretary Theresa May, admitted she employs a Brazilian-born cleaner.
On Friday Downing Street was forced to declare David Cameron had followed the "proper processes" after it emerged his Nepalese nanny had been granted British citizenship. A spokeswoman said neither the PM nor his wife Samantha wrote letters in support of Gita Lima's application and that "the normal application process was followed throughout".
Deputy PM Nick Clegg disclosed that he employs a Belgian national as a domestic help at his west London home.
Mark Harper quit last month after it emerged his Colombian cleaner did not have permission to work in the UK - and he had not carried out checks to establish her status.
Mr Alexander warned yesterday immigration was an "incredibly dangerous" argument. He said: "When people and businesses who employ people from other countries are criticised for that, I think that is getting to a pretty poisonous position."
Last night a Labour source said: "The Tories started this row, but they will have trouble sweeping it under the carpet."
vincent.moss@sundaymirror.co.uk
Mark Harper
Cleaner: Colombian
Resigned after his cleaner was shown to be an illegal immigrant
Theresa May
Cleaner: Brazilian
Mrs May 'had no role' in granting her cleaner British citizenship
Nick Clegg
Home help: Belgian
'I have a lady with a Belgian passport who helps us'
David Cameron
Nanny: Nepalese
She became a British citizen through 'normal application process'
Document SMIRR00020140309ea39000cg
