{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"505"}
____
  
NEWS
Conservatives are home of the workers
By Georgia Graham Political Correspondent   
362 words
9 April 2014
07:01
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MPs say it is the Tories not Labour of Ukip that are now the true home of the workers as 'working class' Conservatives launch collection of essays on how why they joined the party
Conservatives are the true party of the workers, MPs have declared today.
In a letter to The Daily Telegraph MPs, including David Amess, Mark Prisk and former immigration minister Mark Harper, say that their party is the natural home of working people.
It comes as ministers and MPs from working class backgrounds publish a series of essays explaining why the Conservative party attracted them.
Essays in the collection, called Reform, include contributions from Patrick McLoughlin, the transport minister and Mark Francois, the armed forces minister.
Earlier this year Grant Shapps, the Conservative Party Chairman, attracted criticism for claiming that his party were the “workers party” fighting for a “classless society.”
Last month the strapline to a beer and bingo poster issued by the Conservatives following the Budget which read “cutting the bingo tax and beer duty to help hardworking people do more of the things they enjoy” was also condemned as condescending and patronising to working people.
The letter says that while Labour were once “rooted” in working class communities today that “couldn’t be further from the truth” but that turning to Ukip is “not the answer”.
The Conservatives, the letter says, extended the franchise to working class voters, gave the right to picket to trade unionists and demolished the slums.
It reads: “The Conservative Party is the natural home of working people. Today’s party is the party for everybody in society, from every walk of life.
"We remember that Conservatives who have done the most for the poorest, from Lord Shaftesbury and Randolph Churchill to Lady Thatcher didn't necessarily come from working class backgrounds.
“We also remember that Harold Macmillan, the Conservative who appealed most to working class voters was by no means working class himself. Social class doesn't matter, but using power to help working class people matters a lot. And that's what Conservatives have done and are doing.”
Document TELUK00020140409ea49000me
