{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"258"}
____
  
Features
THE WEEK IN WESTMINSTER
631 words
12 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
26
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MONDAY, MAY 12
Commons: Oral Questions: Defence, including Topical Questions. Care Bill (HL), Consideration of Lords amendments. Criminal Justice and Courts Bill, Report stage. Flooding and the river Ash in Staines–upon–Thames.
Westminster Hall: Not sitting. Lords: Oral Questions: Removing international students from the headline immigration figures; How assessment guidance to local authorities under the Care Bill will address the particular needs of people transferring from the Independent Living Fund; Ensuring adequate levels of nursing staff in the NHS. Legislation to ratify the 1954 Convention on the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. Immigration Bill, Consideration of Commons amendments. Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (Amendment) (No. 2) Order 2014. Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) Order 2014.
Licensing Act 2003 (FIFA World Cup Licensing Hours) Order 2014.
Licensing Act (Mandatory Conditions) Order 2014. Representation of the People (England and Wales) (Amendment) Regulations 2014. Representation of the People (Scotland) (Amendment) Regulations 2014.
TUESDAY, MAY 13
Commons: Oral Questions: Deputy Prime Minister, including Topical Questions; Attorney General. Prohibition of Unpaid Internships. Consideration of any Lords amendments. Consumer Rights Bill, Report stage. Relating to the Standards Committee Report on All Party Parliamentary Groups. Consideration of any Lords amendments. Hull Official Receiver's Office. Westminster Hall: Debates on: Political and human rights situation in the African Great Lakes Region; Sale of park homes; Human rights in North Korea; Land safeguarded for development in local plans; GP services in Tower Hamlets. Lords: Oral Questions: Roll–out of broadband services and the provision of comprehensive mobile coverage; Importance of tourism to the UK economy; Number of prosecutions brought for domestic violence. Debates on 5th Report from the Select Committee on Procedure of the House and 14th and 15th Report from the Select Committee for Privileges and Conduct. House of Lords Reform (No. 2) Bill, Third reading; Local Government Pensions Scheme (Transitional Provisions, Savings and Amendment) Regulations 2014. Church of England (Miscellaneous Provisions) Measure. Debate on Report of the Constitution Committee on Constitutional implications of coalition government.
WEDNESDAY, MAY 14
Commons: Oral Questions: Wales. At noon, questions to the Prime Minister. Food Labelling (Sugar Content). Consideration of any Lords amendments. Deregulation Bill, Report stage. Consideration of any Lords amendments. Planning issues in Shipley constituency. Westminster Hall: Debates on: Strategic importance of the A47; Planning in Stroud Valleys and Vale; Localisation of council tax support; Small business start–ups in Scotland; Ambulance resources and response times.
Lords: Oral Questions: Thames Water's additional annual charge to its customers to fund the development and construction of the Thames Tideway Tunnel; Early intervention measures to reduce the educational and financial implications of failing free schools; Promoting an increase in the number of students studying part–time at UK universities. Copyright (Public Administration) Regulations 2014. Copyright and Rights in Performances (Disability) Regulations 2014. Copyright and Rights in Performances (Personal Copies for Private Use) Regulations 2014. Copyright and Rights in Performances (Quotation and Parody) Regulations 2014. Copyright and Rights in Performances (Research, Education, Libraries and Archives) Regulations 2014. Debate on Incidence of abuse of the elderly.
THURSDAY, MAY 15
Oral Questions: Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, including Topical Questions; Church Commissioners, Public Accounts Commission and the Speaker's Committee on the Electoral Commission. Business Statement from the Leader of the House. Consideration of any Lords amendments. Pupils at Risk of Educational Disadvantage Bill, Second reading. Smoke Alarms (Private Rented Sector) Bill, Second reading.
Westminster Hall: Not scheduled to sit.
Lords: Oral Questions: In the light of the rise in executive pay since 2003, whether the Government plan to introduce further measures; Efficacy of the cap on payday loans; How many applicants for service in the reserve army are waiting to undergo medical examinations by their GP as part of the selection process.
Document DT00000020140512ea5c0001x
