{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3401"}
____
  
NEWS
EU elections 2014: What has the European Union done for us?
By Colin Freeman   
3,453 words
16 May 2014
14:07
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
The EU is often criticised as being a vastly overblown monolith which spends profligately and benefits few. But what if a country were to leave? What would it lose?
As  France's most expensive-ever motorway, it is perhaps gratifying to know that the view from its carriageways will at least be magnifique.
Built on high-rise columns that will soar out of the sea, it will wind its way past eight miles of stunning coastline, with pristine white beaches and azure waters. The cost? A mere £1.3 billion, or £110,000 per metre - of which a large chunk is expected to come from the European Union.
The real shock for the average EU taxpayer, however, is in the location, not the bill. This route is not some project for the French Riviera, skirting Cap Nez or Nice. Instead, it is for the island of Reunion, a tiny French territory some 6,000 miles away off the coast of Madagascar, deep in the Indian Ocean.
The exact spending plans for the motorway have yet to be finalised - but if and when it goes ahead, it will not be the first time that the EU has been generous to the island.
Over the past six years, it has received some £800m from the European regional development fund, a huge pot of Brussels cash that is earmarked for helping out backward and remote zones of the EU and its territories. £160m of that has already been spent on a network of roads and bridges through Reunion's mountainous inland, which has won awards for its elegant designs.
But at a time when the EU has faced its toughest ever financial crisis, the question invariably arises: is this is the best use of EU cash?
In short, projects like these embody what many British taxpayers object to about the EU: immensely costly, commissioned through a process in which they have little say, and of no obvious benefit to them. Nor is this an isolated case. There are hundreds of other instances of apparent EU flagrancy, be it in the further reaches of the EU empire or in its own HQ, where two years ago, the European Commission spent £300,000 simply to update its logo.
Far from being "Euro-myths", the worst examples are quite literally concrete ones: the vast road projects that suck up cash not by the million but by the billion. On the Portuguese archipelago of Madeira, for example, some €2bn has been spent building a network of motorways similar to that in Reunion, to the point where conservationists claim it now resembles a Los Angeles suburb rather than an Atlantic resort.
Another is the A3 coastal motorway through the Mafia heartlands of southern Italy, which, thanks partly to Mob infiltration of the contracting process, is still unfinished, despite being started 50 years ago. That has not stopped the EU throwing £8bn at it in the past decade alone - which, as The Telegraph reported two years ago, is now subject to a major fraud probe by anti-Mafia magistrates.
But is it right to think that the best road forward for Britain would be the one marked "EU Exit"? How much money would we save - if any? Do many of these EU projects actually benefit the UK? What other benefits are there of EU membership? And do they make the costs worthwhile?
PERKS OF THE CLUB
First, a little history. Ever since Britain first joined what was then known as the European Economic Community, it has been a net contributor. In other words, the UK hands more cash over to Brussels than it gets back. But when the Conservative prime minister, Edward Heath, signed the accession treaty back in 1973, it seemed far from certain that this would always be the case.
Paralysed by strikes, and with its once-mighty industrial base in decline, Britain was known then as the "sick man of Europe", while the continental economy, led by a resurgent Germany, was doing comparatively well.
However, the OPEC oil crisis that same year left Europe's economy reeling, and over the next two decades, the combination of North Sea oil revenues and Margaret Thatcher's economic reforms saw Britain emerge as one of the leaner, more dynamic members of the club. With many poorer Eastern European nations also joining, that is a position Britain is likely to retain for the foreseeable future.
To put it another way, if the EU was a car insurance scheme, Britain is now the safe, middle-aged driver who never makes a claim - although, were we to suffer some unexpected Greek-style meltdown, we could legitimately expect Europe to help bail us out.
Now, the maths. Britain is the third biggest net contributor to the EU budget, after Germany and France. In 2012, we paid in more than £12bn to the EU's coffers, of which around £4bn came back in EU spending on Britain. That makes a net contribution of £8bn, or around £127 per person.
Graphic: who contributes and who receives?
Office of Budget Responsibility
Britain's £8bn net contribution may sound a lot, especially when countries like Greece and Poland received around £240 per person that year. But it needs to be seen in context.
As a share of our total public expenditure, that £8bn is only around one per cent, or roughly a penny in the pound. It's also less than the £11.3bn pledged to last year's overseas aid budget as part of David Cameron's pledge to allocate 0.7 per cent of British income to fighting global poverty. In other words, we give more money to the world's poor than we give to the EU.
Besides, while we may be a net contributor, some people in Britain benefit far more from EU spending than others. For instance, the EU's much-maligned Common Agricultural Policy does not just help French farmers: their British counterparts also receive £2.7bn from it every year.
And just as Brussels writes cheques for faraway places like Reunion and Madeira, it also helps finance thousands of projects in Britain too, from doing up tatty town centres through to building roads and nature reserves, as well as grants for university research departments and small businesses.
Voters in the wealthy South-East might not notice this much. But in less affluent regions of Britain, the distinctive EU funding logo - a ring of gold stars on a blue background - is a frequent sight. For example, EU grants totalling nearly £6m have helped kick-start the continuing regeneration of Birmingham's unloved city centre, as well as the city's New Street station, a 1960s scheme dubbed one of Britain's worst eyesores.
Similarly, bus passengers in Swansea have a rather more pleasant experience thanks to the EU funding half the city's new £10m central bus station. And in Newcastle and Glasgow, the EU has helped pay for elegant pedestrian walkways across the rivers Tyne and Clyde.
Nonetheless, even in places where the EU's funding stars are everywhere, the beneficiaries are seldom starry-eyed. For a start, many of the projects are routine civic improvements that serve their purpose, but do not excite the public. Not many people in Preston, for example, will vote to stay in Europe just because of the £1.4m that the EU has spent improving road approaches to the town centre. Most EU projects are also via "partnership" funding schemes, whereby national or local government pays the bulk of the cash, and also claims most of the credit.
Moreover, there is the question of how well the money is spent. What some see as a lifeline for projects that might otherwise struggle to get off the ground, others see as a blank cheque for expensive civic vanity projects that should have never got to the drawing board.
WALES - THE CORNER OF BRITAIN THAT BENEFITS MOST
Take Wales, which, per capita, is by far the biggest recipient of EU grant money in Britain. This is because certain parts of the country - mainly its depressed former mining valleys - get extra EU funding under a formula designed to iron out income disparities across the bloc. To qualify, such areas must have productivity levels lower than 75 per cent of the EU average - which puts these areas of Wales in the same category as Romania.
Since 2000, Wales has received £4bn under this funding arrangement, and earlier this year was granted an additional £2bn to last until 2020. Much of the money goes on improving the area's infrastructure, such as £90 million to bring high-speed broadband internet to west Wales, and £80m allocated to the Heads of the Valleys Road, a dual carriageway link between isolated mining towns like Merthyr Tydfil and Ebbw Vale.
Other cash has been used to give a facelift to the towns like Newbridge and Pontypridd, home of the singer Tom Jones.
But not everyone agrees with Wales's former First Secretary, Rhodri Morgan, that the cash has been a "once-in-a-generation opportunity to transform west Wales and the valleys". Dr Kay Swinburne, the Conservative MEP for Wales, says much of the money has failed to boost the economy, or has gone on projects that Wales's devolved government should have funded itself.
"This should be a badge of shame, not a badge of honour," she said. "After all, we are qualifying for this money alongside countries in eastern Europe that have endured many decades of oppression. Some of it gets spent well, yes, but the fact that we are still eligible for this funding suggests that its effect on the competitiveness of the Welsh economy is questionable."
Dr Swinburne, a former investment banker, concedes that for every "white elephant" - such as a heritage centre which is now derelict despite receiving a £900,000 start-up grant in 2008 - there are projects which deserve praise. One is the DeltaStream tidal energy project, a private venture in Pembrokeshire that is experimenting with underwater turbines.
It can capture wave energy without destroying the view of the beaches, and if the technology can be perfected, it can be sold all over the world. For that, she says, the £7.9m of EU funding is a worthwhile gamble. But she thinks that many of the road and town centre renewal schemes offer limited value for money.
"Projects of significance, like the Heads of the Valleys Road, are fine as they have helped generate some businesses," she said. "But in all fairness, I am not sure that simply making the valleys’ towns look prettier has helped that much. What they really need is jobs."
Stephen Booth, a researcher with the think tank Open Europe, argues that EU regional development spending on Britain should be an area for "fundamental reform".
"There is nothing wrong in principle with having richer nations contributing to a central fund to help poor areas of Europe, but there is not much point in Brussels taking part of it and spending it on those wealthier nations. It's just an extra layer of bureaucracy, which means that Brussels is micromanaging projects that local or national government would be better equipped to do."
He added that while the policy was supposed to benefit only the poorer areas of eastern Europe, in practice it still disproportionately benefited the likes of Spain and Italy, countries which were now rich enough to fund development aid out of their own pockets.
RED TAPE VS MARKET ACCESS
Then again, many argue that to measure what Britain gains from the EU purely in terms of what cheques are handed back and forth is a mistake. Much of the benefit is from things that the EU does on our behalf, be it drafting consumer or environmental regulations, or negotiating trade deals outside the bloc, where Brussels now acts exclusively both for Britain and the rest of the EU.
On the question of EU regulations, it is tempting to assume that ditching these would be a boon. For example, British businesses would no longer be bound by the EU clean-energy targets that many complain are making them uncompetitive. Most small and medium-sized firms do not do business outside of Britain anyway, and would save time and money by not having to follow EU rules as well as domestic ones.
However, for every "if" on this question, there is a corresponding "but". Were Britain to leave the EU, it would still have to observe most EU directives in order to do any kind of business in the bloc. Likewise, freedom from EU energy regulations would not stop the British government facing international pressure to impose similar measures of its own.
And contrary to popular myth, the EU civil servants who draft its laws are generally considered fairly competent, according their peers in Whitehall. With some notable exceptions - such as last year's proposals to ban olive oil jugs in restaurants on "hygiene" grounds - much of it is designed to be consumer-friendly.
Few mobile phone users, for example, object to the way the EU has used its market clout to order operators to radically reduce their roaming charges - something national governments would be powerless to do.
But while the pros and cons of EU regulatory regimes can be debated endlessly, there is rather more consensus about the EU's benefits as a trading bloc. Be they car manufacturers or City stockbrokers, most businesses say that whatever the hassles of EU regulations, having direct, tariff-free access to a market of 500 million customers makes it well worth it.
Indeed, Europe is far and away our biggest trading partner, taking half of all our exported goods and services. According to a report released in March by the Centre for Economic and Business Research, an independent think tank, that trade is worth £211bn a year, or £3,500 per person. It also directly supports some 3.1m British jobs.
Of course, were Britain to leave the EU, this trade would not dry up altogether. The UK could still export goods to Europe, and hone bilateral trading relationships elsewhere. But giants like China and India could prioritise dealing with 500 million customers at a time rather than 60 million. And the trade tariffs that would be placed by the EU on Britain as a non-member might render its products uncompetitive within the bloc. British-made cars could face a 10 per cent import tax, for instance.
The financial industry, which makes up 13 per cent of British exports, believes it would be similarly at risk. In evidence to a recent Parliamentary commission, both Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan noted that "Our ability to provide services to clients... throughout Europe is dependent on the passport that London-based firms enjoy to operate on a cross-border basis within the Union.
"If the UK leaves, it is likely that the passport will no longer be available, forcing firms that wish to access EU markets to move their operations to within those markets."
Equally, while the City would no doubt find ways to survive outside the EU - marketing itself, perhaps, as a "light touch" financial centre compared to its European rivals - other major British industries might not be viable at all. Take the Nissan car factory up in Sunderland, opened in 1984 when the North East was at the height of its industrial decline.
Today, it's one of the most productive in Europe - a key player in a revamped automotive sector that now makes up another 10 per cent of British exports, half of which go to Europe. Yet in April, Nissan's chief operating officer, Toshiyuki Shiga, told The Telegraph that membership of the EU was "very important" to the future of the plant, which employs 6,400 people. The plant's trade union bosses do not always see eye-to-eye with the company's management, but on this point, they agree.
"Staying in the EU is crucial, not just for us but other British car manufacturers too," says Tony Burke, the assistant general secretary at the Unite union, which represents workers at the Nissan plant. "The automotive industry is a big success story here in Britain, but companies that invest in it see EU membership as being vitally important."
SEIZE POWER FROM WITHIN?
What is more, says Peter Wilding, director of British Influence, a cross-party pro-EU group, Britain could actually export far more in Europe's markets than it currently does. The UK, he argues, excels as a "service" economy, with a reputation for quality and innovation in everything from law and accountancy through to hairdressing and IT. And with English increasingly becoming a lingua franca, those lawyers, accountants, barbers and techies could be poised for a much bigger push into Europe in coming decades.
The problem is that despite EU regulations on freedom of movement of labour, many countries still operate closed shops that insist on local diplomas and qualifications. Britain can get those old protectionist practices banished, he argues - but only by throwing its weight around inside the club, not out of it.
"If you are a qualified hairdresser or lecturer, for example, other countries will expect you to have some piece of paper from one of their own national institutions," he says. "We need to have a bonfire of these regulations, and Telegraph readers should support that idea, if not for themselves then for their kids and grandkids, who will be the ones doing those service jobs."
Mr Wilding, who describes himself as a staunch Conservative, is nicknamed the "anti-Farage" for the combative way in which he argues the case for Britain to stay in Europe rather than leave. But while he argues that the facts speak for themselves, he also accuses Britain's rulers of failing to get the message across. Hence the demand for a referendum in 2017, when Britain could end up leaving a club that it could be top dog of.
"British people feel that Europe has pickpocketed their wallets and castrated British power. If this were true, lots of countries would want to leave the EU, not just us. But our own leaders need to start acting like we big players too, so that we can call the shots, as we often have in the past. The idea that we aren't influential is absurd."
True, the debate over Europe is not just about the economy, or what we get back in return for what we put in. Emotive issues such as immigration from Europe, and the controversial role of the European Court of Human Rights - which is not, in fact, connected to the EU at all - may prove just as decisive in persuading voters to tick the box marked Ukip in the coming European elections.
There is also unlikely to ever be consensus over what was arguably the biggest change of all in Europe in the last two decades - the decision to admit the countries of eastern Europe to the club.
To many Eurosceptics, that move was a sign of Brussels overreaching its empire, bringing in ‘backward’ economies that will be a drain on Brussels' coffers for the foreseeable future.
On the other hand, the more dynamic economies of the former Communist east, such as Poland and the Baltics, are likely to be net contributors to club in coming decades. Ukraine, whose current political tensions stem partly from the dire performance of its economy, is arguably an example of how countries that have not had the EU's helping hand in the last 20 years have failed to flourish.
But some remain unconvinced.
“Of course there are elements of truth in the pro-Europe story; that poorer regions benefit, that the EU is a useful trading bloc, and that countries wishing to trade with the EU would have to comply with certain legislation,” said Robert Oulds, director of the eurosceptic think tank The Bruges Group.
“But that isn’t the whole picture. Many countries survive perfectly well outside the EU - Switzerland, Norway for example. We would have to comply with certain legislation of course - but the burden would be far less weighty.
“The EU does spend money in the regions - but this is matched by the government, so the EU take all the credit without acknowledging that we could do much of it ourselves. And far more efficiently, at that.”
Yet from a pro-Europe perspective, the costs of membership are less than popularly thought, and the benefits perhaps rather more. Even if one does have to travel all the way to Reunion to enjoy them fully...
Document TELUK00020140516ea5g002e5
