{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3402"}
____
  
CULTURE
Baftas 2014: the actors they should have nominated
By Serena Davies, Chris Harvey and Ben Lawrence   
1,053 words
16 May 2014
13:04
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
We've scrapped the Bafta TV acting nominations lists and come up with better ones. Here’s what they should have been.
On Sunday the most prestigious awards ceremony for British TV takes place. But this is a strange year for the TV Baftas . Often there seems to be the occasional eccentricity in programmes and people the British Academy of Film and Television favours. This year, however, the nominations across the acting categories ignore so many excellent performances on our screens last year that they do a real injustice.
To rectify the matter we’ve come up with our alternative nominations lists for all four acting categories (Best Actor, Best Supporting Actor, Best Actress, Best Supporting Actress), and thrown out most of Bafta’s suggestions.
Best Actor
David Suchet in Poirot窶冱 Last Case
Suchet has never won a Bafta for Poirot. His final bow as the sleuth in a state of decay was superb. Bafta has gone wild for The IT Crowd in its final year, but surely this was a swansong of greater significance.
Cillian Murphy in Peaky Blinders
The Irish film star gave the screen performance of his life, as a baby-faced gangster emotionally blasted by the First World War.
Joe Cole in Cargese
The former Skins star’s portrayal of the troubled, philosophical teenage killer in Matt Smith’s directing debut had such looseness and unpredictability, it was impossible to take your eyes off him.
Chiwetel Ejiofor in Dancing on the Edge
Stephen Poliakoff’s jazz age drama had narrative problems, but that shouldn’t have blinded Bafta to the fact that in Ejiofor’s still, watchful musician gradually realising his own catastrophe was a performance of exceptional nuance.
We threw out...
Dominic West in Burton Taylor
This was intelligent mimicry, pure and simple, and he’s already had a Bafta for doing the same thing better as Fred West in Appropriate Adult.
Luke Newberry in In the Flesh
Newberry had great emotional depth but there’s only room for one up and comer on the Best Actors list and Joe Cole (see above) was mesmerising.
Sean Harris in Southcliffe
It’s easy to play a psycho.
Jamie Dornan in The Fall
See Sean Harris.
Best Actress
Elisabeth Moss in Top of the Lake
The Mad Men actress was tender and tortured as she fell in love and saved the day. One of the most empathetic performances of the year.
Gillian Anderson in The Fall
If you’re going to nominate someone in The Fall choose the person who was best. Anderson’s feisty, sexually aggressive cop was the more interesting foil to Dornan’s inscrutable character.
Olivia Colman in Broadchurch
The one Bafta got right. She will win.
Sharon Rooney in My Mad Fat Diary
Bafta has nominated My Mad Fat Diary as best mini series and in the best supporting actress category yet neglected to give a nomination to the effortlessly believable performance which gave the show its charm and appeal.
We threw out...
Helena Bonham Carter in Burton and Taylor
A so-so performance from a global film star. We wonder why Bafta wanted her to come to the awards ceremony.
Kerrie Hayes in The Mill and Maxine Peake in The Village
Perfectly serviceable performances both from the period dirt category: so easy to gain Bafta sympathy, so dull to watch.
Best Supporting Actor
David Wenham in Top of the Lake 
Was Wenham, riveting as a slick, self-hating paedophile, not nominated because he was an Australian actor no one had heard of? We fear so.
Will Mellor in Dates
Was Mellor, who electrified as a supremely decent working-class man having dinner with a snooty woman in this clever series, not nominated because Hollyoaks is on his CV, and Bafta members think that’s rather uncool? We fear so, again. We also fear they didn’t even watch Dates.
Rory Kinnear in Southcliffe
We’ve kept him in from the original list. Kinnear’s had a good year.
David Bradley in Broadchurch
Although Bradley’s finest performance of the year was actually in An Adventure in Space and Time, the Best Actor category is already so well contested we are settling for this nod (also given by Bafta) for his heart-rending turn in Broadchurch as the village scapegoat.
We threw out...
Nico Mirallegro in The Village
A performance so lacking in charisma and depth, we are mystified why he was ever listed. Presumably just there to further underline Bafta’s approval of the worthiness of this preachy period drama.
Jerome Flynn in Ripper Street
A nod to a TV series that fans liked enough to sign a petition for when it got cancelled? It can’t honestly be a sign that Bafta thinks Flynn, stolid, a bit irascible looking, was one of the year's best actors.
Best Supporting Actress
Sarah Lancashire in Last Tango in Halifax
We’ve kept her in from the original list. She’s a supremely competent actress on fine form here.
Katie Leung in Run
Run was a first-rate Channel 4 drama by new writers that treated inner-city poverty, ignored by Bafta. Leung is the little girl from Harry Potter who grew up to play a Chinese immigrant whose pitiful life options she made heartbreaking.
Amelia Bullmore in Scott & Bailey
Now three series in, Amelia Bullmore has brought both brilliant comic and timing and real dramatic punch – a rare combination indeed – to the part of DCI Gill Murray
Fiona O'Shaughnessy in Utopia
Utopia, also ignored across major categories, was an apocalyptic comic-book thriller that made our everyday landscape look like science-fiction. It included, from O’Shaughnessy, arguably the most convincing female action figure ever seen on British TV.
We threw out...
Nicola Walker in Last Tango in Halifax
She’s fab, but Last Tango didn’t deserve 50 per cent of the nominations in this category. Claire Rushbrook in My Mad Fat Diary, a nomination for her but none for Sharon Rooney (see best actress)? Absurd. Shirley Henderson in Southcliffe, Henderson is never bad but her part wasn’t big, and Southcliffe is hogging these Baftas.
</br>READ: THE 10 BEST TV SHOWS OF 2013
Document TELUK00020140516ea5g0025v
