{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1194"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Patrick Wintour: Two hours could change history (for two minor parties)
874 words
22 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
19
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Next Wednesday, after intensive behind-the-scenes negotiations, the two underdogs of British politics, Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage, step on to a stage in London for the first of two hour-long debates before May's European elections.
The format, a derivative of the 2010 general election debates, has been agreed, the prep is under way and by Wednesday evening the case for In or Out will have triumphed.
In front of a live audience and moderated by the wily Nick Ferrari, the men will stand behind podiums, each make a one-minute opening statement and then over the next 55 minutes or so take up to eight audience questions selected by a panel. Each leader has been allocated a minute to respond and there will be roughly four minutes of free-flowing debate before another question.
The first debate will be broadcast on LBC radio, via its website, and be made available to other broadcasters - though given the participants, the audience figures may prove to be a damp squib.
The whole thing has an air of incompleteness about it owing to the self-imposed absence of David Cameron and Ed Miliband. "A grand prix with a Reliant Robin and a Skoda on the starting grid" is the description of one dismissive Labour strategist.
The event is a coup for LBC, the upstart radio station that gives BBC local radio a run for the taxpayer's money. David Dimbleby has been relegated to the second debate on Wednesday week.
The Clegg team are reluctant to discuss their preparations or who in the Liberal Democrats has been cast in the role of Nigel Farage in mock debates. "Look, he has a busy day job and he is pretty match fit, but we are under no illusions Nick starts as the underdog," says one team member. "Farage is a politician to his fingertips and is peddling some pretty populist messages."
As Farage has said, Clegg is taking part because the deputy prime minister "has almost nothing to lose in this election. The Lib Dems are in big trouble. At 8% they could be wiped out in terms of the European elections. They could go from 12 seats to nothing. It's a chance for Nick Clegg to raise the profile of the Lib Dem campaign, because frankly, looking at those polls they're a fringe party, in the sense of this contest."
Clegg is also a skilled debater. He was the fresh-faced revelation of the 2010 election debates and has morphed into an experienced operator on his weekly LBC phone-in, an idea to break through the wall of cynicism that he grabbed from the ex-mayor of New York Michael Bloomberg. He has honed the skill of sounding informed but unaloof.
He also thinks Farage is plain wrong, telling the Guardian this month "it was a bit of a no brainer" to challenge him to a debate, arguing the mix of divisions and cowardice in the main two parties has created a vacuum in British politics.
"The irony is that you have got two smaller parties now who are doing the job that the big mainstream parties in British politics should be doing, which is spelling out to people what the choice is and the choice is increasingly a rather fundamental one of whether we remain in the European Union or not," he said.
Clegg does not believe the debates will be just an argument on how best to address immigration, crime or foreign threats - even though he thinks Farage is weak on detail - but an examination of a wider fault line in European politics: how to respond to globalisation. Open versus closed is his chosen dividing line in politics.
Clegg's great danger, apart from the popularity of the anti-European case, is that he either patronises or denigrates Farage. He has admitted "it is very dangerous to be lofty or metropolitan about this", or not to respect voters' discontent. Repeating recent personal attacks on Farage will be strictly off limits.
Farage insists no one is playing Clegg in any mock debate organised by Ukip, saying "there is a danger that you can be a bit over-scripted for these things". But over the two hours of debates, he will come under a new level of scrutiny. He says: "I am checking my facts and checking my figures and making sure, given the time we've got for this debate, that I can actually show the British people that in terms of jobs we'd be far better off not being within the European Union, not being within its rulebook, not suffering from some of the green taxes we're putting on manufacturing industry."
Some say he has a tendency to lose his temper under pressure or to let impatience get the better of his undoubted charm. In debates small things matter. The wrong cutaway can cause as much damage as a forgotten statistic, or a zinger soundbite that
falls flat.
The prize for Farage is immense. Euroscepticism has got him through the nation's door. This could be the chance to install himself in the living room.
Document GRDN000020140321ea3m000d5
