{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1439"}
____
  
NEWS
Racists absorb tolerance in ethnically mixed communities; Engineering neighbourhoods and schools so that they are ethnically mixed could tackle racism and prejudice, Oxford Univesity academics claim
By Sarah Knapton Science Correspondent   
479 words
4 March 2014
07:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
People can be made less racist by simply moving to live in ethnically-mixed areas, new research shows.
An Oxford University-led international study found white people develop "passive tolerance" of minorities in mixed areas, even if they have no direct contact with them.
Professor Miles Hewstone, director of the Oxford Centre for the Study of Intergroup Conflict, said governments could create more "harmonious neighbourhoods" by doing more to encourage different ethnic groups to mix.
"If two white people with identical views went to live in different postcodes for a year, the person in the neighbourhood with more mixing between ethnic groups would likely leave more tolerant," he said.
"We would see this effect even if they never personally spoke to people from other ethnicities.
"The size of this 'passive tolerance' effect on people's prejudice is of the same order as the effect of passive smoking on lung cancer risk."
Prof Hewstone claims the research suggests that people can adapt to immigration as long as communities are mixed.
He advises beginning early, by mixing schools so that neighbourhoods become used to children from different backgrounds playing together.
“Watching a mixed group of kids coming out of school together could help communities adapt to immigration.
“To a certain extent, schools could be engineered that that has even been shown to work in Northern Ireland where communities have been traditionally segregated.
“I think schools are a fantastic place to begin because you are starting with people who haven’t got much prejudice."
The research, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) journal, is based on seven studies carried out in England, mainland Europe, the United States and South Africa between 2002 and 2011.
It found that even highly prejudiced people who did not mix with those of different ethnicities became more tolerant the longer they lived in mixed areas.
The scientists suggest simply seeing white strangers "interacting positively" with ethnic minorities is enough to reduce racial prejudice.
Prof Hewstone, the report's senior author, said: "Astonishingly, we don't just see reduced prejudice among people who have direct contact with ethnic minorities.
"It isn't even confined to those whose friends have contact with minorities. Simply living in a neighbourhood where other people are mixing with minorities is enough to reduce racial prejudice."
He added: "Governments should do more to encourage different groups to mix with each other, as we now know that this reduces prejudice not just in individuals but throughout entire neighbourhoods.
"Social interventions that aim to increase contact between groups will help to establish more tolerant social norms in society. In the long run, this should lead to more harmonious neighbourhoods."
Document TELUK00020140304ea34002ei
