{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2093"}
____
  
Features
AT A GLANCE FICTION
Phil Baker   
442 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
39
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
AT A GLANCE THE SNOW QUEEN by MICHAEL CUNNINGHAM Fourth Estate £16.99 ebook £11.39 pp258
FICTION
Some people turn to religion, and some turn to drugs. There is one of each in Cunningham's luminously written new novel, in which Barrett Meeks re-evaluates his life after he sees a strangely knowing and caring light hovering in the sky over Central Park, shortly after yet another romantic disappointment (where the kiss-off comes by text, "a crushingly corporate wish for good luck in the future, followed by three lowercase xxx's"). Meanwhile his brother Tyler, a musician with a terminally ill fiancée, finds that cocaine makes him feel alive and heroin helps him with his songwriting. Page-turningly enjoyable, this is a profound if slightly unresolved novel about love from a highly regarded, Pulitzer-winning novelist.
FAMILY LIFE by AKHIL SHARMA Faber £14.99/ebook £9.99 pp212
Sharma upset a lot of people with his debut novel, An Obedient Father, about incest and corruption in India. He has waited 14 years to produce his second, in which young Ajay Mishra and his family move from Delhi to New York. They prosper cautiously until a horrific swimming-pool tragedy strikes Ajay's elder brother, Birju, after which his father slides into alcoholism. Family Life reads like an autobiography — indeed, it is based on the author's own experience — and there is something likeable about Sharma's totally candid and unpretentious voice. The book is full of striking detail about Hindu culture, Ajay's feelings towards white people, and immigrant experience in America. At the centre, though — with the long-term experience of brain damage, and the reality of nursing homes — it is irredeemably depressing.
ORFEO by RICHARD POWERS Atlantic £18.99/ebook £8.99 pp384
Mistakenly dialling the emergency services because his beloved dog is dying has terrible consequences for Peter Els, an avant-garde classical composer in Pennsylvania. The policemen who call are polite enough, but notice his hobby of microbiology (where's he's innocently looking for musical patterns in strands of DNA). Before he knows what's happening, government agents in biohazard suits are emptying his house and exhuming the dog. Based on the real-life case of Steve Kurtz, a "bio-artist" who went through four years of hell with the FBI, Powers's study of American paranoia post-9/11 alludes to Kafka and stays just the right side of overblown. The result is a virtuoso performance from an unashamedly heavy-duty novelist, determined to tell his fellow Americans more than they see on the news.
Phil Baker
Document ST00000020140518ea5i000gn
