{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"285"}
____
  
Features
Jack clocks on again — and isn't half bad
1,375 words
11 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
2; National
14,15
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
You would have thought Hollywood's national security agencies would have learnt lessons since Jack Bauer was first compelled to save the world singlehandedly in 24 hours, not counting commercial breaks. Lessons such as: "Jack's right, there is an assassination plot aimed at the president. Let's put some people on that." Or: "Someone please give Kiefer a Fisherman's Friend before his next scene, he clearly has tonsillitis." But no, they've stuck to the biggest, most important lesson in television: if it ain't broke, keep recommissioning it. So here we are at the outset of 24: Live Another Day, aka season nine, with another president under threat and only one man on the planet capable of saving him.
Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep.
While the real-time format ain't broke, it's certainly not quite as sprightly as it was in 2001. Back then, it didn't matter that the plot was ridiculous, or that Jack hadn't slept, urinated or eaten for 24 hours straight. He was, after all, in his mid-thirties, peak years for physical endurance. Now he's approaching 50, and the plausibility, if not the novelty, of a man with David Blaine's bladder control has long since worn off.
There are some improvements since the last, dampest squib of a season. Jack is now in London, and even though 24's version of London is half beefeater, half Brixton Laden, the relocation lends a shadier, less teeth-whitened atmosphere. The writers' room has gone for a bit of an update on terrorism clichés, too. Episode one has the president grappling, Play School-ishly, with the ethics of drone warfare; later, we'll have a bit of WikiLeaks hackery to keep things "contemporary".
Much more significant is that 24 is now, technically, 12. Everything still happens in real time, but with gaps when the narrative/budget requires them. We won't have to spend a whole episode watching Jack read an in-flight magazine when he pops over to Berlin. We can also assume he takes his toilet breaks in the unfilmed half of the day, which is a relief. It is still unfortunate that every counterterrorism headquarters in 24 looks like the Moshi Monsters office having a Dragons' Den party. And that the supporting cast continues to be poor. This is the UKIP of TV shows, a star vehicle for Sutherland, who is surrounded by a bunch of swivel-eyed loons you don't care about at all. The presidents have been rubbish — you'd assassinate every one on acting ability alone — and so have the sidekicks. Even if Chloe O'Brian is the only person to grasp that Jack is always, always right, she is so squinty, beaky and irritating, you can understand why the rest of the Counter Terrorism Unit never listen to her.
Still, I'll sit through the whole thing with a bowl of popcorn, groaning at the transparency of the cliffhangers and pre-empting their beeps with my own beeps. Stephen Fry makes his 24 debut as the prime minister, and he's not a swivel-eyed loon at all.
The deification of Gary Barlow came another step closer with the hour-long documentary When Corden Met Barlow. As anyone who endured Michael McIntyre's chat show will know, watching a celebrity interview another celebrity can be like eavesdropping on a first date in a gay sauna. James Corden, a Take That fanatic, didn't hold back on his love for Barlow in this cuddlier version of The Trip. Yet in between all the ego-massaging and rolling about in Range Rovers, there were glimpses of a real person, a star with his guard down, with no PR people hovering in the wings. In a meticulously manufactured world, here was truth, or the appearance of truth, a study in the fickleness of fame and the hard work, rather than good luck, that sustains it. I might even buy his new album, damn it.
It's obviously harder to kill off a zombie show than it is to kill a zombie. In the Flesh, BBC3's right-on, Bafta-winning drama, should have been buried for good after series one. It was a nice, original premise — can a small town in Lancashire adjust to life after an influx of the undead, particularly when the undead have feelings too? Served up with coming-of-age angst and a spot of supermarket zombie massacring, it was a watchable approach to an exhausted genre.
Now, like Jack Bauer foiling yet another dastardly plan, it's going over the same ground again. At the opening of series two, an extremist MP, Maxine Martin, wants to get tough on Partially Deceased Syndrome sufferers. If it wasn't for the scene where she kills one of them with a power tool, we could have been watching News 24's coverage of the European elections. Immigrants. Intolerance. The easy slide into pitchfork illiberalism. It's Metaphor for Dummies. Which we got the first time around. Then there's the pace. Slow. Very slow. It's Day of the Triffids with deceased teenagers instead of triffids, but in a bad way.
Thank goodness we had a comedian preparing for his own impending death to cheer us up. Billy Connolly's Big Send Off began with the Big Yin telling us it had been a funny week. "On the Monday I got hearing aids," he told us. "On the Tuesday I got pills for heartburn, and on the Wednesday I got news that I had prostate cancer and Parkinson's disease."
Part one of a two-part journey focused on the predictably ridiculous funeral industry in America. He visited a pet cemetery ("The smaller the dog, the bigger the gravestone") and a Jewish cemetery ("How weird to have speed bumps in a cemetery"), he contemplated a self-composting eco death suit and he ended up at the frequently televised drive-thru funeral parlour.
It was like all Connolly's other great journeys — trademark warmth, trademark nonjudgmental judgmentalism — but with the extra clarity and poignancy brought by a ticking clock. On seeing the ashes of three anonymous San Franciscans being salt-and-peppered into the Pacific, Connolly wondered if they had just come into this life and left again with nobody noticing. "Make the most of it while you're here, folks," he concluded, blinking back a tear. It was one of several powerful moments.
The journey ended in a mosque, where it emerged that Islam has the most practical, least hypocritical approach to burial. While the Christians of California bankrupt themselves on fancy caskets, and their Jewish neighbours trade astronomical numbers in real estate for their dead, a Muslim funeral, rich or poor, is an exercise in affordable simplicity. And that's the first bit of positive television I've seen on Islam in a long time.
Dr Richard Clay, a Birmingham University art historian, made his television debut in The French Revolution — Tearing Up History. He is a strange egg. He has a long fringe and an arrhythmic gait, like a spider trying to shake off a blonde toupee. This works well for him — but he is also wilfully revisionist, which doesn't. The mob in the French Revolution was not a mob, he told us again and again and again. They were incredibly smart people who understood the importance of symbols. So, when they were defacing saints, scratching out fleurs-de-lys and toppling royal statues, it was in the name of artistic protest à la Banksy. And no matter how many times he said it, it wasn't convincing. Mobs tear down symbols of regimes (and fire up the guillotine) because they're angry with the regime. Art is not the cause, but a byproduct. Try telling that to an art historian. They just won't listen. c AA Gill is away
Matt Rudd
24 | Sky 1, Wed
When Corden Met Barlow BBC1,
In the Flesh BBC3, Sun
Billy Connolly's Big Send Off | ITV, Wed
The French Revolution
Tearing Up History | BBC4, Tue
spend It THE CRITICS
London provides a shadier, less teethwhitened location
Document ST00000020140511ea5b000ha
