{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"3537"}
____
  
News
IN PRAISE OF MILD FAITH
Bryan Appleyard   
2,514 words
20 April 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
2; National
21
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron wants Britain to be more evangelical about its status as a Christian country, yet the Church of England has traditionally made a virtue of vague beliefs and baggy tolerance, writes Bryan Appleyard
Very few people attend services at St Saviour in the Marshes, Hackney, east London. Those who do seem to have either a dubious motive or a rather dodgy grasp of the faith. Even the vicar, Adam Smallbone, is uncertain about what he is supposed to be doing and what he believes. Periodically he slumps into outright disbelief.
Smallbone is beset by a cynical archdeacon, the mad managerialist fantasies of his superiors, crazed evangelicals and a local population that cares nothing for him or his pompous 18th-century church. But somehow he keeps going because keeping going is, ultimately, his entire job description.
Smallbone is a fictional character played by Tom Hollander in the superb BBC2 comedy Rev. But in his doubts, his precarious faith and his impossible task, he embodies a great and lasting truth about the Church of England.
"He is very low down the candle, as they say in church," said James Wood, co-writer with Hollander of the show.
"High up the candle means you are almost Catholic, but he's just a pretty liberal, nonevangelical priest of the sort that's been around for centuries in the Anglican church." In previous centuries, of course, C of E clerics could rely on a large, devout population. Smallbone cannot. His church, he must know, is dying. Although the decline in Church of England attendance seems to have levelled off over the past decade, it is still at the desperately low level of 1.05m weekly parishioners. (The one oddity in the figures is the sharp rise in attendance at cathedrals — 35% up between 2002-12. I'll come back to that.) Furthermore, the proportion of people identifying themselves as Christian has fallen from 72% to 59%; the number reporting no religion has risen from 15% to 25%.
This is not to say religion as traditionally understood is dying in Britain — Muslims, for example, have increased from 3% to 5%. Furthermore, immigration is steadily transforming the religious landscape.
Since 2005 African immigration has led to a 50% jump in attendances at Pentecostal churches; in London they now represent 32% of weekly churchgoers and only 27% are Anglican.
Catholicism has seen its own previously rapid decline halted by a 1% rise since 2005 thanks to the arrival of eastern European immigrants, notably from Poland. Anglicans may be doing slightly better than they expected — but because of ambition rather than faith. The continued existence of good faith schools and bad comprehensives, combined with the pricing out of the middle classes from private education, means the C of E finds itself holding the key to bourgeois ambition.
Congregations swell so people can claim they are churchgoers and get their brats into C of E schools. "Pay or pray" is the stark educational choice for working professionals. This phenomenon was one of the inspirations for Rev and it was the theme of the first episode.
However, the underlying truth is that the C of E could still be on course for no more than 150,000 weekly parishioners by 2050. The old faith clearly cannot compete with the new: consumer capitalism. The latter is evangelised in every television ad break and by smug secular talking heads; the former in almost empty churches.
Despite this David Cameron has been doing a week of God. First he generously gave Jesus credit for the invention of the big society (remember that?) and then, Pope-like, delivered a video Easter message. Finally, in an article in the Church Times, he laid it on the line.
"I believe", he wrote, "we should be more confident about our status as a Christian country, more ambitious about expanding the role of faith-based organisations and, frankly, more evangelical about a faith that compels us to get out there and make a difference to people's lives."
Is his faith deepening? In 2008 it seemed to be shallower. He borrowed from Boris Johnson to describe his own belief as a "bit like the reception for Magic FM in the Chilterns: it sort of comes and goes" — hardly something to get evangelical about.
Or is God an anti-UKIP move, an attempt to crush the Farageist heresy? Many Farageists will be adherents of the old-time religion of Anglicanism, the church once known as the Tory party at prayer. There are probably still more blues in the pews than reds and it may be time to haul them back from UKIP perdition. If that is all it is, then Cameron's conversion is depressing.
"I hate it when politicians do religion," said Richard Holloway, the former Bishop of Edinburgh who resigned when he fell into postreligious agnosticism. "I'm not interested in their religion. If I hire a plumber I don't want to see his baptism certificate. I just want him to be competent and honest."
Alastair Campbell would agree. Back in 2003 he famously announced "We don't do God" on behalf of his still apparently believing boss, Tony Blair. Last Thursday, in the midst of Cameron's theology-fest, Campbell sourly tweeted: "I hear Dave has done God again. Another tactic cos has no strategy." Campbell has many talents; making one feel good about life is not one of them.
Also he is not God; he has no more access to the prime ministerial soul than anybody else. Perhaps we should give Cameron the benefit of the doubt. Nicky Gumbel, who runs the Alpha course that has now taught Christianity to 24m people around the world, thinks being prime minister does make people more religious.
"Even if you don't have faith when you become prime minister, you probably will have by the time you finish," he told me.
"It's like being the head teacher of a school. When you have come into contact with a Christian tradition and once you've been to chapel a few times, it starts to sink in. You meet people, you see what's happening in the country and you see where the church is going to lead you, you get a more positive view."
Fair enough, but in that article in the Church Times, Cameron asks a lot, perhaps too much. He asks us to be "confident about our status as a Christian country" and to be "evangelical" about our native faith. Is either possible? Is either meaningful? THE figures say the answer to both questions is no. But religion as such cannot die. Secularists always make the same mistake. They think faith is like a tumour that can be painlessly removed from the body. In fact, every society has been religious and ours, in its own strange way, still is. It is just that the church is not the place where religion is happening.
"The church has stopped being the place people turn to when they are trying to develop or think about a spiritual dimension to life, the things that make life more meaningful," said Mark Vernon, a theologian and former C of E priest.
"Over the past 50 years people have come to think of the church as toxic or irrelevant, they have turned elsewhere. You can see by the splurge of new age shops, the massive increase in yoga or mindfulness. People in the church can be sniffy about these things, but they are signs of a spiritual revival that the church needs to take notice of."
The church, Vernon believes, should stop talking about its mission as a way of spreading "one particular flavour of Christianity" and instead go to the places where people are searching for God and "align its activities with that". The church should target the malaise of modernity — the multiple mental illnesses that seem to arise from the pressures and anxieties of affluence and consumer capitalism.
The Alpha course is another kind of response. It began at Holy Trinity, Brompton, in one of the richest urban areas in the world, attracting at first the curious and anxiously affluent of west London's Kensington and Knightsbridge before it spread around the world. Unlike going to church, it was an easy step to take in a pair of Jimmy Choos.
"Alpha is a very easy way in for lots of people interested in spirituality," said Gumbel.
"People do recognise there is more to life than material things, but the leap to church is quite a big leap. Alpha is a bridge to a place you can explore big questions: why am I here? What is the purpose of life? They're not brought up at the pub or football matches, but everybody asks them at some time in their lives."
Alpha is a 10-week course combined with weekend days away. It is open to anybody and is non-denominational. Its intention is to explore the meaning of life and in doing so it teaches the basics of the Christian faith.
Its success is extraordinary. It has been taken up by 66,000 churches in the world and about 7,000 in the UK. In total, 1.2m people have done the course in Britain alone. Much of the success in secular Britain, I suspect, is due to the simple fact that many people, especially the young, know nothing whatever about Christianity so the course offers a degree of novelty and revelation.
Another road ahead for the church is social work. Justin Welby, the Archbishop of Canterbury and an evangelical, has embraced this form of active social religion, notably in his crusade against payday lenders. This does not demand belief, only exemplary social action. Vernon disapproves: others, he said, do social work better. Holloway is in favour because it is what our time demands.
"When I was a radical young priest in the 1960s, I lamented the emergence of the welfare state doing me out of a kind of neighbourliness," he said.
"The church historically did run schools and hospitals and look after the poor. That was taken over by the welfare state, but it has now been reversed with the rise of food banks. I know priests who are now doing many things that priests did in the 1930s. The political harshness of the times has meant that side of Christianity has been rediscovered."
The phrase of Cameron's that demands the most introspection is "Christian country". Is it really? In a way it is Rev and its hero Smallbone that answer the question with a yes.
The tolerant, earnest but rather vague faith of Adam Smallbone is that of our national church. The Church of England was born out of the wars of religion that racked Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. Somehow, in the 18th century, we worked out a compromise and the result was a church founded on a weak but enduring faith and a sort of loose, baggy tolerance.
It produced an institution celebrated in Our Church, a recent book by the philosopher Roger Scruton. He sees it as the embodiment of a form of faith that survives, even without explicit belief, on the basis of rites of passage, rituals of community and ancient stone and glass.
"It's a very English idea," said Holloway.
"You do get extreme elements of the faith in Scotland where religion has always been harder-edged. It is one of the glories of England. Religion is most attractive when it is weak because it doesn't handle power better than anybody else."
YET this very local form of religion has gone around the world. As rows about attitudes to gays and women expose deep divisions in global Anglicanism, this imperial spread was, it is now clear, a mistake.
"The church is trying to keep millions of people across the world under one umbrella and all the recent archbishops of Canterbury have tried to find a form of theology to keep them all together. But they can't," said the Rev co-writer Wood.
A church of weak faith and baggy tolerance is a more attractive package than the attendance figures suggest. But perhaps that is changing. The average age of people who take the Alpha course is 27 and Gumbel has noticed that they now arrive with less baggage of resentment and distaste for the church. Angry, postwar secularism is ebbing and the militant atheists — Richard Dawkins, Christopher Hitchens — have had their day.
Finally, there is that odd statistic showing a big rise in cathedral attendance. It is hard, very hard, not to be religious in Lincoln, Durham, Wells, Ely, Canterbury or Norwich, the greatest works of art on these islands. It is not surprising that these old stones are speaking to a new generation, perhaps more tolerant, perhaps more curious than the last.
In his great poem Church Going, Philip Larkin wonders what will happen to the churches when the congregations are gone. A sceptical, even cynical, depressive, Larkin is forced to acknowledge that these old stones have a power that cannot be ignored. In two brief, piercing lines he provides the ultimate, irrefutable defence of the religious impulse: "Someone will forever be surprising / A hunger in himself to be more serious." Today is a good day to be hungry. Happy Easter.
The West must praise the Lord for its liberal, secular freedoms, News Review, page 11 @bryanappleyard
The holy self
The postwar period in Britain saw an unprecedented decline in traditional religion and an equally unprecedented increase in wealth.
The ordinary physical discomforts of life were removed, while the spiritual ones were ignored. But the search for meaning and purpose is a constant in all societies. So the postwar British invented new ones.
Primarily there was cultivating the self. This first took the form of the fitness cult, the belief in the perfected body as typified by Jane Fonda''s first workout video in 1982.
Other versions added religious associations, usually borrowed from the East. So, for example, yoga — which came to Britain when the Maharishi taught it to the Beatles in the 1960s — in all its exotic forms, is a physical discipline with mental and spiritual goals. It is now practised by 30m worldwide.
Celebrity — in itself a quasi-religious cult — became the prime driver of these novel spiritualities. Madonna, for example, led the way with Kabbalah and Noel Edmonds with the even more bizarre Cosmic Ordering Service, a kind of deal that you could make with the universe.
Self-help, rather than communal involvement, was the consistent theme. In less exotic forms this was expressed through therapy.
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) started in the 1970s and quickly took hold thanks to its speed and practicality compared with previous psychotherapies.
This also took on an eastern flavour with mindfulness, a form of CBT-like problem solving using meditation. Thousands of patients have been prescribed this on the National Health Service and a million or more have downloaded DIY mindfulness apps.
Document ST00000020140420ea4k000p3
