{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1802"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion Columns
Atheism and Christianity are both fine ...
Alice Thomson   
978 words
23 April 2014
The Times
T
2; National
25
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
... as long as neither is held with too much passion. We like the Church of England because it's not too assertive
Twenty years ago today I got married in a 13th-century flint-and-stone church in Oxfordshire. As I was vaguely Anglican and my future husband was deeply agnostic I told him to leave the discussion with the vicar to me.
"Would he marry us?" I asked. "Of course," replied my sandal-wearing vegan. "I'd marry you if you were Hari Krishna. This is your parish."
At the time I was mildly horrified that he didn't seem to care. Yet what I have come to love best about the Church of England is its extraordinary inclusiveness — or "wishy-washyness" as my fellow columnist Tim Montgomerie calls it.
David Cameron was right when he said last week that Christianity underpins this country's heritage. The 55 signatories of the letter insisting he is wrong can't deny the logic. More than 59 per cent of people living in England and Wales called themselves Christian in the latest 2011 census.
Our law, ethics, parliament, monarchy, language, education, literature, art and architecture are all inspired by Christianity.
Every prime minister since the war has been remarkably religious. Harold Macmillan read the Bible avidly, Harold Wilson was brought up as a Baptist, Ted Heath retired to the close of Salisbury Cathedral, James Callaghan was a former Sunday school teacher, Margaret Thatcher learnt to speak from a pulpit and Gordon Brown's father was a Church of Scotland minister. Only Tony Blair was explicit about its influence, insisting: "If you have religious faith it's the most important thing in your life; it is not the adjunct, it is the core."
Alastair Campbell, who once told Mr Blair "we don't do God", believes Mr Cameron is exaggerating his faith to score political points off Ukip, but this isn't some cynical conversion. The prime minister does "sort of" do God and often attends Thursday morning service at St Mary Abbots in Kensington.
The Queen, the Supreme Governor of the Church of England, is deeply religious, quietly handing out Bibles to schoolchildren. The Maundy Thursday service is a highlight of her calendar and she has only ever missed four. "Far more important than Ascot," explains one aide.
The Church of England has been inclusive for generations: 85 per cent of Britons visit a church or place of worship at least once a year. Mild, gentle Anglicanism has provided a template for moderation, restraint and pragmatism, showing that religion is as much about values and culture as belief.
It is also the reason, one bishop explained to me, that he thinks there has been a revival of interest in cathedrals, with attendance up 35 per cent in the past decade. The British love their choirs and candles and enjoy feeling vaguely good, but they don't want to be accosted by an over-eager vicar and quizzed about their spirituality.
Anglicanism is often mocked, but that too is important, preventing it from becoming too pompous. It shows how much we still care when so many of our comedies are still based on vicars from Rowan Atkinson to Dawn French and now Tom Hollander in Rev.
Nor has our church been allowed to be too dictatorial. As Justin Welby, the new Archbishop of Canterbury, said repeatedly in an interview last week, he is not the Pope and this is why he is accepted. Even though, personally, he is evangelical, he isn't trying to force his moral agenda on the country. The English would take even less kindly to being told how to behave by Rome than by Brussels. The 77 million Anglicans abroad may take every dictum from the church seriously but this country looks to its politicians to make decisions on abortion and gay equality.
Roger Scruton summed it up in his new book, Our Church. Anglicanism is essentially a vague faith, based on rites of passage, community events and beautiful buildings.
Recently, however, the religious debate has become more shrill and divisive. Religion is suddenly everywhere. Bishops have become political, pontificating about food banks, payday lenders and immigration. Where faith schools once prided themselves on their exam results rather than their conversion rates, they are now being linked to radicalism. The debate in Birmingham shouldn't be about whether extremist Muslims are taking over schools but why fundamentalists of any religion must not be allowed to take over any educational establishments.
The prime minister made me feel slightly uncomfortable when he wrote in the Church Times that Christians should become "frankly more evangelical about a faith that compels us to get out there and make a difference to people's lives".
This feels less British. Most of us don't want to spread the word. It sounds too competitive. We should be encouraging other religions to be as tolerant as our national faith.
All religions should be able to be gently mocked if they become too fanatical. They shouldn't be allowed to become intimidating — and neither should aggressive atheism.
Religion should play a part at births, marriages and deaths, in moments of crisis and on spiritual days. Religious leaders should be there to comfort the lost, the bereaved, the bewildered and the anxious and to help rather than harass society.
Muslims, Jews, Sikhs, Hindus and Christians should all encourage people to enter their mosques, synagogues, temples and churches to seek peace and solace but otherwise our creeds should merge into the background of our lives, quietly doing good.
All religions should note the lines of Matthew in the New Testament, "by their fruits you will know them" — advice also given in the Koran and Torah.
We like our politicians - not religious leaders - to lead moral debates
Document T000000020140423ea4n000bw
