{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"3711"}
____
  
News; Front Page
Salmond plea to halt Ukip surge
Ben Riley–Smith   
939 words
22 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; Scotland
1,4
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
First Minister urges Scots to shun Farage's 'intolerant' party as rising tide of euroscepticism could cost Nationalists third seat
Ukip confident it can take first Scottish Euro seat
ALEX SALMOND last night launched a final attack on the UK Independence Party's "appalling politics of intolerance" amid predictions that rising euroscepticism could hand Nigel Farage his first Scottish MEP.
With voters heading to polling stations to elect their European Parliament representatives today, attention has focused on which party will win Scotland's sixth seat.
Ukip hopes David Coburn, its top European candidate, can ride a UK–wide surge in support for the party to claim the seat ahead of Tasmina Ahmed–Sheikh, the SNP's third–choice candidate. The battle has taken on added significance given the backdrop of the independence referendum, with both sides likely to use the European election result to bolster their respective campaigns.
If the SNP wins a third seat, the party will regard it as proof that an ideological difference exists between England and Scotland that only independence can bridge. For Unionists, Ukip's electoral success will be linked to Alex Salmond's party and a rising nationalist sentiment amid economic austerity which fails to address Britain's long–term problems.
Meanwhile David Cameron issued a similar plea for "frustrated" voters to shun Ukip, promising to salvage Britain's relationship with the European Union just as he said he has overhauled the UK economy.
The First Minister called on "people of all political shades who want to stop Ukip" to vote for his party.
"It is a contest between the new Scotland of hope and ambition that welcomes those who wish to come here and contribute to our society – and the appalling politics of intolerance being peddled by Nigel Farage's Ukip," Mr Salmond said.
Mr Coburn responded by saying Ukip was winning over voters on Scotland's housing estates, adding that the SNP's focus on independence meant it had failed on jobs and growth.
"The Nationalists spend so much time watching Braveheart it has addled their brains. They don't realise that film was Hollywood not Holyrood," Mr Coburn said.
Westminster politicians attempted to link the SNP with Ukip on the last day of canvassing before today's poll.
"The SNP and Ukip offer a false choice in this election," said Danny Alexander, the Liberal Democrat Chief Secretary to the Treasury, who was campaigning in the Highlands.
"Both believe in narrow–minded nationalism and both are bringing our relationship with Europe to the brink. A vote for Ukip or the SNP on Thursday will give succour to those who want to isolate Scotland and put the economic recovery at risk."
Ed Balls, Labour's shadow chancellor, campaigning in Paisley, Renfrewshire, linked the SNP's "confusion over Europe" with Ukip's hopes of "walking away from the biggest single market".
The Prime Minister conceded that voters, including some who previously supported the Tories, would back Ukip as the prospect loomed that the Tories would finish third in the UK–wide poll.
"I would accept that in an election like the European election, people do use that as an opportunity to send a message and make a protest. I understand that," he told Channel 4 News last night.
"People have had a difficult economic time in our country. They are frustrated about some of the issues they want gripped and dealt with like immigration, welfare and Europe."
However, he insisted that only he and the Conservatives could deliver real change in the European Union. "Just as we've turned the economy around, we can deal with the situation in Europe."
Three recent polls have put Ukip's Scottish support in the European elections on 10 per cent. Mr Farage recently predicted the party would need 12–13 per cent of the vote to win an MEP in Scotland.
While support for Ukip remains lower than south of the border, where it could top the poll at the European elections, there are signs that Scots are not as insusceptible to its message as Mr Salmond's rhetoric suggests.
Nearly seven in 10 Scots want to see stricter immigration controls, according to a Survation poll – a key pledge in Ukip's manifesto – while around a quarter want to leave the EU.
Mr Coburn said he was "very confi–dent" of being elected an MEP, but added: "The establishment has done everything they could have done to stop us getting in. If we don't win I'm afraid it will have a lot to do with the establishment."
Meanwhile, Mr Farage admitted that Ukip relied too much on his public pro–file and conceded that its "one–man band" image could prevent the party from making ground at the general election next year.
However, he told the BBC that he planned to appoint spokesmen from the "high–calibre" MEPs he expects will be elected in the European elections to increase the variety of Ukip members visible to the public.
VAT could remain at 20 per cent beyond the next election, after David Cameron said he could not promise to cut it.
The Prime Minister was urged to reduce the tax by a market trader on a campaign visit to Newark, Notts.
VAT was cut from 17.5 per cent to 15 per cent as a stimulus measure by Labour after the financial crash, but raised to 20 per cent by the Coalition as an emergency measure in order to reduce the deficit. Mr Cameron said: "We haven't dealt with the deficit yet."
Document DT00000020140522ea5m000bg
