{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"54"}
____
  
News
The siren voice of Polly Toynbee is calling Ed Miliband. He should give in to it
By Dan Hodges   
1,216 words
25 March 2014
12:56
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
This morning Harriet Harman claimed on the Today programme that Labour is making “steady progress”. And she’s right. Labour is moving steadily backwards.
Yesterday saw another raft of polls showing the party’s poll lead melting away to nothing. The average lead is now down to 3 per cent, and that was before yesterday’s surveys were factored in. Labour is essentially like a drowning man. The party bobs down in the polls, and then bobs up again. But each time it does, it settles lower and lower in the water.
As I窶况e written in the paper this morning, Ed Miliband’s big problem is that a consensus has now developed across his party that his strategy – whatever it is – isn’t working. It’s a problem compounded by the fact no one can agree on precisely what it is he’s doing wrong, or what needs to be done to fix things.
Anyone wanting to understand the nature of the Labour leader’s dilemma need look no further than Polly Toynbee窶冱 latest priceless offering in the Guardian. According to Polly, we’ve all got it wrong.
It suits Labour’s enemies to imagine that the letter from think tanks in yesterday’s Guardian was a 'savage' attack on Ed Miliband. On the contrary: in an unprecedented display of unity, groups all the way from the trade unionists of Class to Fabians and Progress (where Blair is president) called for what Miliband spelled out in his recent Hugo Young speech.
The real reason all those people sent that letter warning Labour was “playing it safe”, banking on Tory unpopularity to scramble over the winning line in 2015, and would “not have earned a mandate for such change” if they do, was apparently this: because they wanted to express solidarity with Miliband and his mission. “The aim is to stiffen his sinews to follow his own radical instincts.”
And what instincts they are. “This goes with the grain of a leader who has denounced irresponsible capitalism, defied Murdoch, damned the energy companies, helped stop the UK and US bombing Syria, and shown how shrinking pay undermines the economy,” Polly writes.
Why all this sinew-snapping radicalism has resulted in Labour’s poll lead evaporating, Polly doesn’t make clear. But her argument is basically this: “Ed Miliband has been doing what I’ve been telling him to do. I’ve been praising him for it. But it isn’t quite working at the moment. So he needs to do lots more of the things I’ve been telling him to do.”
And bizarre as it may seem, Polly Toynbee actually has a point. As do all the people who signed yesterday’s Guardian letter. Though it’s not necessarily the point they think they’re making.
Ed Miliband essentially has three choices. He can continue to run around shouting “Toff!” and “One Nation!” at everyone, which is basically what he’s been doing since the turn of the year. He can radically recalibrate his strategy, and try to build his and Labour’s credentials as a serious alternative prime minister and party of government. Or he can do what Polly Toynbee and the “progressives” are urging him to do, which is basically throw caution to the winds, chuck every madcap radical centre-Left policy idea into the pot, and see what bubbles up.
The first option is clearly a non-starter. Even the most blinkered Miliband groupee is starting to realise Labour is heading for defeat in 2015. And even if they don’t, the shadow cabinet and Labour backbenches certainly do.
The second option is the option I’ve been advocating for the last three and a half years. Tough lines on spending. Welfare. Law and order. Immigration. Public service reform. Regain Labour’s credibility for competence and fiscal prudence.
But the truth is, it’s too late for that now. This week Labour will vote for the Tory cap on welfare. It’s a pointless gesture.
If the party had endorsed the policy when it was first unveiled, rather than pledging to fight it tooth and nail, it would have been a sensible political move. But tomorrow? Why bother?
It doesn’t matter what Labour says between now and 2015. No one is seriously going to be saying to themselves: “That Ed Miliband may look a bit weird. But I tell you what, when it comes to welfare I reckon he’s hard as nails. If he gets elected that White Dee’s going to have to watch her step.”
The window of opportunity for Labour to establish its credentials for fiscal competence and basic political maturity has closed. The Tories now have a lock on issues such as the economy, welfare, law and order and public service reform. And there is now no way Ed Miliband can unpick it.
Which leaves us with the third option. The Toynbee option. And I say: “Go for it Ed!”
Renationalise the railways. Ban free coffee. Give the St Paul’s Protesters a place on some cabinet committee. Set minimum prices for basic commodities. Introduce a statutory living wage. Embrace Andy Burnham’s social care reforms. Pledge a Mansion Tax. And another Banker’s Bonus tax. And another. Scrap the Trident replacement. Abolish Free Schools. Spend billions more on flood defences. Build 100,000 new homes. 500,000. Make it a round million. Advocate greater European integration. Hell, get British membership of the single currency back on the agenda. Empower everyone. Introduce “Co-production of public services by workers”. Whatever that is.
Labour may as well lose big as lose small. And who knows, maybe there is a spark of radicalism lurking within the British electorate that could see their heads turned away from superficial concerns – such as the sound management of the economy, or the level-headed governance of their country – towards Ed Miliband’s “big offer”.
But there is another, more pragmatic reason, why it would be in Labour’s long-term interests to pursue the Toynbee plan.
When the party loses in 2015, as it will, it will then be clear why Labour lost.
As things stand, Labour’s defeat next year is still not going to give the party closure. That’s because no one currently has definitive control of the strategy. The Right of the party will blame Ed Miliband for his reckless radicalism. The Left will blame him for not being radical enough. Polly Toynbee will blame everybody.
Someone has to take ownership of that defeat. Because if it doesn’t, Labour will waste another five years in the way it’s wasted the past five years; i.e. pretending Britain has a Tory prime minister because the party wasn’t Left-wing enough. Or, God forbid, pretending we live in an age of “new politics” where “the old distinctions between left and right no longer matter”.
Some people think that Polly Toynbee and her allies have identified the path along which Labour can return to power. Others – me included – think they are advocating electoral suicide. Well, there’s only one way to find out.
Go for it, Ed.
Document TELUK00020140325ea3p002pj
