{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"580"}
____
  
Observer New Comment Pages
Comment: A humane asylum policy has to be led by law, not emotion: Yashika's deportation seemed harsh - but so would many others. And we can't bend the rules in every case
Catherine Bennett   
1,213 words
6 April 2014
The Observer
OB
41
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
You can still sign the petition at change.org, asking the government to allow the young Mauritian and refused asylum seeker Yashika Bageerathi to complete her A-levels before being forcibly deported. Though it did not finally help Bageerathi, who is now back in Mauritius, this effort has been interpreted as a sign of hope. Even allowing for the clickability of online campaigns it might mean that many of us are actually far more sympathetic to asylum seekers than is suggested by stony-hearted opinion polls, or even by petitions whose success is inevitably determined by exposure in social media, on celebrity support and the calculations of ratings-minded news organisations, not forgetting the individual qualities of their subjects.
Had Bageerathi not been so well liked by her classmates, they might never have mounted their hugely effective #FightForYashika campaign, which attracted so much support, notably from her local MP, David Burrowes, from Channel 4 and, decisively, the model Cara Delevingne (who tweeted support to 1.57 million followers), that their petition had gathered, by the eve of her deportation, more than 175,000 signatures. In comparison, a petition to end the detention of women in Yarl's Wood (where Bageerathi was incarcerated), though it, too, has benefited from demonstrations and prominent supporters, has 42,000 signatures. Another petition, asking the government to offer asylum to Afghan interpreters, stands at 93,000. Meanwhile, a campaign to save an albino baby dolphin has, even without support on Channel 4 news, acquired 180,000 names on the change site, possibly assisted by its "browsing" facility - for people who simply like signing petitions.
It may have helped, in Bageerathi's case, that she was finally asking for so little; not for asylum, this having been repeatedly refused in the courts, but for a chance to complete her exams before being deported, despite being technically, at 19, ineligible for such consideration. Her school confirmed her academic commitment and promise, which had resulted in Russell Group offers. For once, it was easy to agree with Burrowes, better known for his hostility to gay marriage: "We need to look humanely at every individual case, at every point right up to the very end." Is our asylum system so petty and inflexible that it cannot respond to individual circumstances, in a hugely deserving case, when, as it was repeatedly pointed out, known offenders and troublemakers are sometimes allowed to stay, at colossal expense, perhaps for no better reason than that they have reproduced?
In fact, when he told the Commons that the home secretary would make no exception for Bageerathi, the immigration minister, James Brokenshire, affirmed that this is what happens: "We consider every claim for asylum on its individual merits and this particular candidate was not considered to be in need of protection." To be taken into account, of course, is Brokenshire's history, so different from A-student Bageerathi's, as a bona fide idiot, last heard of blaming mass immigration on metropolitan employers of cheap domestic labour, such as the prime minister.
Yet, notwithstanding the powerful arguments for forcibly removing Brokenshire to what I understand to be his original home, in Southend-on-Sea, it seems obvious that a last-minute reprieve for Bageerathi could have set a difficult precedent, supposing immigration laws must be fairly enforced and clearly understood. There will, with more than 13,000 forced removals a year, be many hundreds of asylum seekers with equally, if not more plausible claims to special consideration, most of which never come to public notice. Batches of younger men are regularly deported, regardless of their studies, to Afghanistan, where their lives will be at risk, with barely a flicker of media interest; effectively punished by public opinion for being insufficiently picturesque.
As much as the Home Office should have shown a willingness to relax the rules in Bageerathi's case, this would only have happened, following last week's final appeal, because of the unique set of circumstances that included a petition, a memorable name, Mother's Day, an exemplary school attendance record and Delevigne's tweet. None of which have anything to do with the rule of law in Mauritius or allegations of domestic violence as an accepted argument for asylum, particularly in a system that enthusiastically returns women to cultures that practise FGM and forced marriage.
And if the fact that the average 19-year-old boy, or a less intelligent and pleasing student or young mother, would probably, in similar circumstances, have been repatriated without a national outcry, is not an argument against compassion in Bageerathi's case, it should perhaps temper hopes, following this campaign, that public concern for her translates as some significant softening towards migrants as a whole. After all, even the Daily Mail, hammer of the bogus and promoter of a 2011 Migration Watch petition that demanded further curbs on immigration, has given sympathetic coverage to a story that nicely encapsulates a picky but popular approach to migrants: just a few exceptionally gifted singletons, please.
Any pro-migration argument that celebrates the emotional impact of one virtuous individual must factor in the unhappy corollary when the next uncouth, monoglot, giant flat screen-equipped, hugely fertile shirker stands revealed - preferably against a backdrop of rubbish bags and stricken neighbours, alongside his or her central London palazzo. The emphasis on Bageerathi's promise hints, even among enemies of Migration Watch, at a distinct preference for asylum seekers who can make a measurable contribution - not great for the persecuted but illiterate.
But online reaction to the coverage also suggests limitations, at least where migrants are concerned, to the psychologists' "identifiable victim effect", whereby individuals elicit more empathy than statistics. Far from feeling special concern for the student, many members of the public had given cool consideration to Bageerathi and her family's particular qualifications, considered their origins in an allegedly democratic holiday destination, compared that to places like Syria and concluded, along with Brokenshire, that she had been here, exams or no exams, quite long enough.
Supposing electronic petitions were not, as was early recognised by New Labour, a fabulous wheeze for herding, then scrupulously ignoring, the vagaries of one-click opinion, there might be a case for the Bageerathi signatories to move their petition, as one, from the commercial change.org to a more broadly worded demand, on the government site. This might ask, say, for all over-18 asylum seekers to be allowed to complete their studies before being evicted.
With 178,000 signatures, the petition has already surpassed, like the Migration Watch appeal, the number that the Tories once decided should make it eligible for parliamentary debate. But which outcome - out of a general change of heart, or one of the law, or greater flexibility for refused asylum seekers, or simply help for this unfortunate teenager - was most wanted by #FightForYashika signatories, including Delevingne and Burrowes? As it is, now she's gone, so's the fight.
Captions:
Demonstrators in Parliament Square, London, protest against the deportation of student Yashika Bageerathi. PA
Document OB00000020140406ea460000z
