{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"902"}
____
  
News
Britain is throwing the race for foreign students
David Warren   
823 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
29
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A blunderbuss immigration policy is costing us millions and global influence, warns David Warren
Last year, Britain saw the first fall in the number of overseas students at its higher educational institutions for 30 years. In 2011-12, according to the Higher Education Statistics Agency, there were 435,235. In 2012-13, there were 425,265 — a drop of just under 10,000. In 2011-12, 302,685 non-EU students were studying here. In 2012-13 there were 299,970 — a drop of around 2,700.
This matters — higher education is a major British export. Foreign students contribute more than £10bn to the British economy through tuition fees and living expenses. Ten thousand fewer students cost the economy about £230m in lost earnings.
The impact on our standing in the world is serious too. Surveys have shown that foreign students at British universities view the UK more positively. This creates an international network of partnership, influence and understanding. This is good in itself, helps us promote our national interests abroad, and contributes to a safer and more prosperous world.
Other countries understand these connections. That is why the competition between countries with major world universities is so intense. The world market in students is growing rapidly. It doubled in size between 2000 and 2011, from 2.1m to 4.3m. It is predicted to grow to more than 7m by 2020.
Ministers promote higher education when they take business missions overseas. And rightly: we should be market leaders, as we have some of the best universities in the world. Why then do we damage our chances in this race by including students in the overall net immigration targets that the government has been trying, increasingly unsuccessfully, to reduce? Why are we clamping down on precisely the temporary immigrants that we should be trying to attract? As British ambassador in Japan from 2008-12, promoting higher education was one of my major objectives. I made sure that Japanese colleges and their agents understood the way in which the visa system worked, and that their students had appropriate sponsorship and filled in the forms correctly. The UK Border Agency officials I dealt with tried to ensure that the mass of genuine students were not deterred by systems and rules aimed at weeding out the tiny number of bogus applicants.
But Japan is a relatively small supplier of foreign students. The impact is much greater elsewhere. The number of students from India starting a UK university course has halved over the past two years. Pakistan is down 38% over the same period. The situation would be very different if we adopted a sensible policy and took students out of the immigration target. America, not exactly a soft touch on border control, does not include students in its permanent migrant figures. Nor do Canada and Australia. New enrolments of overseas students in America increased by 9.8% last year; in Australia by 8.1%, and in Canada by 3.9%. There is a race, and we are beginning to lose it.
This misguided policy is specifically damaging the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (Stem) sectors. These subjects are strategically important, but vulnerable. A recent Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) report highlighted the extent in which master's level courses were populated by, indeed dependent on, foreign students. But the total of non-EU postgraduate Stem students fell by 20% last year. We should be deeply worried about this.
Numerous surveys have shown that legal immigrants put more into the economy in taxes and wealth-creation than they take out in benefits and using services. A report last year by Oxford Economics and Sheffield University showed that students are the category of immigrant least likely to be a drain on resources: many are young, single and without dependants, as well as likely to be highly skilled. The vast majority return to their countries at the end of their studies.
The illogical way in which students are lumped together with permanent migrants is having a destructive impact on Britain's reputation as a world centre for higher education. We are still up there with America as a major destination for foreign students. This will not be true for much longer if we remain in denial about the impact of our policy. It cost us £230m last year. If trends continue, it will cost us £400m in this.
There is an alternative. Classify students as temporary migrants, take them out of the targets, and send a clearer message to the world that we want to attract as many as we can — don't, as we are at present, carry on promoting higher education as an export with one hand tied behind our back. The policy should change.
Sir David Warren is the chairman of the Japan Society and chairman-designate of the council of Kent University
Document ST00000020140504ea54000ni
