{"newspaper":"The Mail on Sunday","id:"3527"}
____
  
Features
HEARTBREAK FOR UMA AS SHE CALLS OFF ENGAGEMENT
BY CHARLOTTE GRIFFITHS   
1,514 words
20 April 2014
The Mail on Sunday
MOSM
22
English
(c) 2014 Associated Newspapers. All rights reserved   
ACTRESS Uma Thurman and her multi-millionaire fiance Arki Busson have split up, I can reveal. The New York-based Kill Bill star and hedge-fund boss Arki have struggled to make their long-distance relationship work and have called off their engagement.
'Uma and Arki were due to attend a gala together on April 8, but Uma showed up without her engagement ring or her fiance,' says a source. 'Arki was scheduled to attend and it seemed clear there was only one reason why he didn't show - because he and Uma are no longer an item.'
Another source adds: 'Uma lives in New York while Arki lives in London. He has been out and about without Uma since October when he went to a Halloween party alone. They have been at one or two events together, like Harvey Weinstein's pre-Bafta party in February, but on that occasion they looked miserable.'
This is the second time Uma, 43, has broken off an engagement with French-born tycoon since they began dating in 2007.
In 2009 she returned an eight-carat diamond ring to him a year after he first proposed. She took him back in 2011, and by 2012 they were engaged again, with Uma pregnant with their first child, Rosalind. She has not been seen without her engagement ring since - until now.
Uma has two children from her earlier marriage to actor Ethan Hawke. Arki, 51, has two sons from a relationship with supermodel Elle Macpherson.
Arki's spokesman was unavailable for comment, while a spokesman for Uma declined to comment.
***
MOST people need only provide proof of identity and a reference to get a visa before starting a job in America - but Harry Potter star Daniel Radcliffe had to produce his collection of newspaper cuttings. The 24-year-old is starring in the dark comedy The Cripple of Inishmaan on Broadway, but he almost didn't make it on stage thanks to US immigration officials. 'For Daniel to get his visa, it had to be proved that no American performer could act in the role as well as him,' says a friend of the star. 'It was actually his brilliant reviews from the London version of the play which helped persuade officials there was no one better for the job.'
FROM THRONES TO ROME... HAIL SEAN, THE NEW CAESAR
HE'S made a career out of playing ruthless men who show their rivals no mercy - so Game Of Thrones star Sean Bean should be perfect as Julius Caesar in a new British film adaptation of Shakespeare's play.
Sean, right, will play the Roman dictator, appearing alongside Samantha Barks's Portia and Mackenzie Crook, who takes the role of Cassius.
'Sean is going to be great,' said Samantha at the Bailey's Feaster Egg Hunt at Harvey Nichols in Knightsbridge. 'I think he's perfect for the role - he's got the right look for it.'
Sean, 55, will have his work cut out competing with the 1970 version, in which Caesar was played by acting legend John Gielgud, Portia was played by Diana Rigg and Charlton Heston played Mark Antony - that role will be filled this time by Misfits star Robert Sheehan.
The movie, called Caesar, has been given a £10 million budget and starts shooting this summer.
 
ELLIE'S WEDDING HINTS HAVE THE RING OF TRUTH
ELLIE Goulding has been dropping hints that she is engaged to McFly singer Dougie Poynter.
Earlier this month Ellie, left, tweeted a picture of a record sleeve for the song The Secret Wedding, from the film Braveheart, with the caption: 'I'm listening to this and whistling along @dougiemcfly.'
Days later Ellie - a favourite of Prince William - posted a picture on Instagram of a diamond ring on her engagement finger.
The 27-year-old, who has previously dated actor Jeremy Irvine, Ed Sheeran and One Direction's Niall Horan, began her romance with Dougie, 26, last year, but denied it for months until Dougie admitted to us that they were indeed an item. A spokesman for Ellie said: 'She's just having fun.'
 
'WHO'S THAT RANDOM BLOKE?' CHELSEA GIRLS CAN'T SPOT A REAL STAR
THE Made In Chelsea girls certainly know how to put their foot in it. Not content with apparently straying outside the law at an event to promote drinks brand Baileys, Binky Felstead, Louise Thompson and Rosie Fortescue then ridiculed the man sent in to rescue them as a 'total random' - not realising he was, in fact, hairdresser to the stars Nicky Clarke.
I spotted Binky, 23, and Louise and Rosie, both 24, at top London department store Harvey Nichols to promote Baileys - part of the Diageo empire - but they were left red-faced when someone pointed out they were too young to be photographed with alcohol.
'In order to have your photo taken with a Diageo drink you have to be over 25, and those girls are too young,' said a flustered organiser. 'They need a chaperone.'
Up stepped Nicky, but afterwards Louise exclaimed: 'Oh my God, that was so embarrassing. Now we have a total random in our photo - great.'
Nicky could soon be competing with the Chelsea girls for TV viewers, for I hear he may be getting his own reality show. His girlfriend Kelly Simpkin said: 'I've just signed up with PR Leisa Maloney and she thinks Nicky and I would be great on TV.'
 
SIR TREVOR SET TO RAISE THE CURTAIN ON HIS SECRET CHATS WITH PRINCESS
Theatre grandee Sir Trevor Nunn is writing his autobiography - and he promises to lift the lid on his private conversations with Princess Margaret.
'I've started the book and that's why I have to keep all my juicy secrets to myself - but not for much longer,' he said at the opening night of his revival of Noel Coward's Relative Values at the West End's Harold Pinter Theatre.
'A friend invited me to meet Noel, and Princess Margaret was there, too. I had at least three rather special conversations with her.
'Then Tom Courtenay turned up with a new beard and Noel said, "My dear, how terribly avant-barbe!" '
 
***
THE Victoria and Albert Museum's forthcoming Wedding Dresses exhibition will showcase some of the most romantic gowns ever made.
But nestled next to the dove-grey silk dress worn by the Duchess of Cornwall for her marriage to Prince Charles in 2005 and classic designs by Norman Hartnell will be an altogether less sophisticated number - the transparent outfit sported by Lady Mary Charteris, right, on her big day.
A spy says: 'Mary's mother-in-law Pamela called the V&A and put forward Mary's dress - and they accepted the offer!'
***
 
LIKE J.K. Rowling, Hilary Mantel takes an avid interest in the dramatic adaptations of her novels. The RSC is rehearsing for a stage version of Wolf Hall and Bring Up The Bodies but the cast keep getting calls and emails from the author. Ben Miles, who plays Thomas Cromwell, said at theatreland's Olivier Awards last week: 'She is so involved. I got an email from her just now.' The drama opens on May 1 at the Aldwych Theatre, but will Hilary be in the front row or waiting in the wings?
***
 
Bryan Adams is back in the studio - but this time it has nothing to do with his photography career. The singer-turned-snapper has two albums in the pipeline, I can reveal - his first since 2008. 'One is an album of covers and one is of originals,' says Bryan, 54. But he hasn't asked pal Mark Ronson to help him modernise his style. 'I decided not to work with Mark. Maybe one day. The covers are songs I listened to while I was growing up.'
***
 
Beautiful French actress Gaia Weiss has captured the heart of Harry Potter star Sean Biggerstaff. Gaia, right, who appears in The Legend Of Hercules, met Sean - quidditch captain Oliver Wood in the Potter series - on the set of a new film version of Mary, Queen of Scots. 'We kept it a secret when filming because we didn't want to be unprofessional,' said Gaia, 22, at the Motion Photography Prize at London's Saatchi Gallery last week. But the pair don't plan to act together again. 'I think it's weird when couples appear together in something, especially when they play lovers,' she added.
***
 
The Queen's Master of Music also seems to be her master of mischief. When Sir Peter Maxwell Davies met the Queen to tell her he was retiring as her composer, courtiers heard raucous laughter coming from behind closed doors at Buckingham Palace. 'We were swapping jokes,' said Sir Peter, 79. 'The servants outside wondered what was going on, but I'm not going to reveal the jokes, other than to say they were very funny. The Queen is a great woman with a great sense of humour.'
© Mail On Sunday
Document MOSM000020140420ea4k0000f
