{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"3062"}
____
  
Guardian Saturday Comment Pages
'I hate being told what to do'
2,634 words
26 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
23
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
← continued from page 1
dress code for taxi drivers? "I've burned all 400-odd pages of it, burned it all, so I'm not prepared to discuss any of it."
Self-censorship doesn't really suit Farage, so he resorts to suppressed giggles and frantic gurning whenever he won't let himself answer a question, casting himself more as a mate planning a surprise birthday party than a slippery politician evading scrutiny. When it comes to Ukip policies already on the record, if he can't defend them then he says they're simply nothing to do with him. For example, the party now requires all candidates to confirm that they have no skeletons in the closet that could cause embarrassment to the party, but what does that actually mean? "I've no idea. 'Could cause an embarrassment' could mean almost anything, couldn't it? I just hope I'm exempted." Are any candidates likely to disqualify themselves on the basis of this clause? "Depends how ambitious they are, I suppose. Oh, I don't know, I'm surprised they used the phrase to be honest. But as I say, I don't run everything."
Farage knows he can't rely on the party's original support base - "very middle-class, very below the M4, ex-military" - to deliver victory next month. So he is now chasing northern urban voters, and claims his party has become working-class. "What we've got to do in the next four weeks is rattle the Labour party. That's the big job for Ukip now. The middle-class Tories in Wiltshire have already decided whether they're going to vote Ukip on 22 May or not - and a lot of them are. So for the next four weeks the focus is on the Labour vote. If we're going to win these elections, those are the voters we want to get."
He is probably wise to steer clear of policy detail, for Ukip is now such an ideologically incoherent bandwagon that policy is no longer the point. Some of its supporters want to make dressing up for the theatre compulsory, while Farage is a libertarian who breaks the law "regularly" and says: "I'm not for laws. We need a minimum of laws. I hate big government, I hate being told what to do on a personal basis." But even he is a bit wary of libertarianism now, "because I've seen some of the loonier elements. A bloke took over our youth wing and called himself a libertarian, and he's for, I don't know," he shudders, "bestiality!" But he thinks he can sidestep all these contradictions, because none of them will matter on 22 May. "People are voting for difference. I think there's a feeling among our supporters that we speak for them and no one else does."
One problem for Farage is how to maintain his image as a chaotic amateur while communicating quite a shrewd electoral strategy. The key to winning next month, he explains, is to get the non-voters out. "Over one in five of our votes already come from non-voters. And in European elections only a third [of the electorate] vote, so it's a massive marketplace. And the more urban the area, the lower the turnout." If Ukip can beat Labour to first place - and the gap has closed to just a couple of points - "the grassroots pressure on Ed Miliband to promise a referendum will be irresistible. We need to get into a position where, whatever the outcome of the next election, we get a referendum."
He is enormously pleased with the Ukip posters he launched this week, one of which features a gigantic pointing finger beside the words: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?" But as the BBC's political editor asked Farage this week, if he's so worried about Europeans taking our jobs, why does he employ his German wife as his secretary, at taxpayers' expense? "That line of argument from Nick Robinson was pathetic," he scoffs. "It just shows you how trivial the whole thing is." He has to employ his wife, he says, because nobody else could possibly work such antisocial hours so closely with him.
But other MEPs manage to employ secretaries to whom they are not married, don't they?
"How can you compare my life to any other MEP? I mean, come on, it's crackers, isn't it? Look, other MEPs do five days a week in Brussels and pop home for weekends. I'm working seven bloody days a week, all the hours God sends. If you include the socialising, it's over 100 hours a week." His wife is not the only immigrant he has employed, it emerges; he has hired other Europeans, "because they had specialist skills - languages in particular". But he says British people should always try to employ a Brit over an immigrant wherever possible. "And is that discriminatory? Maybe it is." Is that what he would always do? "Of course I would, yeah."
The posters have been condemned across the political spectrum as racist, divisive and ignorant. He knew the
finger-pointing poster would be controversial, but can't for the life of him see how it could cause offence. "Shouldn't do. We should have gone further, really. What we could have done is say we've opened the door to 425 million people who are after your jobs. That would have been stronger." I suspect the decision not to had something to do with criticism of a notorious Ukip leaflet last year, which warned: "The EU will allow 29 million Bulgarians and Romanians to come to the UK." As the combined population of both countries did not, in the event, relocate to Britain on 1 January, you'd think he might be embarrassed about the baseless alarmism, but not a bit of it.
"Not at all. Two reasons, really. I think we don't know the true figures yet. And there's also the quality debate. People hate talking about this, but if you look at the Met crime figures for Romanian arrests, there have been 28,000 in London in the last five years. Is there a problem? Yeah. There is a problem." Is he saying there is a culture of criminality among Romanians? "Bound to be. You have to go and see it to understand it. I've visited camps in Romania and Bulgaria, I've got a pretty good understanding." Should British people be wary of Romanian families moving into their street? "Well, of course, yeah."
The poster campaign was funded by Ukip's main donor, the businessman Paul Sykes, but I'm not convinced that relations between the two men are quite as harmonious as Farage says, because he looks a little strained when I mention Sykes' name. The pair considered dozens of different poster designs, he says - so who had the final say? "Me." Sykes would have paid for posters he didn't choose? "We agreed. But if we hadn't agreed, we wouldn't have had them." After a brief pause, "I'm not for sale," he suddenly barks. "I'm not for sale." But Sykes' money is crucial, isn't it? "Well, his money makes a huge difference to us, of course it does," he says briskly. "I get on incredibly well with him, we're pretty eye-to-eye on lots of issues, and getting agreement on this campaign and how to do it has been very easy. Very easy." Yet Sykes still hasn't promised to bankroll Ukip's general election campaign. He says he's waiting to see how the party performs in May, so I ask Farage what Ukip has to do to secure Sykes' backing for 2015. "Well, you'd better ask him that." Hasn't Sykes told him? "No."
The party's finances are a perennial headache for Farage, and like most Ukip MEPs he has donated a chunk of his own money - pounds 11,000 last year, pounds 4,000 this year. It was recently reported that the party is drawing up an MEPs' charter, demanding a compulsory donation from each MEP of pounds 50,000, but Farage says it will stipulate only a "reasonable sum", which in his case will be "two to three grand". He recently described himself as "broke", but has a household income of just over pounds 100,000. How can Ukip be a working-class party if it will only accept candidates wealthy enough to donate thousands? "They wouldn't have their jobs as MEPs if it weren't for Ukip."
Money has become a tricky subject for Farage lately, since it emerged that supporters donated for free an office that he lists as a significant running cost. He insists he has done nothing wrong, so I ask if he can give voters a guarantee that every penny he's received from the EU has been spent correctly.
"I can guarantee one thing. That I haven't done it for personal gain. But how I've spent my time and money, and whether I've spent it because I'm an MEP, or because I'm Ukip, I would suggest to you is a very grey area. It's a difficult divide. I've made no bones about it that I would use the wherewithal provided by the European parliament to go round Britain and campaign against Britain's membership of the European Union. I think I'm just about within the rules. I think I've kept just the right side of the line. Albeit pushing right up to it, sure."
And if he has strayed over the line and broken the rules? He doesn't think it matters. "I mean, given the abuses for personal gain that have gone on with expenses in Westminster, I don't think the general public are that interested in whether I've strictly observed the rules on what is campaigning and what isn't. We always knew these criticisms would come at some point. If someone in Brussels wants to martyr me for that, then, well . . . well, they won't, they won't."
He told the Today programme last week that he would be happy to have his expenses independently audited, but he is now keen to correct this. "No, I didn't. I said if every other British MEP wants to then I would. I mean, I am not going to be one out of 73 that is held up as an example of all that is wrong with the European Union. After all, I've been saying that myself for years, so this is absolutely ludicrous."
The other charge levelled against Farage is that he can be a hot-headed bully, so I ask when he last raised his voice at a colleague. "Um, that's a very good question. I had some sharp words with somebody two days ago. I told him to sharpen his effing act up. He said to me today, thank you for that. But I very rarely lose my temper. You know, really lose my temper." What about a barky growl? "Oh, I do that quite regularly."
He is one of the jolliest politicians I've ever met - exuberantly self-deprecating ("Why would I take paternity leave? I'm absolutely useless!"), quick to laugh, great fun, and uncommonly at ease in his own skin. But I would guess that, when provoked, he can go off like a bomb. Interestingly, he says of the Clegg debates: "He really, really tried to dig me in the ribs in that second one, but I knew I was calm, I knew I was in control. I think if he'd gone down that line in the first debate, I might well have snapped. Which I would have enjoyed - but probably no one else would have."
The day after our meeting, Farage had to suspend one of the stars of Ukip's first ever party political broadcast, a council candidate, after racist tweets from his Twitter account were exposed. When I interviewed Farage in January last year, he was still a maverick on the political margins, and for all his charisma, it was hard to see how he could protect himself from his colleagues' bigotry and battiness. I still can't work out whether what he's achieved since then says more about the failings of the Westminster class than it does about Farage's own acumen. But his apparent immunity to any amount of Ukip scandals is looking less like just good luck.
Then again, as he points out himself, he is a very lucky man. It's surprisingly easy to forget that on election day in 2010 Farage very nearly died in a plane crash, when a Ukip banner the light aircraft was towing became tangled in the tail fin. At the time it seemed almost like a bad joke - a metaphor for an eccentric political career nose-diving into oblivion - but not to Farage. "Well, it was horrible. Yeah. It's one of those things I still think about." He thought he was going to die. What went through his mind? "All sorts of things that shouldn't have done," he laughs. "I'm not going to tell you." Go on. "Well, I thought a bit about things I'd done well, things I'd done badly. I thought about all the different girlfriends I've had, you know, about different forks in the road at different times." Was he seized by regrets? "Well, we all have regrets in our life - but I'm married, you see," he laughs, "so I can't answer that."
He thought about phoning his wife. "But then I reasoned that probably that phone call would haunt them." If he had called, he would have said: "Sorry I've been such an appalling husband and a not very good father. But that wouldn't have helped. So I just sat there quietly. And then when the end comes, and you're careering towards the earth, there's almost a sense of resignation. Let's hope it's over quickly."
He came to rest upside down, his head two inches from the ground - "That was the difference between snapping my neck and not." Covered in fuel oil, he thought he was about to burn to death. "And that was terrible. And I thought, nobody will ever know I survived this crash. And then, after a few minutes, it hadn't caught fire, and I began to think it might be OK. But I couldn't breathe. And I thought, you know, all those years of smoking - if I get out of this I'll never touch another cigarette, I'll be a really good person. If I get out of this I'm going to live such a good life." And has he kept any of his promises? "No! None of them."
He thinks that since the crash, "I'm a little bit more aware of others than perhaps in my worst moments I would have been before." Awareness of others has never been his strong point, he chuckles softly. "I think it's been a weakness. But I wouldn't be doing what I'm doing otherwise. To do what I've done in this job, I think you have to lack self-awareness."
Leader comment, page 32 ≥
Captions:
Nigel Farage knows he's lucky, having narrowly escaped dying when a plane towing a Ukip banner crashed on election day 2010 Photographs: Richard Rayner for the Guardian; Neil Hall/INS
Document GRDN000020140425ea4q000fg
