{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2307"}
____
  
NEWS
Nigel Farage feels too 'unsafe' to attend his own 'Ukip carnival'
By Georgia Graham and Christopher Hope   
447 words
20 May 2014
20:24
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Carnival descends into verbal clashes between Romanian protestors and Ukip supporters on the streets of Croydon as Mr Farage fails to turn up
Nigel Farage has failed to attend his own Ukip “carnival” on the streets of Croydon because he felt "unsafe", after the event descended into verbal clashes between Romanian protesters and his party’s supporters.
The rally, part of a series of staged a series of events from Ukip in a bid to demonstrate they are a non-racist party, hit trouble after the protesters arrived bearing signs attacking the party.
A Ukip official told The Telegraph Mr Farage, who had been expected to greet awaiting supporters, would not attend the event because he "feels unsafe".
The steel band, hired to play at the event, packed up after less than an hour amid reports that some members were not aware they were expected to perform at a Ukip rally, it was reported.
Twitter: Michael Deacon - Sad news: it seems there is to be no Farage. We were expecting speech at 3pm. "Nigel did a bottle job," beams a protestor #ukipcarnival
Meanwhile a black Ukip van bearing the slogan “take control of our country” was parked on the edge of the event, outside the Dorothy Perkins clothes shop in Croydon town centre. At 3.15pm, the van left with no sign of the Ukip leader appearing.
According to reports in the Croydon Advertiser, Mr Farage was supposed to speak at the event in the borough where his party is fielding 42 candidates at Thursday’s local elections.
Twitter: Michael Deacon - No music, no food, no drink, no dancing - just shouting and placards. To be honest, probably save yourself for Glastonbury #ukipcarnival
Winston McKenzie, a black Ukip candidate in Thursday's election, clashed with black teenagers in a debate over whether he was a leader of the community while also being in the party.
Mr McKenzie confirmed Mr Farage would not be attending, citing security concerns. He told reporters: "He's a responsible family man and political party leader.
"Certain situations you have to avoid."
Mr McKenzie added: "Croydon is unsafe and a dump."
It comes after Mr Farage was accused of racism for making comments about Romanian immigrants.
He said in an interview with LBC Radio: "I was asked if a group of Romanian men moved in next to you, would you be concerned? And if you live in London, I think you would be."
He said he had been "tired out" during the interview and did not use the "form of words" he would have liked to.
Document TELUK00020140520ea5k004v4
