{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1184"}
____
  
News
Ukip or UKIP? Nigel Farage must decide what sort of party he wants to lead
By Damian Thompson   
1,227 words
21 March 2014
20:44
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
I had coffee with Peter Whittle this week. He’s an openly gay British writer and former television executive who spent years working in Los Angeles. He founded and runs a trendy think tank called the New Culture Forum (NCF). He is unequivocally anti-racist and supports gay marriage.
Also, he’s just been made the culture spokesman for theUnited Kingdom Independence Party.
Yes, Ukip. Or UKIP, as traditionalists prefer: they hate the way newspapers use lower-case letters. (In case you were wondering, our rule is that acronyms are “capped down” if they can be pronounced as words – other examples are Nato and Aids. I’ll come back to this Ukip/UKIP thing later.)
I didn’t know Whittle was a member of Ukip. What a smart appointment by Nigel Farage! The NCF is my favourite think tank. It’s made up of media professionals who look as if they’re employed by the Guardian/BBC. But, actually, they’ve turned their backs on multiculturalism and its weaselly contempt for Britain. Nor are they keen on the Cameroons’ multiculti lite with a dusting of ironic patriotism. Instead, they celebrate British culture in a way that isn’t “sheepish, tentative and inhibited”.
Although the NCF isn’t politically affiliated, Ukip has effectively adopted its ideas by putting Whittle in charge of culture. “We must replace multiculturalism with integration,” he says. “Britain must be totally colour-blind but reject any subtle ambivalence about national pride.” He favours using the weapons of the Left against it: for example, mocking the student-union “comedy” of Radio 4, which is far too busy policing cultural boundaries to be funny – and gets away with it because the Tories, with the exception of Michael Gove, are such cowards.
Peter Whittle is someone who could persuade middle-of-the-road voters to support Ukip. His appointment is a reminder that Nigel Farage can be nuanced and flexible when it suits him – note how skilfully (i.e. unobtrusively) he ditched Ukip’s campaign against gay marriage this week on the grounds that the battle is lost.
And yet… Whittle tells me that since joining Ukip “I haven’t met any Godfrey Bloom types, or any bigots or racists”. To which I can only reply: Peter, have you read any comment threads underneath online articles that discuss immigration, Islam, sexuality or Europe? No website is safe from Ukip’s equivalent of the SNP’s cybernats. Tirades against “LibLabCon”, gays, Muslims etc, of varying degrees of unpleasantness, are almost invariably signed off with “vote UKIP”.
We are hearing a lot at the moment about how ex-Labour voters are emerging as a bloc within the party. But I see another division: between a sensible outfit that wants a classical liberal Britain outside the EU, which I think of as lower-case Ukip; and permanently angry conspiracy theorists whom I think of as UKIP, or maybe UKIP!!!!, whose American equivalents have made the Republicans unelectable.
This isn’t to say that Nigel Farage is wrong to chase the protest vote, or that he should tone down his attacks on the corruption of Brussels and the Conservatives’ terrified cringeing in the face of Left-wing pressure groups.
But he’s got to stop giving “maverick” activists the benefit of the doubt when, as happened recently, one of them talks about “sending them all back” – and he has to find a way to drown out the professional bores who bang on about “LibLabCon traitors” in online discussion forums.
They’re hijacking your brand, Nigel, and driving away potential supporters just when you should be entering the mainstream. So which is it to be: Ukip or UKIP?
Fire, brimstone and Bovril
I’m a keen follower of the Twitter account @TeleArchive, which tweets The Daily Telegraph of exactly 100 years ago. This week: “World-famous vulcanologist dies on Vesuvius as his clothes catch fire” and – strong stomach required – an advertisement asking: “Have you tried Bovril made with hot milk?” By that stage Bovril was already a venerable brand. Pope Leo XIII, no less, was a fan of the English “beef tea”. A poster from 1900 is headed “Two Infallible Powers: the Pope and Bovril”. Mind you, Leo also personally endorsed Mariani wine, made with cocaine. I wonder which he was sipping when he declared Anglican orders null and void.
The new 1 coin is far too edgy
What do you make of the new 12-sided 1coin that we’re told will be “the most secure in the world”? Maybe I should ask Reading Coin Club, which I joined when I was at school, having survived its fearsome blackballing procedures. I haven’t been to a meeting since 1978, so I’m guessing I’m now an ex-member. In those days you could buy a Georgian sixpence – such beautiful coins – for less than afiver.
The Government is trying to evoke nostalgia for the threepenny bit. But the truth is that many-sided coins are intrinsically ugly. I was trying to work out what the new 1 reminded me of, and then it came back to me: those Maltese or Egyptian coins you’d drop into the collection plate to reward the priest for an especially dreary sermon. (Istill keep a supply.)
Traditionalists’ double delight
The last Archbishop of Liverpool, Patrick Kelly, retired more than a year ago – but it took the Vatican until yesterday to announce his successor, Bishop Malcolm McMahon of Nottingham, a Dominican. I leaked his name on my blog a day early – the first time I’ve ever got a prediction right.
It’s an encouraging choice. McMahon is a bit of an old Lefty but plays a straight bat theologically. He’s certainly not a doctrinaire liberal like Kieran Conry of Arundel and Brighton, who I suspect was Cardinal Murphy-O’Connor’s candidate for the job.
The Liverpool clergy are famously modernist and philistine; how amusing that their new boss is one of very few bishops who celebrates the old Latin Mass. And thisin the same week as FrRobert Byrne, an Oratorian lover of the ancient liturgy, was named as auxiliary bishop in Birmingham. Traditionalists must be delighted; they wait years for the promotion of a cleric who uses the Old Missal, and two come along at once…
A cereal offender inside No 10
David Cameron has embarked on a diet that involves avoiding dairy items, according to reports. For example, he now pours almond milk – blissfully low in fat and calories – on his cereal. But which breakfast cereal? We don’t know, though according to university friends he’s been known to make short work of a box of chocolate granola (though not always at breakfast or accompanied by milk).
Meanwhile, the non-dairy thing isn’t making life any easier down in the kitchens. “I baked a luscious Victoria sponge, missing out the cream but with a generous layer of jam,” says my source. “And do you know what he said? 'Like eating dry toast.’ Honestly, I’ll be glad when this diet malarkey is over.”
More by Damian Thompson:
Missing plane 'will return as a nuclear weaopon'
At last, someone gets Monteverdi's title right
Meet Vincent Nichols, our bland new cardinal
Document TELUK00020140321ea3l004v1
