{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"2432"}
____
  
Features
Immigration vow a joke
385 words
14 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
1; National
41
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
£50 LETTER
WHAT hypocrisy from Yvette Cooper, saying she will count every immigrant in and out if Labour come to power.
I hope she has learned to count a lot better since they were last in power when Labour let thousands in unaccounted for.
BASIL MIDDLETON Southampton
SO Labour want to count migrants out? What a pity they didn't count them when they came in.
We wouldn't have the problems we have now had they done so.
MALCOLM REED Nottingham
WHO does Yvette Cooper think she is kidding? Our politicians are too scared of upsetting the European bullies to tackle our immigration problems.
Anyway, our border control agency is so flawed I would be surprised we had anyone who could possibly count into the thousands.
BRIAN LEA Hucknall, Nottingham
NICK CLEGG claimed to "love diversity". If this is the case, please buy my house in the middle of diversity, where there are at least 25 different languages spoken at the local primary school and where it's the norm to dump sofas and old mattresses in the middle of the street. Words are cheap, Mr Clegg, and so is my h o u s e because I'm desperate to get out!
HELEN KELLY By email
FOR as long as I can remember, any Conservative who has proposed controls such as Yvette Cooper is suggesting has been vilified by Labour as some sort of swivel-eyed racist lunatic. It's amazing how Labour continually cut the cloth solely to fit themselves.
COLIN BRYAN North Woolwich, E London
WE are being told how wonderful it is to go to university or get an apprenticeship.
When will we wake up to the fact that it's to keep unemployment figures down, not because there's future employment for them?
TREVOR GRAY Haywards Heath, W Sussex
I NEVER thought I'd agree with anything Katie Hopkins, pictured, had to say but I couldn't help but admire her honesty in her column about celebrities' gushing tributes to Peaches Geldof on social media.
They were all trying to outdo each other. Katie's view was the most refreshing thing I have read for ages.
We all know it is sad but leave it to family and friends to grieve.
MARIE JENNINGS Norwich
Document THESUN0020140414ea4e0008k
