{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"504"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Labour voters will want a stake in Ed Miliband's new Jerusalem
MARY RIDDELL   
1,273 words
9 April 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
18
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Devolving power to the powerless is seen by some as the party's only chance of victory
Not since Joseph Chamberlain announced that he would turn Birmingham into the Paris of the Midlands has the city hosted a more hopeful prophet. Ed Miliband's promise, delivered yesterday, of "the biggest devolution of power to England's great towns and cities in a hundred years" made the French capital sound hardly more glamorous than Stoke Poges. By resurrecting Britain's Victorian glories, Mr Miliband hopes to go one better than Chamberlain and rebuild Jerusalem.
The Labour leader's aim is to turn cities including Manchester, Liverpool and Newcastle into powerful urban hubs with control over their housing and transport budgets. A partnership between local authorities and business leaders would, he hopes, mean a resurgence of skilled jobs. This plan is broadly similar to the one produced for the Government by Lord Heseltine, who urged David Cameron to give £58 billion to the regions.
Since Mr Miliband is initially earmarking £20 billion over the next parliament, some may wonder whether he is actually heading for that cut–price utopian destination, Jerusalem–on–the–Cheap. Lord Adonis, the author of Labour's interim growth review, rejects any such suspicion, pointing out that Mr Cameron has actually spent only £2 billion so far. Labour's plan, in his view, is "Heseltine on steroids".
There is no doubt that the imbalance between London and other cities symbolises the inequality that disfigures Britain. On transport projects alone, Londoners were scheduled at the start of this parliament to benefit from public investment of £2,731 per head compared with £5 for every citizen in the North East. Last year, the capital's preposterously inflated property market generated more wealth than the entire New Zealand economy.
With London inhaling almost all the oxygen of recovery, rebuilding the Victorian civic vision is a welcome construction site for Mr Miliband. Ever since his poor Budget response, the Labour leader has seemed in need of a hard hat and high–visibility jacket as armour against MPs unnerved by falling poll ratings and unsure of what the party's message is. Despite Mr Miliband's professed enthusiasm for devolving power, it has been far from clear whether he would, in the end, relinquish the levers of control.
Yesterday's acceptance of the Adonis programme signals a major victory for Labour's policy chief, Jon Cruddas, and other arch–decentralisers, such as the care spokesman, Liz Kendall, and the shadow business secretary, Chuka Umunna – all of whom favour loosening the shackles of central government and giving everyone from city leaders to the sick and elderly more say over their destinies. Optimists hope that Mr Miliband has set an irrevocable seal on the bold offer that many see as his only chance of winning in 2015.
His speech, however, ranged more widely. Less a floorplan for a new Jerusalem than a shopping mall for Brand Miliband merchandise, it also featured the leader's favourite retail outlets: the squeezed middle classes and the cost–ofliving crisis. This twin emphasis, as the leader made clear yesterday, will be the scaffold of Labour's offer to the electorate. That assurance has alarmed some MPs, who fear that the cost–of–living crusade is foundering and think Labour should focus more heavily on the blue–collar workers feeling the brunt of financial hardship.
Two reports published today by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation show that, as welfare reforms bite, people are choosing between eating and heating, borrowing from family and friends to pay for essentials, falling into rent arrears because of the bedroom tax and worrying about falling incomes and job security.
Those studies will be essential reading for Nigel Farage, who is hoping to capitalise on his TV debating triumph by making big inroads in Labour–held seats in the North and Midlands. While Mr Miliband yesterday promised a revival of industrial meccas, Mr Farage was also thinking of William Blake. Nostalgic Labour voters are ready, in his view, to deem Ukip the better turf–layer of a land made green and pleasant once again.
Mr Farage told me last week that he would pour all of his election money into Labour's northern heartlands, and it is easy to see why. As he acknowledges, ginswilling Tory colonels are a dwindling breed, while there is no shortage of disaffected Labour voters who think, bitterly, that a metropolitan party sees them as an anachronistic race of Andy Capps preserved in beer and Woodbines.
Labour MPs have become accustomed to doorstep laments by Ukip converts for a once–great country that offered prosperity to workers. As one senior figure says: "These voters' view that the past was better than the present is rational. I can't tell them they're wrong. Ed's message that he feels their pain isn't taking us anywhere."
Mr Miliband's belief that he has developed a unifying theory by harnessing inequalities of power and income is unlikely to beguile the doorstep doubters. Nor is the underlying message, however true, that helping the middle class into better jobs will in turn offer a ladder of opportunity to those at the bottom.
Whatever the misgivings of its core voters, Labour is certain they will not turn to Mr Farage. As evidence, insiders cite the trouncing the party gave Ukip at Wythenshawe – the first by–election overseen by the new election chief, Douglas Alexander. When I put that point to Mr Farage, he replied that, in that seat, "most potential Ukip voters hadn't heard of Ukip". Now they have.
Labour might be right to think that Ukip will have a fruitfly's lifespan, but it would not be wise to bet on it. While Mr Farage's remedies may be toxic, his analysis is unerring and his game plan long. Of the 100 most Ukip–inclined seats, 72 – including Ed Miliband's – are held by Labour. If Ukip can amass some second placings in 2015, then the prospects for 2020 (especially if a Labour government has proved unpopular) may strike Mr Farage as rosy.
The vulnerability that he exploits is nothing new: 19th–century Britain was not solely a cauldron of invention, in which the evolution of great cities was chronicled by Dickens and Gaskell and gold–plated by world–class entrepreneurs. It was also an age of insecurity and of skilled trades threatened by technological innovation. Although spinners and colliers were displaced not by immigrants but by children, the tensions were a mirror of today's unease. As E P Thompson suggests in The Making of the English Working Class, seismic change inevitably devalues old skills as it elevates new ones.
Labour's message should surely focus on easing the passage for those caught in the limbo between past and future. A bold and precise offer on the minimum wage, the living wage and child care would be a start. So would a detailed explanation of how a compact between local authorities and private business will create vibrant companies with well–paid jobs for those with greater or lesser skills.
Having begun the giveaway of state control for which his key lieutenants have been pressing, Mr Miliband should offer real power to the truly powerless. As Mr Farage and his own backbenchers could tell him, the forgotten voters of Labour's heartlands will not be signing up to Project Jerusalem unless they are given a key to the citadel.
Comment on Mary Riddell's view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview
Document DT00000020140409ea490004t
