{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"1661"}
____
  
Observer Home News Pages
Q: So where's the hub of Venice's independence party? A: Kent: From his Tonbridge study, a psychiatrist hopes to rally global support for Europe's latest separatist group. Harriet Sherwood reports
1,012 words
20 April 2014
The Observer
OB
3
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
The pound shops and fast-food outlets of Tonbridge, Kent, seem an unlikely setting for the international hub of the Venetian independence movement. But overlooking the opaque brown waters of the river Medway, some 700 miles from the sweeping palazzo-flanked Grand Canal, is the "Republic of Venice Embassy", headed - and staffed solely - by Giovanni Dalla-Valle, a voluble Italian-born psychiatrist who is utterly convinced that small, local, independent states will be the hallmark of 21st-century Europe in a "new Renaissance".
Ambassador Dalla-Valle left the north Italian region of Veneto as a disillusioned young doctor 22 years ago. Now, from the first-floor study of his modest townhouse and amid red-and-gold Venetian flags bearing the Lion of St Mark, he runs an international campaign for its independence. The coming years, he says, will see "a move from economic totalitarianism to localised models of economics, welfare, culture and ethics. The geopolitical map of the 21st century will be much smaller nation states based on self-determination."
In Veneto, he says, the movement has been galvanised by "recession, euro crisis, austerity measures and excessive taxation". The impact on a region which, he says, contributes euros 70bn (pounds 57bn) a year to Italy's budget but receives only euros 50bn in services, has been "a profound crisis", with the closure of up to 30 small businesses a day, the loss of 100,000 jobs and a significant spike in the suicide rate. Free from Rome, Veneto - whose per capita GDP is, say separatists, 15% higher than the national figure - has the potential to be a "small but economic superpower", insists Dalla-Valle. Antipathy to Rome and the desire for local autonomy produced an 89% vote in favour of Veneto becoming a "independent and sovereign federal republic" in an online poll organised last month by the pro-independence organisation, Plebiscito.
An independent Venice would not be new; it was a cultural and commercial republic for more than 1,000 years before being seized by France in 1797, then governed by Austria, and finally coming under Rome's rule in 1866.
Thirty-five years ago, a separatist movement emerged and later came under the umbrella of the rightwing Lega Nord (Northern League). Dalla-Valle is anxious to distance himself and Plebiscito from the League's "xenophobic, stuck-in-the-past, pre-globalisation" political philosophy. "We do not want to return to the Veneto of 200 years ago; we want the issues of today resolved."
He points to narrow majorities in last month's poll in favour of remaining part of the EU and the eurozone as evidence that the movement is shedding the rightwing cloak thrown over it by the Northern League. Immigrants - who make up around 10% of the population of five million - would be welcomed in the independent Republic of Venice. "It's so beautiful to hear black and Chinese children speaking Venetian," Dalla-Valle says, referring to the local dialect spoken by an estimated 70% in the region.
Dalla-Valle, who describes himself as leftwing and whose socio-economic priorities are raising low wages and pensions, looks for inspiration to Scotland's independence movement.
"The Scots are a model, a lighthouse to separatist movements in Europe - open, tolerant, social democratic," he says. "They want to take decision-making on solid economic issues back to local communities."
The ambassador gets out a photograph of Venetian activists marching through Edinburgh in support of their Scottish counterparts last year, red-and-gold flags alongside the saltire.
Advocates for Venetian autonomy have been ridiculed by the national government and marginalised by the media. The online poll was dismissed by politicians and academics as unconstitutional, invalid and unverifiable. Dalla-Valle says it was based on a rigorous electronic voting system that automatically discarded the votes of the ineligible and nullified repeat voting: "It's very difficult to corrupt an e-poll compared to a paper poll." Sixty-five per cent of eligible voters took part, with 2,102,969 yes votes cast.
Arianna Giovanni, a researcher in Italian politics at Leeds Metropolitan University, questions the veracity of polling methods and the data, but says the referendum broadly reflects Venetian exasperation. Other, more credible, surveys have suggested a majority of around 55% in support of independence. "Fractures in the socio-economic and political arenas are particularly evident in Veneto at the moment," she says. "The independence movement should be taken seriously - not because people really want to secede, but as a cry for attention based on a profound sense of dissatisfaction. It's a warning to the Italian political class."
In the unlikely event it wins independence, the traditionally centre-right stronghold of Veneto may not embrace Dalla-Valle's vision of a liberal nation-state. But that does not deter this man who spent 20 years working in the mental health sector of the NHS. Two years ago, Dalla-Valle - born in Bassano del Grappa, home to the liqueur, to an ancient Venetian family - cut his work commitments to a minimum and sold some property to devote around 50 hours a week to his cause.
His most recent efforts focused on securing the release of 24 activists arrested in St Mark's Square on 2 April, accused of plotting a violent takeover. "The Italian government is ferocious against anyone who tries to challenge unity," says Dalla-Valle. Most were discharged from custody on Friday.
Despite having relinquished Italian citizenship, Dalla-Valle has made 35 trips to Veneto since March 2012 "to help my people". His permanent return awaits independence. "It will happen, we will see it," he insists. Until then, the ambassador's gaze will rest on the Medway rather than the Grand Canal.
Captions:
Giovanni Dalla-Valle, pictured with the flag of Veneto, is encouraged by
a recent poll backing independence. Photographs by Andy Hall, Getty
Document OB00000020140419ea4k0002p
