{"newspaper":"The Observer","id:"581"}
____
  
Observer New Comment Pages
Comment: Voters will go on raging at elites while their interests are ignored
Will Hutton   
1,132 words
6 April 2014
The Observer
OB
40
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Observer.  All rights reserved.   
An ex-stockbroker with a penchant for wearing fur-collared coats is hardly the most obvious leader of a people's army against the establishment. But Nigel Farage claimed the title at the end of his debate with Nick Clegg without turning a hair. It was one of his best lines: the man of the people determined to overthrow elite policies that had lowered working-class wages, opened our borders willy-nilly to an unstoppable flood of immigrants and subjugated British business to the foreign yoke. The snap polls suggested his victory margin was two to one.
The argument that the European Union is a project beloved by a corrupt establishment and therefore by definition wrong is Mr Farage's trump card. In vain do his opponents offer a litany of reasons why he is factually inaccurate: on the day of the debate, the British motor industry issued a paper arguing that its success in manufacturing more 1.5 million cars a year, and employing 700,000 people, was dependent on membership of the European Union.
Mr Farage can swat the argument away. What would you expect of "big business", hand in glove with the establishment and "career politicians"? They are just scaremongering and anyway Europeans sell more cars to us than we do to them. To close their borders to Britain would be self-defeating. Fact is pitched against counter-fact, but if a fact is championed by the establishment, it must by definition be dodgy.
The culture and media secretary, Maria Miller, added further fuel to the anti-establishment fire. Her refusal to resign after being castigated for her lack of co-operation with the parliamentary standards commissioners over the inquiry into her expenses was just more evidence that it was one rule for the rich and another for rest. On Thursday evening, a BBC Question Time audience was in no doubt. As an MP and minister, she held a position that required moral authority she did now not possess. It might be rough justice, but they wanted her resignation.
Mr Farage has been peddling his anti-Europeanism for 20 years, but his current bubble of support is because he has tapped so brilliantly into a wider mood. He would say it is because he is speaking the unpalatable truth to the establishment But his economic and social arguments are a farrago of half-lies and, on occasion, arrant bullshit - Britain does not need nor can it afford three extra aircraft carriers and even the American right is giving up on flat-rate taxes.
It is when he turns to elites, establishments and lack of democracy that he scores a bullseye, because they are easy and deserved targets. It also chimes with a sentiment that is evident not just in Britain but across the west. Electorates have been misgoverned for decades in the name of "wealth generation": their elected governments have allegedly had no option but to cut taxes for the rich, to reduce regulation on business, to police their borders less effectively. What's more, they've had no choice but to make all the systems that support the daily life of ordinary people ever more threadbare and mean in the name of promoting business incentives.
Meanwhile, business pays itself ever more extravagantly as the necessary "incentive", but delivers a first-order financial crisis and five years of austerity, with more to come. Inequality has risen everywhere, especially in Britain, for no perceptible wider gain. It is purposeless to speak out in the public square because protest is damned as socialist and everyone knows socialism has failed. The language of public purpose, justice, social solidarity and nobility of collective action that can be translated into a feasible programme of government has disappeared.
Democracies have been denuded of the vitality of argument but, more crucially, of one of their key purposes. Democracy has become synonymous with not doing transformative things except if they are to shrink the state and/or enlarge the wealth of the already very rich. In a recent essay on the travails of democracy, the Economist comically argued that it should be revived by democratic politicians agreeing that they should make minimal promises and reduce the state. But the point of democracy is to reflect argument in the public square and attempt to deliver the democratic will publicly, which will involve legislating, taxing and spending.
Into this gap has stepped the populist, nationalist right. Farage's talent is to use transformative, emotive language - of Britain getting off its knees, governing itself and standing tall to champion a "white" working class that is becoming an underclass - for what is in truth a reactionary project. His heroine is Lady Thatcher and his soul mates are France's Marine le Pen and Holland's Geert Wilders, who argue in similar terms.
Farage is not the friend of the working class. Ukip's proposed abolition of inheritance tax and national insurance and the creation of a flat rate tax would cause inequality to balloon. It would be paid for by swingeing spending cuts that would make George Osborne's ambitions to shrink the state to 1948 proportions look tame. Social housing, education, transport and health would be devastated. Nor does Farage complain for a second about our great companies being sold to foreign interests and the fortunes of their workforces being directed from abroad. Indeed, by leaving the EU he would preside over a flight of working-class jobs to Europe. He is a phoney.
But he is an effective phoney. An equally effective response must be multi-pronged. First, our establishment parties must put the condition of the people - rather than business and the rich - at the heart of their political programmes. Liberal conservatism, sneered at on the right because of its preoccupation with one nation, must reassert itself, while the left has to rediscover the language and practice of feasible transformation. The drift our politics ever rightward has to be stopped.
We have to develop a language of public purpose in its own right. We need a conversation about the perniciousness of inequality, the extravagance and selfishness of the rich and the urgent need to level up. Business has to be held to account for delivering more than value to shareholders. Above all, we need functioning democracy. All votes have to count. The media have to be accountable for how they behave. Across the board, there needs to be accountability mechanisms and checks and balances - from the institutions of the EU to the boards of our great companies. The establishment has to be turned inside out. There can be no more free rides for Mr Farage.
Captions:
Illustration: briancairns.com
Document OB00000020140406ea460000x
