{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2088"}
____
  
News
Minister's rebuke to immigrants
Tony Grew   
394 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
3; National
15
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
IMMIGRANTS should learn English and "respect" the British way of life, Sajid Javid, the culture secretary, has said.
Javid, who was promoted to the cabinet last month to replace Maria Miller, is the son of Pakistani immigrants and the most senior member of the government from an ethnic minority.
Speaking ahead of this week's European parliament elections, he said it is "right" that people want Britain to have more control over its borders.
"People also say, when immigrants do come to Britain, that they should come to work and make a contribution and should also respect our way of life, and I agree with all of that. It means things like trying to learn English," he said. Javid, who has already been tipped as a future prime minister, became an MP only four years ago at the age of 40. He was brought up in Rochdale, where his father worked as a bus driver.
"I know people myself, I have met people, who have been in Britain for over 50 years and they still can't speak English," he said in a newspaper interview.
"I think it's perfectly reasonable for British people to say, look, if you're going to settle in Britain and make it your home you should learn the language of the country and you should respect its laws and culture."
Javid was a vice-president at Chase Manhattan Bank at the age of 25 and held senior positions in Deutsche Bank before his election as Conservative MP.
He said his parents "were very proud of Britain and they have always respected the country and always wanted to make a contribution". He added: "I think that is the story of most immigrants I have met."
The Bromsgrove MP, who is also minister for equalities, defended Nigel Farage, the UKIP leader, over allegations that he is a racist.
"When he talks about immigration, the reason he's talking about it is that many people throughout Britain are concerned about excessive immigration. And they should be," he told The Sunday Telegraph. "Politicians do need to respond to those concerns."
He said that while some UKIP candidates for the European and council elections have racist views, "I don't think they are a racist party and I don't think Nigel Farage is racist".
Document ST00000020140518ea5i000pq
