{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"3204"}
____
  
News
The first of Thatcher's children has arrived
Tim Montgomerie   
1,021 words
10 April 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
19
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Maria Miller's resignation will soon be forgotten. But her replacement could make a lasting impression on politics
An MP could be found in a bed in a compromising situation with a dead human or a live animal and the public would be interested and appalled, but not surprised. That was the colourful but depressing verdict of Iain Duncan Smith when I once asked if a now forgotten indiscretion by an MP would have any impact on the opinion polls. Politics had fallen to such a low level of esteem that voters expected their elected representatives to misbehave and misbehave badly.
Political parties are now judged on whether they could keep waiting lists and taxes down — on basic competence rather than the basic instincts of their representatives.
For individual MPs, however, this cynical mood means they get little benefit of the doubt when allegations are made against them. We learnt that 80 per cent of the public thought Maria Miller should resign, even though very few probably studied the complexity of her circumstances. She was hardly blameless, of course. She did make an error with her claims. She could have been more co-operative with the inquiry. And her 32-second apology to the Commons was inadequate. Overall, however, there was a sense that she was guilty because most politicians are guilty.
Despite Ed Miliband's efforts at Prime Minister's Questions yesterday the fallout of Mariagate will be limited. David Cameron will be frustrated that the only mother in his cabinet was ousted and even more annoyed at losing a trial of strength with the press. There may be a shortterm boost to Nigel Farage and his charge that the "LibLabCon" establishment needs replacing. It will be short-term because Ukip does not come out well when its own MEPs' expenses are examined. It will be short-term because voters do not think that members of any one party possess a monopoly either of virtue or sin. I don't expect the Miller affair to influence more than a handful of voters at the next election. It will be the bread-and-butter issues of living standards and public services that will decide who governs Britain. It nearly always is.
Unless yesterday's resignation leads to a cleaner, less bureaucratic system of parliamentary allowances — which it should — it is unlikely to be remembered for Mrs Miller's demise. However, it might well be remembered for Sajid Javid's rise.
Somewhat prematurely but with some good reason, the new Culture Secretary is already being tipped as a future Tory leader. His biography is certainly impressive. He's Muslim by background and a second-generation immigrant. His father arrived in Britain from Pakistan with nothing. He won the nickname "Mr Night and Day" for the number of shifts he would work to provide a better life for his five sons. Mr Javid inherited his father's work ethic and patriotism. He has lived the British Dream — marrying his Christian wife Laura and succeeding handsomely in banking before he entered parliament in 2010 — although being an ex-banker may not endear him to many.
I should declare my own interest. I've known Sajid for 25 years. I can even remember when he had hair. I've forgotten how many Star Trek movies we've watched together, although mentioning that might not endear him to the artistic elites who will be wondering about their new minister's cultural hinterland.
We were in the Exeter University Conservative Association at the end of the 1980s. I remember him going to Tory conference to protest at the Thatcher government's decision to join the ERM. He handed out leaflets describing the decision as a fatal economic mistake. He was more Thatcherite than Margaret Thatcher and the Black Wednesday experience vindicated his judgment.
State-educated and brought up in Bristol on what was once described as "Britain's most dangerous street", he has always put his family first. He was once asked if he was wise to put his children into private schools, given his political ambitions. He said he didn't care if it caused him difficulties. His father gave him everything he had and he would give his own four children everything he had, regardless of what opponents might say.
If he can survive the trial by trivia that faces every Culture Minister — What was the last play you saw? Who is your favourite contemporary British artist? Which team holds the FA Cup? — he is likely to use his new portfolio to uphold press freedom, protect commercial media organisations from BBC expansionism and champion private investment in the arts.
Yet he is also interesting for at least two other reasons. He's the first of the huge intake of 2010 Tory MPs to get to the cabinet. In terms of ethnicity, gender and schooling it was the most diverse parliamentary cohort in Conservative history. Mr Cameron will hope that the days of promoting women and minorities to positions of influence before they were ready are over. Hopefully, promotions will now be on merit rather than for presentational reasons.
Mr Javid is also one of the first children of Thatcher to get to the top table in government. We know that he shares her commitment to market economics, choice in public services and the nation state. Do he and others from the 2010 intake also understand Thatcherism's weaknesses? Will they worry as much about protecting the safety net for the victims of the economic cycle as she worried about creating ladders of opportunity for its beneficiaries? And will they be able to compromise with political opponents in a way that she struggled to do? Sajid Javid has risen quickly and may rise much farther still, but he also risks seeming too partisan on occasions and too ready to confront, rather than persuade, doubters. His and his party's success depends upon learning from the Iron Lady's weaknesses as well as her strengths.
Javid will back press freedom and private investment in the arts
Document T000000020140410ea4a00068
