{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3231"}
____
  
Have women lost trust in the UK police?
By Ava Vidal   
1,027 words
9 April 2014
12:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
As a report concludes policing in England and Wales has been damaged but not "broken" by the likes of the Stephen Lawrence investigation and the Hillsborough disaster, Ava Vidal, a former prison officer, explores whether women have more reason to distrust the police
'Abuse of power'
'Additional barriers'
Policing in England and Wales has been damaged, but not broken, according to Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary, Tom Winsor. In his annual report, he lists five main reasons for the public’s lack of confidence in the police, including the handling of the Stephen Lawrence murder investigation, the Hillsborough disaster and the so-called plebgate affair.
Years ago, I remember speaking to a white friend after it was revealed that the police had been spying on the family of Stephen Lawrence, a victim of a racist murder, who said she was in total shock. I had to admit that was I was not shocked at all.
I have grown up seeing members of my community clash with police. The Toxteth, Brixton, Broadwater Farm and recent UK Riots were all in response to heavy-handed policing, in my opinion. We have seen many deaths in custody and not a single successful prosecution.
When Conservative MP Charles Walker raised the issue in Parliament in December 2013, the nearly empty room showed just how seriously the politicians are taking this subject.
And what of women and the policing? From a woman's point of view, is trust in the police better or worse?
I recently spoke at the Women of the World festival at The Southbank Centre about online harassment and bullying. Caroline Criado-Perez, the feminist behind the women-on-banknotes campaign was also on the panel. She read out some of the vile abuse that she had to endure for daring to suggest that a woman should be kept ona note. Two people were eventually jailed. She then went on to describe her experience with the police officers assigned to her case which, she alleges, was not a positive one.
She listed the catalogue of mistakes, including that they lost evidence and the lack of care she received and concluded that her trust in the police was severely dented. I remember thinking that it was amazing that she had got to the age of 30 before she had had a bad experience with the police.
</br>Tanya is a mental health worker in East London that regularly comes into contact with the police because of her job. She tells me: “I have grown up witnessing their abuse of power. Disproportionately used against black and Asian youth. Their presence and behaviour in carrying out their duties on the streets of East London in particular amounts to little more than the systematic bullying and harassment of BME youth ... from stop and search to surveillance.
"I was appalled when my son told me that he and his mates are filmed by the police as they play in local playgrounds. In the month of Ramadan they seem to get even more heavy handed and gung-ho in exercising their duties as they hang around local mosques after Taraweeh prayers."
The Scarman Report, The MacPherson Report, The Ellison Report . Pretty much the same results are found, recommendations are made and yet nothing seems to change. The Head of the Met's Black Police Association, Janet Ellis, has called on the Commissioner Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe to admit that the police force is still institutionally racist.
There are still some crimes that women are disproportionately the victims of, such as domestic violence, sexual assault and rape. This may mean that they have to come into contact with the police. The treatment received when reporting these crimes has improved for some women while there are others that do not feel that anything has got better.
For example, when Sanaz, a student in Leeds, was physically assaulted by her drunk and high male housemate she said that the police were more concerned with checking her immigration status rather than investigating the crime.
</br>Broken Rainbow UK is the only national lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender domestic violence service. Jo Harvey Barringer, managing director (interim), says: "We know from callers to our national LGBT domestic violence helpline that lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans people face additional barriers to reporting, which means they either don't contact the police or if they do will often face an even more inconsistent and confused response from officers attending."
Trust in the police from the trans community was not improved after the video of the arrest of a transwoman went viral last year. The police allegedly ripped the wig from the head of Jose Dos Santos whilst loudly telling her that she was ‘not normal.’
Broken Rainbow said last month: "So many lesbian and bisexual callers don’t believe that the police will take them seriously as their abuser is another woman.
The dominance of this heteronormative view of domestic violence means that so many agencies, such as the police and refuges, are not sufficiently equipped to support lesbian and bisexual women."
If Hogan-Howe is really interested in leaving a legacy that will mean something, he will look to make serious changes within the police. These include setting up a truly independent board that investigates complaints, as well as dismantling the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC). As long as the ex-police keep investigating the police, they will keep finding themselves innocent of all charges.
Moreover, I think that given the recent revelations that policemen have been spying on female activists, having sexual relationships with them and in some cases fathering children with them, has horrified most women. When this has been allowed to happen then we have to question just what kind of police force is being operated. Many women are already in a very vulnerable state when they have to enlist the help of the police. Consequently I believe that they have more reason to distrust the police that men for the reasons stated above. Especially it seems if they are mothers of men of colour.
Document TELUK00020140409ea49002gz
