{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2734"}
____
  
News
How Scotland's luvvies turned into strident cheerleaders for Salmond
By Tom Gallagher   
1,178 words
2 April 2014
17:17
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Intellectuals and members of the entertainment industry have swung towards the Scottish independence cause in impressive numbers. A normally critical crowd have become cheerleaders for the Scottish National Party and manage to suppress any concerns about Alex Salmond’s U-turns on issues like currency and Nato membership.
Mr Salmond repays the compliment. He writes prefaces to some of their books, in 2012 gave them pride of place at the launch of the Yes for Scotland campaign in an Edinburgh cinema, and even promised they could help make sure that the recent White Paper on independence could "resonate down through the ages" thanks to their literary contributions. But in the end they either backed off or their services weren’t required since most of the 670 pages read like a civil service boilerplate draft.
Scotland’s bards and novelists share with a political movement the desire to break free from the suffocating grip of Britain. No stirring poems or novels evoking this restless Scottish age have so far appeared, but they seek to contribute to a mood of expectancy, suggesting epic occurrences are just around the corner.
The "National Collective" is the united front of Scottish intellectuals and artists in favour of independence. One of its stalwarts, Andrew Redmond Barr, wrote last June: "There is no place more revolutionary and no time more exciting than right here and right now in Scotland." He invoked Allen Ginsberg, the American Beat poet, by claiming that Scotland was on the verge of experiencing the cultural energy surge that transformed London and San Francisco back in 1967: "The finest minds of our generation are poised to re-imagine Scotland from top to bottom."
Just like the Beat generation of the 1960s or the Bloomsbury group in England 90 years ago, a group of writers are in revolt against what they see as the boring, pedestrian nature of national life. The country’s imprisonment in a smug British order had blighted Scottish writing and other forms of creativity for too long. Indeed some would say all the way back to the time of Sir Walter Scott in the early 19thcentury, the last time a writer of European stature arguably sprang from Scotland.
They now see the chance to make Scotland became a genuinely interesting and exciting place that attracts the curiosity, and hopefully the admiration, of the world.Joyce McMillan, Scotland’s best-known theatre critic, believes independence will be the catalyst enabling Scottish culture to be "recognised at the global level for its ability to articulate the current human condition".
Invoking a song by the late balladeer Michael Marra, she complained in February that there are "still many Scots who would rather be 'hermless', and eke out a quiet life under Westminster rule, than take on all the risks and opportunities of trying to build a new nation, for the new times in which we live."
But what happens if the voice of Middle Scotland seeks to share the national stage with the cultural bohemians? Well, as a case which made the headlines this week indicates, they are denounced as a suburban fraud, a trespasser in the national debate lacking any right to be heard. This was the fate of Bill Munro, who founded Barrhead Travel, Scotland’s biggest independent travel company in 1975. In February, he wrote to the company’s 697 staff expressing his misgivings, on economic grounds, about separation. The letter surfaced at the weekend. In subsequent days, probably no Scottish businessperson outside the sphere of criminal justice has endured as much vitriol as the unfortunate Mr Munro.
Munro was compared to Robert Mugabe in messages posted online while there were by now predictable calls for people to boycott his business. Salmond is increasingly approached by the North American media and it will be interesting to see if he is tackled about the harrying of what Americans would see as a classic figure from Main Street for daring to challenge the agenda of a determined ruling party.
Salmond has little time for entrepreneurs who fail to exercise their duties to create a vibrant independent nation. The risks this might entail are brushed aside
Pat Kane, a veteran of the Scottish rock music scene, believes a new virtual Scotland is capable of transforming the country on all fronts. He is much promoted by Yes for Scotland as he bids to become a Caledonian renaissance man with hisideas blog Thoughtland.
On 25 February 2012, he passed on to readers of the Scotsman the thoughts of his partner, Indra Adnan, who runs a consultancy called Soft Power Network. According to Kane, "she notes that Scotland at the moment 'has all the positive points of British soft power – its English language, its richness of customs, culture, values – but few of the negative ones’ ".As Kane proudly pointed out, SoftPowerNetwork now "advises companies and governments on strategy in this area".
Cultural innovators like Kane pin their hopes on the rise of a new progressive elite, imbued with Green ideas, embracing immigration because it is sure to energise the nation, and inspired by the hope that a post-British Scotland can replicate the best in Scandinavia. The author and broadcaster Lesley Riddoch has set out these views in a best-selling book, Blossom.
But a price tag comes with the creation of this futuristic nation and just one part is high energy prices for consumers. Such an inconvenience are usually brushed aside by radical intellectuals. However, they might have pause for thought if they realise just how short of followers they are.
Scotland’s youth are the most computer-literate segment of the population For young people, often with global horizons, who know that many of them are likely, as adults, to earn their livelihoods beyond Scotland, the idea of laying down an international frontier across northern Britain often appears ludicrous. A poll of a thousand Scottish teenagers published in mid-2013 found that 60 per cent want to keep the Union, with just 21 per cent backing independence. Numerous school debates have revealed even more sweeping support for the Union.
There is no shortage of radical posturing which would cause Franz Fanon, the originator of radical Third World chic, to raise an eyebrow if he was around to observe it. One of the most visible "angry young men", the novelist Alan Bissett, insists that Scotland is really "a colony" because English allegedly supplanted Gaelic and the farmore widely spoken Scots tongue.
Scotland’s creatives are increasingly preaching to a small pool of "converted". They have given up on raising the awareness of the "bovine" masses. Not a few can barely hide their excitement about the demographic changes which the SNP is fully capable of carrying out in order to reinvent a new people fit for a radically assertive country. Whether Scotland will produce its Bertolt Brecht able to wax lyrical about such a dystopia is rather to be doubted.
Tom Gallagher’s book Divided Scotland appeared in 2013 (Argyll Publications).
Document TELUK00020140402ea420038p
