{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2724"}
____
  
NEWS
European Union migrants will overtake immigrants from outside Europe for first time, says report
By David Barrett Home Affairs Correspondent   
586 words
2 April 2014
10:19
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
MigrationWatch says number of EU migrants arriving over just four years will be equal to the population of Manchester
Immigration from within the European Union is poised to make up the majority of new arrivals to Britain for the first time, according to a new report.
A paper published by MigrationWatch UK, which campaigns for tougher immigration rules, said the economic crisis in southern Europe would continue to drive a huge influx to this country.
It predicted net migration of EU citizens will be around 130,000 a year, and levels would be maintained for the “medium term”. It meant the total would be 520,000 over four years, or more than the population of Manchester, the study said.
The report said a key factor in the surge was a rise in migration from southern European countries which are suffering high youth unemployment including Spain, Italy and Portugal.
It also predicted that overall net migration would be “in the order of 160,000 a year” - far higher than then Government’s target of “tens of thousands” - once immigration from outside the EU was taken into account.
“If non-EU net migration does fall to about 100,000 per year and EU migration stays at around 130,000 it would become, for the first time, the main source of net migration,” said the report.
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of MigrationWatch, said “The government are successfully bringing down immigration from outside the EU but we now face a situation where the numbers from inside the EU could form the majority of foreign migrants.
“This clearly poses a fundamental issue for our negotiations with the EU.
“It was crazy to have opened up our labour market and our benefit system to 100 million people from countries with a standard of living less than a quarter of our own. There must now be a determined renegotiation.”
Numbers from the EU could overtake non-EU migrants in the next set of official immigration figures, due to be published next month, MigrationWatch said.
The report added that EU migration could be reduced if ministers could persuade Brussels to allow governments to restrict access to benefits for five years.
“It would ensure that the UK remains a destination for highly qualified individuals such as French bankers and German engineers who would be entirely unaffected, yet it would prevent workers from the poorest EU countries migrating to the UK in order to substantially increase their incomes at the expense of subsidy by UK taxpayers,” it said.
 Figures published in February  showed the number of National Insurance numbers given to foreigners - an important indicator of immigration levels - showed a 19 per cent rise to 617,000 in 2013.
There were huge surges in the number of citizens coming to Britain to work from EU countries which have been hardest hit by the economic crisis.
Data showed the number of Italians registering rose 66 per cent to 44,000, with other countries showing other large increases including Portugal (up 47 per cent, up to 30,000 people) and Spain (up 36 per cent to just under 52,000).
The official figures also showed net migration had risen to 212,000 in the 12 months to the end of September, its highest point since 2011 and a blow to the Government’s pledge to cut levels to the tens of thousands by the next general election.
Document TELUK00020140402ea420018h
