{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"923"}
____
  
Guardian Money Pages
Saturday Money: What the whistleblowers say
569 words
3 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
45
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The Sky sales agents who contacted the Guardian went in front of our cameras to reveal selling practices they claim are common at their branch. Here's what they said - in their own words.
Targeting vulnerable customers:
"Sky agents will target people who don't speak English - recent immigrants, Polish, eastern European people - we will tell them anything to sell Sky products."
"We don't go to expensive areas because there the customer knows the cost of everything. They know the difference between normal broadband or fibre. They would just slam the door in our face and it would be a waste of time.
"We don't want to waste time, so we go to the poorest areas where there are lots of immigrants that believe everything we tell them."
"Some roads we visit four times a year . . . more even. The people recognise us and get angry because the agent lied to them last time. It's a bad feeling for them, but we have to keep selling."
Mis-selling call packages:
"Sky is selling three products - TV, phone and broadband - and in the three products there is mis-selling.
"Take the telephone package . . . Sky sells Anytime Calls International with (free) calls to a limited number of countries. Many agents tell the customer their country is free to call - for example, Egypt or Iran - even if it is not included in the package."
Exaggerating broadband speeds:
"Take broadband. There is lying about the speeds, giving normal broadband for the fibre, promising unlimited broadband, but giving them the Everyday Lite (limited) broadband."
Pressure to sell:
"If we don't get a sale we will be called by the manager at 10 clock in the office, not to motivate us or train us - it's just to punish us."
"Many of the managers have come from a gas and electric background which recently has been closed down due to mis-selling. The managers migrated from that area."
"Sales agents not performing, they (the management) are tracking them, as we have been given the company mobile, and the company iPad, as well as the company car. They are tracking us after working hours even on Saturdays as well . . . especially the agents that are under-performing, or not giving good numbers."
"When we see a customer's house or their children, I feel pity for them. There are many customers that literally cry with us. I tell my manager he is putting everyone's job at risk and the same thing happened with the gas and electric industry - he is just laughing at me."
Promising extra channels:
"We promise customers they get a certain kids' channel such as Disney.
"Kids are excited, the customer is excited, all tempted by the prices. But when the installation is done they never get the kids' channels. When they ring customer services they find they have to pay extra.
"It is too late then, as they are already out of their cooling off period. Already trapped in, and the agent has already secured his commission, and the manager secures his bonus."
Customers who end up with both Sky and Virgin:
"Some customers signed up to two contracts, but cancelled and found that they put negative things on their credit file. One had saved up pounds 42,000 for a house but couldn't get a mortgage as result."
Document GRDN000020140503ea530003c
