{"newspaper":"The Sunday Telegraph","id:"911"}
____
  
Features
Down to earth, with a good sense of humour
Francine Raymond   
1,617 words
4 May 2014
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
16,17
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Gardening Against the Odds recognises those who create beauty in the face of adversity. This year, a new award nods to creations that inspire a smile, writes Francine Raymond
The Great Conservatory at Syon Park, bursting with metre-high Geranium maderense and joyful with the chatter of young gardeners, last week played host to our fourth Gardening Against the Odds awards presentation. The awards, organised by The Sunday Telegraph and The Conservation Foundation highlight the efforts of those who create beautiful gardens, despite personal difficulties.
The overall winner for 2013, Chris Evans, reminded us that the Butterfly Garden Project in Cheltenham started with just six students but, 11 years later, numbers had spiralled: "When we heard we'd won, it was difficult to leave anyone behind, so 60 of us are here to accept the award."
He added: "Elspeth Thompson [The Telegraph gardening writer], in whose memory these awards are given, knew how magical gardening can be. You decide to garden and people come to look, then someone will speak to you, another will ask what you're doing, a third will come back the next day to watch and, in no time, you have friendships. Off the back of that friendship a new community is born."
Their award was like a seed and the Butterfly Garden is already cross-pollinating with the winners of the Young Gardener category: Dost, a centre for young immigrants and refugees, and Ricky Downey, an apprentice gardener. Last Thursday, Chris received his British Empire Medal. He had a brooch made up and reproduced a similar award for every one of his students, all to be presented by the Lord Lieutenant.
THE 2014 AWARDS
Over the coming year, the Gardening Against the Odds awards will continue to celebrate those who battle against physical and mental odds, but we are also introducing a new category - Gardens that Make You Smile - highlighting exuberant gardens with generosity of spirit that uplift and make life better for those who view them.
Those who smile live longer. It has been proved that smiling boosts our immune systems, changes our mood, lowers blood pressure and can even act as a natural facelift, so if gardens can add to our wellbeing, why not promote their benefits and reward our benefactors? In the meantime, their creators are receiving their own health bonus through exercise and fresh air. Just imagine how much better life could be if all front gardens displayed a little wit among the usual plants and shrubs.
Katy Cox's end-of-terrace garden in Faversham is a prime example. When I visited last week I was entranced with her horticultural whimsy. Vegetables grow happily in old tin trunks; succulents succeed in tiny jewellery cases (and, more surprisingly, in plastic dinosaurs that lurk in window boxes packed with ferns); and tin cans of alpines balance in precarious Fifties wirework among surrealistic marine creatures - all to seduce passers-by. Katy makes fruit preserves and liqueurs (from mightyfinethings.co. uk) and organises a monthly street market (favershammarket.org). She will also show her garden as part of Faversham Open Gardens on June 29.
Another such gardener is Marilyn Phipps, who welcomes visitors to her beach-house venue with an old Lloyd Loom chair that has seen better days. Instead of ending up in the skip, this venerable old resting place displays a selection of small pot plants nestling in its exposed springs. To Marilyn, gardening is a form of self-expression, a creative way of pleasing. But it's not just horticultural jokes that please: I pass a front garden on my way to the station that's just so charming, it always makes me smile as I hurry to catch my train.
The most innovative and amusing gardens can be found in the concrete jungle of the city. When east London "Pothole Gardener" Steve Wheen wanted to brighten up his grey neighbourhood, "gardening came to mind", he says. So, for the past three years, he has been filling holes in the road with compost and plants, and adding tiny features "to bring happiness in unexpected places" (see The Little Book of Little Gardens and his website thepotholegardener.co.uk).
Apart from drawing attention to the potholes, Steve's greatest reward is to sit back and watch the public's reaction to his ephemeral miniature gardens.
In north London, architect and hedge-cutter Tim Bushe turns boundaries into common ground. After he fulfilled his wife's request to sculpt his own privet hedges into a cat, neighbours he had never met before made contact. Local landmarks such as his famous Highbury herd of elephants make people stop, smile and socialise. And he uses his fees to support a charity that helps people with learning difficulties (hft.org.uk, formerly the Home Farm Trust).
Such ideas have blossomed in recent years. Telegraph writer and Gardening Against the Odds judge Tim Richardson thought up the Chelsea Fringe as a way of bringing together the myriad community gardening projects that spring up around London. "The idea of the Fringe is to give a platform for these projects to promote themselves and give an annual focus for celebrations," he says. Success is obvious, with increasing numbers of gardeners taking part, and satellite fringes springing up in Bristol, Brighton and Kent, as well as abroad (see chelseafringe.com).
Tim describes the Fringe, running this year from May 17 through to June 8, as "street fashion" to the "haute couture" of Chelsea proper. Last year, Anna Rose Hughes's garden in a converted lavatory block in Peckham, just a corridor's width, incorporated the site's original sinks packed with dripping asplenium, athyrium, dryopteris and polystichum ferns. This kind of irreverence proves gardeners have a sense of humour.
Humour doesn't feature widely in mainstream Chelsea gardens, but a memorable exception in 2006 was Marney Hall's 4head Garden of Dreams; an idyllic retreat home to thousands of healing plants, and the flower show's largest plant sculpture — a reclining female figure clothed in a variety of grasses and mosses.
Since one's own garden rarely evokes a smile, it's up to us to nominate the gardens of others. Send us examples of gardeners whose efforts bring a smile to your face, and spread the joy.
For details of how to enter, see panel, right, go to telegraph.co.uk/ gardeningawards or gardeningagainst theodds.com.
WHAT IS GARDENING AGAINST THE ODDS?
Gardeners against the odds make their own lives and the lives of others brighter, better and more fun through their efforts to create beautiful garden spaces. Entries are invited from individual gardeners and groups from anywhere in the UK. Nominations are also greatly encouraged. Gardeners can be shy about putting themselves forward. Please tell us about somewhere that catches your eye.
THE ODDS INCLUDE
Physical disabilities, such as sight, health and mobility difficulties, as well as social isolation.
Psychological and mental problems, where gardening gives solace.
Young gardeners against the odds: we invite nominations and entries for any gardener under 25 whose life has been made better through gardening.
New for this year
Gardens that make you smile. They may be in "impossible" places or created in the unlikeliest spot or container. We're looking for quirky, eccentric and amusing garden spaces. Elspeth Thompson, to whose memory the awards are dedicated, loved the splashes of beauty, created for others to enjoy. As you go about your daily life, please snap these on your phone, tablet or camera. Entries will be posted on a photo gallery on telegraph.co.uk/gardening and gardeningagainsttheodds.com this summer
ENTRIES AND NOMINATIONS, PLEASE
These can be submitted online or by post. You can enter any number of times.
Online: please post photographs taken in 2014 at gardeningagainst theodds.com (where terms and conditions are displayed) and include the category you are entering (if entering the Young Gardener category, please state the age), where the photographs were taken and a brief explanation of the odds, together with your name, postal and email address and telephone number. Or email GATO@conservationfoundation.co.uk By post: please include your name, address and telephone number and send to: Gardening Against The Odds, The Conservation Foundation, 1 Kensington Gore, London SW7 2AR.
Closing date: Monday 1 September 2014
PRIZES
The overall winner will receive the Gardening Against The Odds trophy for a year. They, the runner-up and eight highly commended award winners, guests and nominators will be invited to a gala presentation event in the Great Conservatory at Syon Park in spring 2015.
THE JUDGES
A distinguished panel of gardeners, writers, conservationists and two previous award winners will judge the shortlist of entries in autumn 2014.
They include the Duchess of Northumberland, creator of The Alnwick Garden, conservationist David Bellamy, actress and gardener Susan Hampshire, Conservation Foundation director David Shreeve and Frank Wilson, husband of Elspeth Thompson.
WIN A GARDENING AGAINST THE ODDS BOOK
With the help of Coutts, the Conservation Foundation has published a compilation of some of the inspiring and beautiful entries from the past four years, including useful contacts.
The first 10 readers to email GATO@conservationfoundation.co.uk will receive a copy. Further copies are available for £7.50 including postage and packing.
LAST YEAR'S WINNERS
Our thanks to the Duchess of Northumberland (pictured right with winner Chris Evans) for hosting at Syon Park, to Coutts for its generous sponsorship and the Garden Centre Group for providing the afternoon tea. Thanks also to the Tanner Trust for supporting the gardeningagainsttheodds.com website and Hayloft Plants which gave fuchsias and geraniums to every guest.
Document STEL000020140504ea540002w
