{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"3320"}
____
  
Ukip's Sanya-Jeet Thandi quits: Why it doesn't always end well for young activists
By Cathy Newman Channel 4 News presenter   
724 words
14 May 2014
13:06
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Ukip is not the only party to have cultivated young political pin-ups, but as in the case of Sanya-Jeet Thandi, it can backfire when youth leaders' early certainties mellow into something much more ambiguous, argues Cathy Newman
There’s been a lot of mud slung at Ukip over the last few weeks, some of it of the sticky variety, some less so. But there’s been little more damaging than the resignation of Sanya-Jeet Thandi .
Here was a British-born Indian supporter of Ukip, described as a “rising star” by Nigel Farage who was living proof of the party leader’s claim that he’d embraced his “clause four moment” and turned his back once and for all on candidates accused of racist views.
Yet Thandi – who joined the party’s youth wing, Young Independence three years ago when she was 18 – has now publicly walked out of the party, voicing concerns that play into the hands of Farage窶冱 opponents .
“The direction in which the party is going is terrifying: Ukip has descended into a form of racist populism that I cannot bring myself to vote for,” she wrote in this morning窶冱 Guardian . The scare-tactics behind a recent party poster declaring that “26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose jobs are they after?” appeared to be the final straw. “While the party deliberately attracts the racist vote, I refuse to be associated with them,” she concluded.
Ever since David Cameron attacked Ukip members as a bunch of “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists,” the party has struggled to demonstrate that it’s not anti-immigrants and immigration per se, but in favour of controlled immigration. A series of racist statements from candidates in this month’s elections have proved embarrassing to say the least. Now Thandi has undermined Farage窶冱 attempt to draw a line under all that.
Of course there are those who suspect foul play, who believe she’s a “leftie plant”. Ukip’s head of communications, Patrick O’Flynn, tweeted about a doubling of Young Independence membership, with 200 new members joining since the start of March alone. Certainly, there were recent indications Sanya-Jeet’s enthusiasm for Ukip was on the wane, when the writer and performer Awate attacked her on Channel 4 News earlier this month for being a member of a party, as he put it, “made up of a lot of racists [and] xenophobic people”. She retorted then that she was merely a “former” Ukip activist.
After initially refusing to dignify her exit with much of a response, a Ukip “source” was quoted this morning as saying: “She’s a young person and she speaks her opinions. I’m free not to consider them very important. I don’t regard her as a person I should spend a huge amount of my time bothering about.”
This is somewhat sour grapes. Political parties love the new kid on the block and spend inordinate amounts of time courting “the youth vote”.
Sanya-Jeet began her career as a Ukip poster-girl when she spoke at the party’s conference in 2012, and was wooed assiduously by the leadership.
Other parties similarly have cultivated young pin-ups. Just look at how the 16-year-old William Hague was lauded at Tory party conference back in 1977. The same happened to Justin Hinchcliffe in 1995, who, at the tender age of 14, advocated making the homeless fish for food in the Thames, and Jessica Lever, who addressed Tory conference as a 17-year-old in 2004. And then there was Rory Weal, the 16-year-old who impressed Labour in 2011.
But it doesn’t always end well for young activists. Their early certainties can mellow into something much more ambiguous. Hague’s passionate Thatcherism and youthful nerdiness proved an embarrassment to him in later life. And Hinchcliffe, now a local Tory chairman in Tottenham, is still, all these years later, struggling to get elected to the council in Seven Sisters.
Many Ukip supporters seem to think Thandi will enjoy a fabulous political career in the Labour or Conservative party. Then again, she might find fulfilment outside politics entirely.
Document TELUK00020140514ea5e002be
