{"newspaper":"The Daily Telegraph","id:"1097"}
____
  
Editorial; Opinion, Leading articles
Families need support with burdens of ageing
455 words
7 May 2014
The Daily Telegraph
DT
1; National
23
English
The Daily Telegraph © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855
The Care Bill returns to Parliament today, for what are expected to be its final stages in the Lords before becoming law. Since the consequences of an ageing population represent one of the greatest social challenges of the era, it is hard to think of a more important piece of legislation to have come before MPs and peers in recent years.
The Bill is the most ambitious attempt yet to put in place a comprehensive system for residential and home care in England. It will introduce a cap on costs from 2016, reducing – but not removing – the need for the elderly to sell their homes to cover bills. Everyone will have a legal entitlement to a personal care budget, which they can receive as a direct payment to spend as they wish. In addition, carers will have the right to support from their local council.
These reforms should remove uncertainty, allow people to plan for their old age and, crucially, enable the financial services industry to start fashioning insurance and saving products to cover people's bills. But while these initiatives are welcome, no one should be under any illusion that they represent a panacea. A debate continues to rage over who should take the greatest responsibility for dealing with the impact of ageing – the state or families.
There is always the danger that the enactment of legislation is regarded as a guarantee of state intervention. But the plain fact is that the rising costs of care will make it impossible for the taxpayer to bear the burden of looking after a rapidly rising number of elderly people, many of whom will be suffering from dementia. As we report today, figures from Public Health England show that some 50,000 people are quitting work every year to look after a relative afflicted with dementia, and this is likely to become more commonplace despite the care reforms.
It is, of course, laudable that family members should choose to care for their relatives – following the admirable pattern seen in many immigrant communities, as the Lib Dem MP Simon Hughes recently pointed out. Furthermore, as Jeremy Hunt, the Health Secretary, has written in this newspaper, it is possible to live with dementia and to adapt to its presence if it is diagnosed early. Today, the Alzheimer's Society will formally launch the latest stage of its Dementia Friends programme, which helps people learn about dementia and encourages individual empathy and compassion.
Inevitably, dealing with what Mr Hunt called the "quiet crisis" of ageing will involve a cultural upheaval, one best addressed by the state working to support families rather than supplant them.
Document DT00000020140507ea5700056
