{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"2542"}
____
  
NEWS
Vince Cable says he is 'intensely relaxed' about immigration; Britain needs migrants because they are some of the most dynamic and imaginative workers in the economy, Vince Cable will say today.
By Christopher Hope and Peter Dominiczak   
508 words
6 March 2014
06:00
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Britain needs migrants because they are some of the most dynamic and imaginative workers in the economy, Vince Cable will say today.
The Business Secretary will say in a speech that he is “intensely relaxed" about large scale migration – as long as “they pay their taxes and pay their way".
In a speech at the Mansion House in the City of London, Mr Cable will state that Britain needs more migrants to help fuel growth in the economy.
He will say that “bearing down on economic migration is a clear example of a restriction on trade", pointing out independent research which said that quitting the European Union could cost the UK £60billion a year.
He will warn: “Bear down on immigrants, and you lose some of the most dynamic, innovative and imaginative workers in your economy."
According to excerpts released last night, Mr Cable will warn that a “marked reduction" in migration from EU countries will lead to “an increase in the budget deficit and a much slower reduction in the public debt".
Mr Cable will say that while the issue is “politically toxic" and he needs a “tin hat" when raising it, surveys suggest that nearly three quarters of people think migrants who learn English, work hard and pay their taxes are welcome in the UK.
He will say: “I know from experience that these arguments are difficult on the doorstep, where – after years of pressure on living standards and worries about jobs and housing – immigration is deeply unpopular.
“But the answer I give...is that I am intensely relaxed about people coming to work and study here and bringing necessary skills to Britain – provided that they pay their taxes and pay their way."
The news came after Downing Street was accused of suppressing a report which found that immigrants are not preventing as many British workers from getting jobs as previously claimed.
Theresa May, the Home Secretary, has repeatedly cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee that found 23 British workers are left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals.
But a study by civil servants has concluded that the ‘displacement’ figure is actually much lower, according to the BBC’s Newsnight programme.
The report was apparently completed last year but has not been released amid concerns it could prove politically awkward for ministers.
Number 10 said the report had not yet been released it had not been finalised, adding that it will be published “shortly".
The disclosures will prove embarrassing for Mrs May, with official figures suggesting that the Conservatives’ pledge to reduce net migration to below 100,000 people a year by next year is unlikely to be met.
Internal emails seen by Newsnight showed that one civil servant described the Migration Advisory Committee research used by Mrs May as “not robust enough given the wider evidence".
Document TELUK00020140306ea36001mo
