{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"92"}
____
  
Guardian Comment and Debate Pages
Diary: Hugh Muir
Hugh Muir   
717 words
26 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
33
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
✒To Britain's leading black paper, the Voice, where there have been many stories about the struggle of Conservatives to feel at one with multiracial Britain. Stories of councillors posting racially dodgy material. Disapproving stories about ministers and their approach to immigration. Accounts of the fact that only 18% of people from any visible minority, and only a sprinkling of black people, voted Tory in 2010. And this week, an extra item: a high-profile column from George Osborne explaining how he has reformed air passenger duty to enable "hardworking families" to travel more cheaply between Britain and the Caribbean. All welcome, but what next? Will the conference theme be the song Ebony and Ivory? You'd think there was an election coming.
✒Still, good to have friends, whatever their motives - as exemplified by the hyper-connected late prince of television talk, Sir David Frost. Barney Jones, his editor on Breakfast with Frost, told students at the University of Westminster of a time they struggled for a special guest. What about George Bush Sr, mused Frost. Two calls later Jones overheard: "Geeee-orge, how are you?" The ex-prez was booked.
✒Fresh troubles afflict the once mighty Socialist Workers party, still dogged by the furore over its handling of sexual assault allegations involving senior officials. The SWP holds fast to tradition, and one such was the annual Marxist Festival in London, for which it routinely sought co-operation from student activists at such places as the University of London. This year it won't be forthcoming. "Our rejection of this year's request to book rooms at the University of London Union for Marxism Festival 2014 is due to the fact that the Socialist Workers party has, over the last year, proven itself to be a corrupt, rape-apologist organisation that prides itself in creating an unsafe space for young women," say student officials in a statement. "We see the SWP's handling of rape allegations against a senior member as a despicable denial of sexism." There's more. "To the SWP, we say that you are beyond help and progressive debate. You are a disgrace to the left, and we have no wish to help support any growth in your oppressive organisation . . . you do not have any right to use this space, you are not welcome here or anywhere near our union and we will not be harassed by your organisation." The SWP calls this "a malicious attempt to smear the SWP by publishing vicious but unsubstantiated lies about the organisation". But the rooms are gone for this year, one would think.
✒Defiance from our Tory rival Justin Hinchcliffe, as he sails close to the rocks in terms of copyright by producing the self-styled Tottenham Guardian. He steals our typeface for his election leaflet, though sadly he rejects our politics in favour of Cameroonian piffle. Unsurprisingly, good people see his ruse for what it is. "Despite claims by the Tottenham Tory Justin Hinchcliffe that the Tottenham Guardian is a soaraway success, complaints have been made that it contains no crossword, letters page or diary column," reports local union man Keith Flett. "Engaged by the opposing forces of Haringey TUC in central Tottenham on Sunday afternoon a man was observed to come out of his house holding a copy of the Tottenham Guardian and exclaiming 'What's this shit'." Still, Hinchliffe talks the project up. "It's becoming a popular and well-read title, unlike the actual Guardian, which is surely facing bankruptcy." Delusional. But feisty, isn't he?
✒I'm taken to task, finally, for referring to the meeting of the pope and archbishop of Canterbury as a rendezvous between "two great religions". The Roman Catholic Church and the Church of England, though different denominations, are followers of the same religion, Christianity, says Pauline Davidson of Cambridge, somewhat sternly, and that is plainly right. The pope, in telling the archbish that he was the more senior by two days, was not implying separation, or seeking to reopen centuries of pain, or to revisit enmities long forgotten. He was merely saying that, as regards Christianity, he's the daddy. Just so we're all on the same page.
diary@theguardian.com
Twitter: @hugh-muir
Document GRDN000020140326ea3q00036
