{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"757"}
____
  
Guardian Education Pages
On our networks this week: Guardian University Forum 2014: New postgraduate tables: How to survive a PGCE course
375 words
25 February 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
29
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
Guardian Higher Education Network
theguardian.com/higher-education-network
Tomorrow we'll be live blogging from the Guardian University Forum - our higher education event for 2014. The theme for this year is "Competing on a global stage". Liam Byrne MP, shadow minister for higher education, will address questions of future higher education policy; David Stevens, of University College London, will talk about immigration policy and university recruitment; and professor David Greenaway, vice-chancellor of the University of Nottingham, will talk about international partnerships for UK universities.
We'll also find out how parents rate UK higher education as YouGov presents the exclusive findings from a poll commissioned by the Guardian. Follow the event live on Twitter using #gdnuniforum.
Guardian Students
theguardian.com/education/students
Postgraduate study is our topic of the week, as we launch the Guardian University Guide's postgraduate tables for this year. If you're thinking about a master's, have a look at our guide for information on completion rates and other key stats. Abby Young-Powell explains how to use the tables.
We also pull out key findings from this year's research. Which postgraduate courses are the most popular and which fall behind in recruitment numbers? How many postgrads are studying part time?
And to coincide with our latest tables, we're also launching a section of Guardian Students dedicated to postgraduate students, sponsored by the University of Central Lancashire.
Guardian Teacher Network
theguardian.com/teacher-network
Ex-journalist Jeanette McAllister questions her sanity on the Guardian Teacher Network this week. Why? Because she's starting a PGCE in September. She's under no illusion about what's in store: 60-hour working weeks; piles of paperwork of questionable purpose; an inspection regime that expects bells and whistles in every lesson; and teachers who are stressed out. But McAllister believes her commitment to the students will see her through. Read her story and share your own advice.
And today we're holding a live chat about evidence-based teaching from 5.30pm to 7.30pm, sponsored by Randstad Education. Our experts will be ready to answer your questions.
Document GRDN000020140224ea2p0006b
