{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2763"}
____
  
Guardian Comment and Debate Pages
Diary: Diary Hugh Muir
734 words
27 February 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
29
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
✒Anticipation in the Twittersphere for today's big event as the Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams offers himself for direct questioning by the public. Gerry is a keen tweeter and already questions are flooding in. The comedian Chris Addison has been in touch. "Was it you who personally had to dress up as a lady-horse with lipstick to entice Shergar into the van?" Another participant seeks advice. "Gerry, I'm in a bit of a pickle. Red wire or blue wire?" A desperate Manchester United fan seeks help. "Is there any way you could send the lads around to Moyes's house?" And there's a fashion query. "Were you ever tempted to wear a pink balaclava just for giggles?" More pointed questioners seek a variety of reminiscences on matters that continue to interest historians and the judicial authorities. This will be a one-off, I think.
✒Some rejoicing, meanwhile, in the area of Sellafield as news seeps through of the generosity of the plant's management company, Nuclear Management Partners. They're good neighbours and no mistake. Available from NMP for a range of good causes locally, via the Whitehaven News and Star's Community Chest, a whole pounds 1,000. Some rejoicing. But it must be said, the rejoicing is not widespread for a good few have long and bitter memories. Surly types dwell on the pounds 2,795 previously claimed in taxpayer-funded expenses for a trip to the US for the Masters golf tournament by the firm's executives. The really surly sods bang on about the pounds 715 cab journey claimed on behalf of an unnamed NMP executive "and cat".
✒We have work for that cat, for something must be done about the mouse problem at the House of Commons? It's a battle of wits and the rodents are winning. And some MPs say it's time for the authorities to stop messing about, go route one - as football types say - and get a moggie. But it's trickier than one might think. The government can't contract a foreign feline, for though a Lithuanian cat might do the work diligently - and at good rates too - the fallout would be far-reaching. And there's no point turning to Freya, George Osborne's cat at No 11, for while cutting the ribbon at the re-opening of the Red Lion pub in Whitehall - a popular watering hole for MPs - Osborne revealed on Tuesday that Freya spends most of her time across the road in the ancient hostelry. A sorry business really. Freya seems fit for work and there's a job, but instead she skives in the pub and the chancellor pronounces that arrangement acceptable. It really is one rule for them, isn't it?
✒Yes, one rule for them. When immigration minister Mark Harper fessed up to employing a foreign-born cleaner without adequate checks on her immigration status, he was allowed to step down gracefully, sustained with the hope of another ministerial position in the future. In similar circumstances, Mr Ali of Banglatown might not expect such treatment. Certainly the coalition took a harsh attitude in the case of Trenton Oldfield, the Australian it tried to deport for his heinous crime of disrupting the Oxford-Cambridge boat race. When the government lost the first appeal, Harper sanctioned a second, which it also lost heavily. But what goes around, comes around, and thus we find that having been supported by two immigration judges, and having promised never again to disrupt a celebrated boat race, Oldfield spends a deal of his time helping others. Right now he's heavily involved in the legal defence fund campaign to assist one Isabella Acevedo. Isabella was Mark Harper's cleaner. There's pleasing symmetry to that don't you think?
✒Let's end in the capital where mayor of London Boris Johnson is busy closing fire stations, despite warnings that this will endanger the public. At the same time the Blond reiterates his desire to paramilitarise the police with water cannon. How might the ordinary Londoner cope in the event of a fire? Protesters, who grow in number and determination, provide the answer. If your house is ablaze, they say, possessions burning, loved ones trapped - phone 999, supply an address and shout "riot".
diary@theguardian.com
Twitter: @hugh-muir
Document GRDN000020140227ea2r0003j
