{"newspaper":"The Sun","id:"3085"}
____
  
News
VILE TWEETS OF FARAGE'S TV AD STAR
TOM NEWTON DUNN   
357 words
25 April 2014
The Sun
THESUN
2; National
2
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved.   
UKIP RACISM STORM Election candidate suspended
UKIP were last night engulfed in a fresh racism storm after a star of their TV election film urged all Africans to "kill themselves off".
Andre Lampitt was one of five supporters chosen to appear in the first Ukip broadcast for the Euro polls next month, which aired on Wednesday.
But the anti-EU party were forced to suspend the wannabe councillor last night for expressing "repellent views".
In a series of tweets, Lampitt branded Islam as "evil" and founding prophet Muhammad "a pedo" with "an underage wife".
He labelled most Nigerians "bad people" and backed slavery as "an act of war".
And he said Labour leader Ed Miliband — the son of a Jewish refugee — was "not a real Brit". Ukip chiefs were last night scrambling to axe Lampitt as a candidate for South West London's Merton Council, but may have missed yesterday's 4pm deadline.
Ukip leader Nigel Farage last year vowed to tighten up selection procedures to keep extremists away. Last night he pledged to find out what went wrong with party checks.
But he added: "I don't think we have the monopoly on stupid and extreme people." Mr Farage's former flatmate, Independent MEP Godfrey Bloom, left Ukip last year after describing foreign countries as "Bongo Bongo Land" and women as "sluts".
In the broadcast, builder Lampitt complains about EU immigration. Sex scandal Ukip official Lizzy Vaid, 27, also appeared in the five minute Euro elections film.
The Sun yesterday revealed she had been snapped naked taking part in lewd acts when she was 20. She also posed as a Devon "voter" in Ukip's Euro elections manifesto.
A Ukip spokesman said: "We are deeply shocked that Mr Lampitt has expressed such repellent views."
Lampitt, from Morden, South London, who described himself as "born British in Rhodesia" had deleted his Twitter account by last night.
Shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper called Lampitt's tweets "nasty and divisive". Liberal Democrat president Tim Farron branded them the "politics of hate".
tnd@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUN0020140425ea4p000e6
