{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"165"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Protests to no avail as Yashika, 19, deported: Teenager is flown back to Mauritius on third attempt: Mother concerned for distressed A-level student
Mark Tran and agencies   
538 words
3 April 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
10
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
A 19-year Mauritian student was deported last night after a judge rejected a final appeal against the deportation hours before she was due to depart from Heathrow. Lawyers for Yashika Bageerathi lodged papers with a judge at the high court seeking an emergency injunction to block her removal and give her time to take her case to the court of appeal as she was being driven to Heathrow yesterday to await her flight at 9pm.
Lord Justice Richards refused to order a stay of deportation in a telephone hearing and Bageerathi left the UK on the Air Mauritius flight. It was the third time authorities had attempted to send her back to Mauritius in little over a week.
The teenager's mother begged the authorities to allow Yashika to stay just long enough to finish her A-levels at Oasis Academy in north London. Sowbhagyawatee Bageerathi told Channel 4 News: "Where she is going, she is worried about the life and the education. She has worked so hard here and now they want to ruin her life."
Sowbhagyawatee Bageerathi, who was comforted by Yashika's principal, Lynne Dawes, as she struggled not to break down, said: "I am very sad for my daughter. I am very worried. I want everybody to go together and not to send her alone."
Yashika's MP, David Burrowes, said he was "deeply disappointed" by the deportation order.
Yashika was supposed to have left on Sunday, but her supporters said Air Mauritius had refused to fly her out, following an earlier refusal by British Airways. But despite a vocal campaign for Bageerathi to stay so that she can finish her A-levels, the Home Office was adamant that she should return to Mauritius.
On Monday, James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, told the House of Commons that the Home Office would not intervene. He said her case had been through the proper legal process and the Home Office's decision that she did not need protection from violence or persecution in her homeland had been upheld.
Brokenshire said that "given the extent and level of judicial and other scrutiny", the home secretary, Theresa May, had decided not to intervene. Bageerathi came to the UK with her mother, sister and brother in 2011 to escape a physically abusive relative, and they claimed asylum last summer. But the family were told they all faced deportation. Bageerathi is being deported without her mother and two siblings because, as an adult, her case was considered separately.
A petition calling on authorities to stop the deportation at www.change.org had gathered more than 175,000 signatures.
Steve Chalke, founder of the Oasis campaign, said: "If anyone at the Home Office thinks that things are about to die down now that Yashika is out the country, they have got another thing coming. Our legal systems are designed to protect those who are vulnerable and reflect the heart of the British people. "
Captions:
Lord Justice Richards refused to order an 11th-hour stay of deportation
for Yashika Bageerathi
Document GRDN000020140403ea430002g
