{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"2972"}
____
  
Guardian Review Pages
Review: FICTION: The Ladykiller: Mark Lawson is absorbed by a retelling of the real-life murders of widows and spinsters: Quiet Dell by Jayne Anne Phillips 443pp, Jonathan Cape, pounds 18.99
921 words
10 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
11
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
The names of the characters are often a giveaway sign that fiction is based on fact. Sensible novelists avoid scenes featuring two speakers with the same names, but write a novel about the Kennedy administration and inevitably men called John keep having conversations.
Similarly, readers would normally groan at a book whose characters included a lawyer called Law, a Virginia courtroom run by one Judge Southern, and a police force under the control of Sheriff Grimm. Jayne Anne Phillips can't avoid such punning personnel, though, because that is what they were really called. Quiet Dell, her fifth novel, is based on the crimes and trial, in the early 1930s, of a serial killer who, under various names including Pierson and Powers, contacted widows and spinsters through dating agencies and deprived them of their savings and then their lives.
"The press will be a huge problem in this case," says Sheriff Grimm here, and he is proved correct. Powers (originally a Dutch-American immigrant called Harm Drench) was one of the first American murderers to become a media sensation, dubbed "Bluebeard" or "The Ladykiller" in press coverage of his "love racket".
Anticipating eBay's darker markets by eight decades, relics of the deaths were sold on the street by morbid opportunists, including alleged fragments of the soundproofed wood that lined the hut in which the murders occurred. In a closing note on sources, the author reveals that she was sent one of the numbered splinters after mentioning the case, which has long obsessed her, in her debut novel, Machine Dreams
The documentary origins of this latest book are underlined by the inclusion of period photographs, while one entire chapter consists of newspaper cuttings and verbatim witness statements. Even a Boston terrier called Duty - who may become, for some readers, too sentimentally central a focus of the story - is photographically verified.
The novelist's way into the material is through Duty's owners: Asta Eicher, the artistic widow of a Chicago silversmith, and her three young children. It is a standard complaint about crime writing that the murder victims are often scarcely established as characters; created merely to be dispatched. Avoiding this, Phillips allocates a retrospectively heartbreaking 60 pages to the Eicher family alive, at Christmas 1930, as elder daughter Annabel stages a play, and as her mother rejects a potential suitor in favour of the loving letters from a correspondent, Cornelius O Pierson, whom she is about to meet for the first time.
But, after four chapters, in a daring structural decision, the Eichers vanish from the narrative in a way that successfully mimics for the reader the shock and confusion of their disappearance from home. What happened to them and many other victims - climaxing in the West Virginia hamlet that gives the book its name - is obliquely approached through other perspectives. These include Pierson but, most often, one of the few invented characters: Emily Thornhill, a reporter with the Chicago Herald Tribune and a rare woman among the press corps of the period.
One of the justifications for historical literature is giving voice to perspectives to which contemporary accounts were deaf and Phillips' emphasis is on the treacherous destinies - personal and professional - that society decreed for women then. In one of the novel's many flashes of insight, Emily understands why the serial killer "succeeded with these women in mid-life, women likely already ravaged by men or fortune; they wanted care and protection".
They also eagerly believed the fantasy they were offered of a better life. The novel's key line is Emily's observation: "People are so influenced by appearances." The story is a web of pretence in which every major player is living some kind of lie, whether malevolent or benevolent. Apart from the killer's multiple seductive personae, Emily lives the outward life of a spinster in order to avoid the scandal that might ensue from her relationship with a married man, who must also cover his tracks, while Emily's co-reporter at the trial is a homosexual required by the times to hide his sexuality.
These disguises spawn many metaphors of acting and theatricality - "They were all here to play their parts, and the production was finally starting" - which are beginning to risk seeming over-emphatic when they are justified by the astonishing fact that, owing to the numbers of public and press wishing to attend, the Bluebeard trial took place on the stage of a West Virginia opera house, with the judge sitting in front of painted scenery depicting a small American town, and the barristers ordering adjustments to the lighting.
An occasional tendency towards mawkishness, threatened by each appearance of the dog, is also present in passages narrated by one of the dead Eicher children, which, for me, brought back unwelcome memories of Alice Sebold's bestseller The Lovely Bones. In total, though, Quiet Dell is an absorbing and captivating retelling of the birth of one force for good - female empowerment - and of another progressvely destructive trend: scandalous and disproportionate reporting of crime.
Mark Lawson's The Deaths is published by Picador. To order Quiet Dell for pounds 14.99 with free UK p&p call Guardian book service on 0330 333 6846 or go to guardianbookshop.co.uk.
Captions:
Asta Eicher with her three children
Document GRDN000020140509ea5a000cf
