{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1888"}
____
  
Guardian Home Pages
Minister's speech turns spotlight on nationality of PM's staff
Rowena Mason and Alan Travis   
467 words
7 March 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
11
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
David Cameron and Nick Clegg have brushed off questions about their employment of foreign nannies after a Tory immigration minister blamed the "wealthy metropolitan elite" for fuelling high immigration by demanding cheap labour.
Downing Street declined several times to reveal the nationalities of Cameron's domestic staff after James Brokenshire, a new Home Office minister, gave a speech yesterday arguing that well-off families and big business were the main beneficiaries of "cheap tradesmen".
In his speech, Brokenshire said immigration was still "frankly just too high" and suggested those who employ foreign labour have done well out of the situation. The comment sparked questions over whether he was implying that everyone, including members of government, was wrong to employ people from abroad because it might be fuelling immigration and suppressing wages for British workers.
"For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services - but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country," Brokenshire said.
Cameron has in the past employed Nepalese and Australian nannies. Asked whether he still employs domestic staff from overseas, the prime minister's official spokesman said: "I'm going to keep talking about government policy."
A spokesman for Brokenshire said the immigration minister "manages the household with his wife" and he does not employ a nanny or cleaner. However, Brokenshire's predecessor as immigration minister, Mark Harper, employed a cleaner from Colombia for years, which led to his resignation when it emerged she did not have a legal right to work in the UK.
Clegg, the Lib Dem leader, was asked on his weekly LBC radio show about whether he employs a foreign nanny, gardener or housekeeper, and initially said: "I'm not going to get into a great list." However, he subsequently said he had a "lady who has a Belgian passport who helps us".
Brokenshire's speech infuriated companies, with the Institute of Directors saying it was "feeble and pathetic" to use such divisive language. "The UK is an open, trading country that benefits from the skills and ideas of migrants," Simon Walker, the head of the IoD, said.
"We will not become more prosperous by closing our borders to talented individuals and entrepreneurs from across the world. This speech seems to be more about political positioning and less about what is good for the country."
Both parties were mocked by Lord Wood, a shadow cabinet member and adviser to Ed Miliband. He said Brokenshire's speech, along with Vince Cable's remarks on migration, suggest ministers "now see themselves as commentators on how bad their own policy is".
Document GRDN000020140306ea370009s
