{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"1585"}
____
  
NEWS
Watchdog raises concerns over thousands of foreign criminals and illegal immigrants still in UK
By Tom Whitehead Security Editor   
469 words
27 March 2014
15:46
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
John Vine, the immigration watchdog, reveals up to 6,500 cases where emergency travel documents obtained but not used
Up to 6,500 foreign criminals and illegal immigrants are still in the UK despite the Home Office having secured travel documents for their removal – with some cases dating back 12 years.
Almost half are still in this country because casework is still ongoing while up to one in four have disappeared, according to the borders and immigration watchdog.
John Vine, the chief inspector of borders, said there were some 6,460 cases where emergency travels documents had been obtained but still not used, with the oldest dating back to 2001.
The documents are secured from foreign embassies when an illegal immigrant or foreign criminal does not have a passport or any other form of travel document, and are designed to ease their removal.
But in a sample of 75 cases, Mr Vine found 43 per cent still had outstanding casework to be done, 24 per cent were no longer in contact with the Home Office and 18 per cent had legal barriers to their removal.
The remainder were in the pool in error because they now had leave to remain in the country.
Mr Vine warned that foreign embassies could be reluctant to issue such documents in the future if there were delays in using them.
The Home Office insisted the figures did not represent the number of people who could be readily removed and that in many cases travel documents were obtained at the very outset of a case.
In a second report, Mr Vine warned that two thirds of immigration raids to find illegal workers were conducted with inappropriate use of search powers, including six that were carried out unlawfully.
He found that 1,049 searches in the first half of last year were approved by a civil servant rather than with a court warrant.
Such powers can be used if there was a fear that the suspected illegal workers may flee before a court order could be obtained.
But Mr Vine questioned its use in two thirds of the cases he examined as they had “weak justifications”.
In six cases, they were either signed by a civil servant who was of a too low a level or were used out of time.
It raises the prospect of arrested illegal workers using the findings to challenge their detention or removal.
A Home Office spokeswoman said: "AD letters and Emergency Travel Documents play a vital role in tackling and removing immigration offenders.
“Work was already under way to improve their use before the inspections were conducted and we will continue to make improvements in the way we work.”
Document TELUK00020140327ea3r003uy
