{"newspaper":"The Guardian","id:"1125"}
____
  
Guardian Comment and Debate Pages
Comment: Don't agree with Nigel: In a TV debate, David Cameron should confront the Ukip leader, but acknowledge his appeal
Melissa Kite   
665 words
6 May 2014
The Guardian
GRDN
22
English
© Copyright 2014.  The Guardian.  All rights reserved.   
As Nigel Farage delivers a killer line, with his customary blend of humour and pluckiness, the studio audience bursts into applause. David Cameron shifts uncomfortably at his podium. He opens his mouth and declares: "I agree with Nigel."
You can picture this scene only too easily. In order to win, or even survive, a TV general election debate with the insurgent Ukip leader, the prime minister may well decide that not attacking is the best form of defence. This is the big dilemma for Cameron as he prepares to square up to Farage in a series of party leader debates, now said to be likely after No 10 dropped its initial wariness and agreed in principle.
All eyes will of course be on the Dave v Nigel element. And key advisers are already split on whether the prime minister should opt for politeness or attack. The drawbacks of appearing shrill and rattled are obvious. But Tory strategists may yet decide there is an even bigger danger for Cameron if he opts for the "I agree with Nigel" strategy.
They need only remember what happened after Gordon Brown deployed the "I agree with Nick" line during the TV debates at the last election to see how this could go awry. The Lib Dem leader went from zero to hero, and then became deputy prime minister.
Those in the attack camp believe Cameron's best chance of dealing with Farage is to paint him as an extremist and stoke the fears of moderate Tories who have doubts about Ukip's credentials on race and equality.
I'm inclined to agree. I've spoken before of the sense of despair many grassroots Tories feel at being driven into the arms of Ukip. My parents, for example, feel they have no choice but to back a Ukip candidate in Warwickshire because they have been denied compensation for the catastrophic fall in value of their home thanks to HS2.
But they are not happy about it. If they vote Ukip, they will hold their noses as they do so. My father is that rare thing, a Ken Clarke-style pro-European. Every time there is a story about a Ukip candidate saying something idiotic, my parents get pretty depressed.
If Cameron were to come out fighting against Ukip, Conservative waverers might just listen. But it is no good him demolishing Farage without telling disaffected Tories why they should keep the faith with him instead.
The prime minister must put Farage on the spot while communicating to moderate Tories that he understands why they find him appealing. This sounds tricky. But it ought to be possible to disagree with the wilder excesses of Ukip's position on Europe, immigration and foreign policy, while agreeing that the party has a point when it criticises the long arm of Brussels and the pressure immigration puts on public services.
Labour had to do this when it faced a drift in its heartlands towards the BNP. No good would come of simply denouncing the tattooed skinheads. It was only when braver ministers such as Margaret Hodge acknowledged the reason for the BNP's appeal that the drifters started to return. What Hodge identified was that the rise in English nationalism in places such as Barking and Dagenham showed that her party had betrayed the white working class.
Cameron needs to demonstrate he understands that the rise of Ukip in the well-heeled Tory shires is because parts of Middle Britain feel woefully under-represented. Until he begins to acknowledge the reasons for their reluctant choice of Ukip, he cannot begin to earn himself a hearing with these people.
Maybe he doesn't have to say "I agree with Nigel." Maybe he could say "Nigel has a point, but . . ."
Melissa Kite is a contributing editor of the Spectator
Document GRDN000020140506ea5600005
