{"newspaper":"The Daily Express","id:"3747"}
﻿Editorial; Opinion, Columns
Negative tactics show Ukip has got its rivals rattled
Leo McKinstry   
883 words
28 April 2014
The Daily Express
THEEXP
1; National
12
English
(c) 2014 Express Newspapers   
THE surge in support for Ukip continues to gather momentum. Amid mounting public disillusion with the progressive ruling elite, Nigel Farage's party is on the verge of causing one of the biggest upsets in politics since the Second World War.
An opinion poll at the weekend showed that 31 per cent of people are planning to vote Ukip in next month's European elections, well ahead of both Labour and the Conservatives.
This dramatic rise in popularity is remarkable for a party without a single seat at Westminster. But Ukip's growing appeal is a graphic indicator of widespread fury at the betrayal of our country by a narrow, selfserving political elite that has systematically undermined our national identity and allowed the EU to trash our democracy.
The further that Ukip advance the more rattled the political establishment becomes. A mood of hysteria and desperation has gripped the three main parties and large sections of the media as they try to halt Farage. Rational argument has been replaced by a form of McCarthyism, policy debate by puerile insults.
So we are told that Ukip's campaign posters, spelling out the disastrous impact of uncontrolled immigration, are "racist". Similarly, a phoney storm is being generated by people dredging up online comments by even the most obscure Ukip members on social media sites.
In this climate of witch hunting and guilt by association, any controversial remark or dodgy behaviour by a Ukip supporter is paraded as representative of the party as a whole.
BUT these negative, mud–slinging tactics have backfired spectacularly. The onslaught has only enhanced the rise of Ukip, as this weekend's figures demonstrate. This is because most Britons see through all the synthetic indignation.
Throwing about accusations of "racism" has long been the nasty tactic used by progressives to enforce their twin ideologies of mass immigration and cultural diversity. The acceptance of these two creeds was never put to a democratic vote of the British people.
Instead the establishment ruthlessly imposed them by bullying opponents into silence and presenting any alternative viewpoint as "offensive".
That attitude was perfectly encapsulated by the notorious outburst from Gordon Brown during the 2010 general election when he branded Rochdale voter Gillian Duffy as "just a bigoted woman" for daring to voice her concern about uncontrolled immigration. However much of the public is fed up at this suppression of dissent.
Increasing numbers of electors now find it intolerable to be treated as racists simply for loving their country, or for being alarmed at the social revolution that has engulfed Britain over the last decade.
The attempt to portray Ukip as socially unacceptable has only succeeded in reinforcing the potency of Farage's message: that he wants to regain our liberty from the anti–British, pro–EU political class that holds the very concepts of free speech, nationhood and democracy in contempt.
Ukip's surge is a quintessentially British rebellion against the thought police, the race relations commissars, the diversity doctrinaires and EU propagandists. The establishment's anti–Ukip efforts also exude the foulest stench of hypocrisy. For the party's supposed sins of unfortunate expression or poor administration pale beside the activities of the incumbents at Westminster and Brussels.
Farage's critics bleat about his claims for office allowances but Labour, the Tories and the Lib Dems were entirely responsible for the outrageous expenses scandal, which saw a host of MPs sent to prison. The most recent to end up behind bars was Denis MacShane, the fanatically pro–EU MP for Rotherham.
IT was not Ukip that presided over the financial crisis, or sent British troops to die in Iraq and Afghanistan, or produced a dodgy dossier to justify an illegal war or squandered billions on aid for corrupt regimes.
It was not Ukip that colluded in the long–term cover–up of the paedophilia of the late Lib Dem MP Sir Cyril Smith. It is the EU, not Ukip, whose accounts have failed to be given a clean bill of health for 18 years by auditors because of serial abuses and mismanagement.
Imagine the thunderous outcry if Nigel Farage had been a leading officer in an organisation that was linked to a child abusers' support network. But that is the reported record of Harriet Harman, Labour's deputy leader, and her husband Jack Dromey, the shadow local government minister. During the 1970s both were senior figures in the National Council for Civil Liberties, to which the sinister Paedophile Information Exchange was affiliated.
We have heard a lot about explosive comments from Ukip members on social media but let us remember that Labour's Diane Abbott has arguably made racially charged remarks about "blonde, blue–eyed" Finnish nurses taking jobs at her local hospital and about her belief that "white people love to play divide and rule".
The great irony of Ukip is that it owes its success to the political establishment. If the main parties had not derided the views of the people for so long, especially on immigration and the EU, then Farage's party would never have gained ground.
The establishment is about to pay a heavy and deserved price for that disdain.
'Britons see through synthetic indignation'
Document THEEXP0020140428ea4s00041
