{"newspaper":"The Telegraph Online","id:"917"}
____
  
News
No, it's not racist to think Ukip has a point about immigration
By Tim Stanley   
744 words
3 May 2014
20:53
The Telegraph Online
TELUK
English
The Telegraph Online © 2014. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Matthew Parris has written a silly column about Ukip. A very silly column. It fits with the growing narrative that Ukip isn’t just a bunch of xenophobic golf players with too much time on their hands but actually the first stage of the Fourth Reich. Oh my, it is silly.
At an almost empty Derby railway station, I passed a little posse of youths with purple badges and pound-sign stickers and … felt just momentarily menaced … I was starting to look at the Ukip phenomenon with new eyes.
Were those eyes entirely open, Matthew? For an angry gang of Ukip canvassers might be the least terrifying sight in the world: a gaggle of spotty libertarians, fox hunting enthusiasts and a confused old lady who thinks they’re all collecting for Cancer Relief.
There’s more. One of Ukip’s leaflets landed on Matthew’s door mat and, through those misty eyes of his, it read like a copy of the Vlkischer Beobachter. He saw the warnings about mass immigration, Nigel Farage’s cry that “Enough is enough” and Mr Parris “felt just a bit frightened. This thing has a bad smell. I picked up that leaflet, read lies and saw the menace.” Did Matthew feel the same way in 2005 when Michael Howard asked the public if they were thinking what he was thinking about immigration? Never mind, because what really concerns Matthew is what the “young woman of East European origin” who cleans the entrance of his apartment block thinks about it all. He imagines that if she read Ukip’s leaflet she might be “threatened” by its language. And he adds that it’s a tragedy that no one in the Tory party is prepared to stand up for “the cleaning woman on our East London staircase”. Earth to Matthew: Tory MPs have rarely stood up for East European cleaning women and probably never will. They employ them, they underpay them and they occasionally hit on them – but they don’t typically include them in the election address.
Yes, it’s all getting rather silly, isn’t it? The Right-wing Ukip has, unsurprisingly, attracted fruitcakes and racists who regard it as a vehicle for their appalling views. This ought to have played into the hands of the mainstream parties and, in Matthew’s ideal world, they'd be putting together a united front against the Hitlerian menace coming out of West Kent. But that’s not actually happened. On the latest edition of Question Time, the panel was asked if Ukip was a racist party – and Labour, Tory and Lib Dem all said “no”. Why? Because they know that to call Ukip racist is to damn its sympathisers by association. And a growing number of those sympathisers are regular swing voters who the mainstream parties want to woo, too. You see, beyond Matthew Parris’s East London staircase is a Britain populated by people with entirely legitimate concerns about uncontrolled mass immigration. All the parties are doing their best to court them. Ukip is currently winning because the establishment has lost the trust of millions on the issue. In other words, few politicians will explicitly damn the Ukip revolution because they know that it speaks for a sizeable part of the population. The kind of people who can’t afford to employ East European cleaners. Or even people who are cleaners and who feel they can’t compete with the EU-born competition. Real people, not columnists like Matthew and me.
Ukip is doing something very interesting. It is delineating the boundaries between the metropolitan elite and the provincial disaffected – and inviting the two groups to define themselves by opposition to one another. Implicit in Matthew Parris’s remarks is a dislike of those who wail about the impact of immigration. The pull quote on his article reads, “Many inadequate people blame their problems on foreigners.” That’s a nice sentiment, isn’t it? Those inadequates presumably include out of work plumbers, those stuck on housing waiting lists, parents searching for school places. Of course, immigration has cultural and economic benefits that a newspaper columnist with a First in PPE might be able to quote to satisfy the more learned readers. But don’t dismiss the feelings of less elite subscribers to The Times, Matthew. Or else they might start voting Ukip. Shudder…
Document TELUK00020140503ea53002be
