{"newspaper":"The Sunday Times","id:"2092"}
____
  
Features
Touching the void
Jonathan Dean   
1,486 words
18 May 2014
The Sunday Times
ST
1; National
16,17
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
One of the great songwriters, Conor Oberst is also a fierce critic of our empty internet age. He explains why to Jonathan Dean
There's something delicate about Conor Oberst, as if he's a tall, talking porcelain doll. On record, the Bright Eyes singer's lyrics touch on love, but often crack under fear. In person, he's pale, sinking deep into an armchair and speaking quickly, but quietly. He sets a Dictaphone on the table. This is rare in rock, whose stars tend, unthinkingly, to just let it all out. Last year, though, he was accused of rape, and is in turn suing for libel. When a fire alarm blares out — "That's terrifying!" — he covers his ears and mimes a scream, as if it's the last noise he can bear.
Last December, a commenter wrote on a message board that, 10 years ago, this alleged assault took place. It topped Google searches for Oberst's name for months, and, while I'm not allowed to ask about the case, it speaks volumes about how quickly the internet can judge, and damage, anyone — accuser or accused.
Tomorrow, though, brings his first music without a backing band since Oberst, now 34, was a teenager; before his words were quoted by Lorde and Jonathan Franzen; before he toured with Michael Stipe and Bruce Springsteen for Obama; before anyone called him the Dylan of the Ritalin generation.
Outside of Bright Eyes, he plays beach rock with the Mystic Valley Band and political punk with Desaparecidos — his Conortations, if you like — but this is the first time it's been just him, as the mature Conor Oberst. Alone. The result is the quiet, distant Upside Down Mountain. A line on the opener goes: "I want to walk in that howling wind/Till it scatters all my thoughts". He seeks escape at every turn.
We meet for coffee in London, on a day when Jo Whiley will tell him that his best-known song — First Day of My Life — is probably the track she has played most in her long career. He is used to such flattery. Stipe compares him to Patti Smith. He is namechecked in Richard Linklater's new film, Boyhood. I tell him that, when reading the CD booklet for an earlier album, I thought the lyrics must be bonus essays, such were the twists in narrative and turns of phrase. I thought there was no way such words could fit into songs. But they did.
"That's funny," he smiles. He keeps his hat on throughout, dark eyes fixed on mine, as if he's more worried than most about where questions may lead. "To me, what's still exciting is that I don't actually know how to write a song. People think this is bullshit, but it's not. There's still a big, mysterious part of it, and I like that. It's about being patient.
"To me, my songs are closer to daydreams, letting your mind wander when nothing's going on, staring out of a window, going for a walk. That's when words, when that transmission starts coming."
His speech comes in a steady flow, recalling the soulful writing of David Foster Wallace — a source of pride to anyone who still thinks of Oberst as the voice of his generation, even if that generation has moved away from him. There's an interview he gave in January, and a quote — "I'm not going to sit on a f****** computer and try to talk to some f****** 16-year-old" — that he gave when asked about communicating with his fans. It feels pertinent, addressing how many of his peers, and those he was charged with speaking for, spend their time. "I feel like a very 20th-century person," he says, appropriately, before rolling into a lengthy monologue. Here are the edited highlights.
"Our age is the last to remember the world before the internet, and I'm happy I do. What is damaging to the human spirit is, we all have a void inside, and all want connection to other people, but our culture creates a false togetherness. We think we're filling the void when we're not. We're making it worse. To have 10 million friends on Facebook, you're still alone at your laptop... Also, it's funny.
One critique about my music has been how selfabsorbed I am. But I look around at everyone on the street, and I'm, like, I took all of my self-absorption and made rock'n'roll for 20 years. Most of you have taken 20 pictures of yourself today and waited for someone to tap them and tell you, 'You're beautiful.' "To me, that's real selfabsorption. Everything is a spectator sport. I say, start a band, not a blog. Sell that to the kids. Make some music. Do some painting, make a film, do something of value. Don't just waste your life commenting on all this vapour blowing by you."
Oberst was born in Omaha, Nebraska, in 1980, releasing his first album 13 years later, and fronting various bands. Bright Eyes landed a hit in 2005 with the near-perfect political folkrock of I'm Wide Awake It's Morning. At the time, on the Jay Leno show, at the height of George W Bush's presidency, he played the furious (non-album) track When the President Talks to God. His are the protest songs some older critics insist modern artists don't offer. He has also released songs about immigration rights in Arizona, the whistleblower Chelsea Manning and fur.
He went on the road for Obama, met the man and says, sadly: "I don't want to say that he broke my heart, but..." Last year he wrote a polemic for Chile with Desaparecidos. Why not America? He looks despondent, defeated. "If there's any superpower that's a candidate for utter, total collapse," he sighs, "we've got the recipe."
This, the acutely articulate passion on subjects people should care about, is why people love Oberst. Seriously, love him. I interviewed Steven Soderbergh in full flight, when he left film for ever, and he was easier to edit. Honest (he can't stand his old voice, "jumping octaves inexplicably") and funny ("Every record sold more than the last. Well, for a while"), he is, nevertheless, more timid than expected. I have spent a decade watching him woo crowds confidently, from grotty unions to rain-soaked Glastonbury. Maybe it's his new, mature, married life. Or maybe it's because he is dealing with the biggest controversy of an already noisy career. The key song on Upside Down Mountain seems to be the last one, Common Knowledge. Quiet but wordy, like its singer, it's a highlight that sits alongside old songs Going for the Gold, Lua or Milk Thistle; confessional snapshots of a life growing up. Except, this time, it's third person: he, not I. "Holds onto his mind just like a kite," goes a line, before continuing with lyrics that make him sound more removed than before, telling stories, not being the story. The album is simple and folky, as his best-loved ones are. Effortless, too, as on Night at Lake Unknown, which drifts the listener along to whichever still body of water Oberst is singing about. Somewhere far away, that's for sure.
He tried out "megalomaniac producers" for this record, people who would "really twist my will and be a bit domineering". But he wound up with friends again, in Los Angeles, Omaha and Nashville. I ask why he looked to outsiders, and what they would have brought. "They would make me have shorter songs," he replies. "Words that repeat more often, arrangements less homemade-sounding."
He doesn't like speculating too much on what hasn't happened. Instead, as he heads off to play on the radio — solo performances that receive an enthusiastic Twitter reception, which he won't read — I ask which song he is most proud of. There are nearly 300 of his on iTunes. He thinks, then picks the slow, slightly mystical Cape Canaveral, from 2008.
I listen to it again on the walk home, thinking about a friend who lives far away. It goes, "And you don't judge me/That's not your style/But I won't see you for a little while" — and, like the best lyrics, the ones in wedding vows and on tattoos, it works as well for the singer as the sung-to. It comes from arguably the best songwriter this century. From a head that is full of pressure, and one, I sense, its bearer would like a rest from for a while. c Upside Down Mountain is out tomorrow on Nonesuch
Our culture creates a false togetherness
Document ST00000020140518ea5i000h5
