{"newspaper":"The Times","id:"1144"}
____
  
News
Farmers' fields are weak link in fight against trafficking
Greg Hurst   
435 words
6 May 2014
The Times
T
1; Eire
6
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Small private airfields, helipads and even farmers' fields are being used by smugglers and people traffickers as a weak link in Britain's border security.
Microlights, helicopters and private business jets are being used to fly drugs, guns and explosives to remote or unstaffed airstrips where security is weaker or impracticable. Illegal immigrants are also being transported in this way, police say.
There are more than 3,000 small landing sites in Britain, from private aerodromes and small flying clubs to old bomber bases and grass strips surrounded by farmland. There are 20,000 light aircraft and almost 47,000 licensed pilots.
Growing concern about the use of the landing sites by organised crime gangs has prompted an appeal for help from people living near private airfields by the National Crime Agency, UK Border Force and the Association of Chief Police Officers.
They want people to report the appearance of windsocks or lights at odd times, unusual activity around an aircraft once it lands, aircraft that are covered in mud, or packages being dropped from low-flying aircraft.
People who fly from or work at private airfields or flying clubs have been urged to report aircraft that have been modified to adapt their range or load or carry extra fuel, unexplained damage to aircraft, or pilots joining a club and flying to unusual destinations, especially long-distance foreign flights with only a brief stay.
Suspicion may also be aroused by pilots who are determined to fly in poor weather or low light, who land short of their notified destination, who disguise flight plans, or who are evasive about passengers or routes.
Police and security chiefs have also asked people to look out for activity that could be reconnaissance by criminals to test or research security around an airfield, or for visitors who buy uniforms, badges and other equipment.
All forms of private aviation are thought to be at risk of exploitation by smugglers, including gliding, parachuting and aerial surveys.
David Armond, director of the National Crime Agency's border policing command, said: "This is an area where we are convinced the public can really help law enforcement disrupt criminal activity. You might have seen unfamiliar people in sensitive areas of the airport, or unusual patterns of activity such as night-time airdrops. That information could be key to an investigation."
The agency asked people who saw suspicious activity to note the date and time and details of the aircraft, such as a description of markings and modifications, and of the pilot or crew.
Document T000000020140506ea560000s
