{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2408"}
____
  
What's the difference between BNP and Ukip voters?
Robert Ford Matthew Goodwin   
theguardian.com
857 words
15 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin: Both groups share the same concerns, are disaffected by politics and anxious about immigration, but there the similarities end
Ever since it was formed in 1993, Ukip has faced regular accusations of sharing space with the far right and attracting the same types of voters. This question surfaced again at the launch of our new book Revolt on the Right at the thinktank Chatham House, where Nigel Farage addressed it directly: "We are saying to BNP voters, if you are voting BNP because you are frustrated, upset with the change in your community, but you are doing it holding your nose, because you don't agree with their racist agenda, come and vote for us."
Farage's admission was publicised in the national media but it was not new. Ukip has been campaigning to attract BNP voters ever since a parliamentary byelection in Oldham East and Saddleworth in 2011. Aware that Nick Griffin's party was rapidly imploding, Farage and his deputy Paul Nuttall set out to win over BNP voters. "It was the first time," Nuttall told us, "that we ever said, 'come and vote for us'." Both Farage and Nuttall have since claimed that Ukip's rise has played a key role in forcing the toxic far right out of British politics. Given that more than 940,000 former BNP voters – who supported Griffin in 2009 – will be up for grabs at the 2014 European parliament elections in May, this is worth exploring.
That Ukip has been actively courting BNP voters suggests it believes there is an overlap in the appeal of the two parties. This may appear surprising given the geographical focus of the parties. The BNP's strongest areas were northern England, especially Pennine Lancashire and West Yorkshire; the Midlands and outer east London. Yet Ukip traditionally focused on Conservative-leaning areas in England's east, south-east and south-west. These contrasting patterns even prompted some to suggest to Ukip that it should form a pact with Griffin at the 2009 European elections, dividing the map between them – an idea that Farage swiftly rejected.
But does this geographical divide mask underlying similarities in the social backgrounds and attitudes of BNP and Ukip voters? We analysed 5,593 Ukip and 1,332 BNP voters, and found that both parties appeal to similar constituents who share similar concerns. Both parties have drawn their strongest support from the "left behind" in Britain: older, white working class voters who have few or no educational qualifications. Both parties do better among men than women but both have virtually no appeal among minorities, university graduates and the professional middle class. The social profile of BNP voters is narrower on all these fronts; while Ukip holds some appeal beyond these core voters the BNP has none at all, which partly explains its rapid collapse.
Both groups of voters also share the same concerns. Writing in the Guardian in 2004, David Aaronovitch argued that "what the BNP and Ukip have in common is the psychological suggestion that 'ordinary' people are being betrayed by the political class. They are paying too much fuel tax, too much council tax, they are being pushed around by foreigners and outsiders, they are having stuff done to them and have become victims in their own countries." Our findings generally support this interpretation; both groups of voters feel disaffected with politics, are anxious about immigration and hostile toward the EU. Yet there is one important distinction: open racism is more widespread among those who vote for the BNP.
Ukip has long objected to any comparison to the BNP and the two parties certainly have different values, histories and outlooks. Ukip appears at ease with the global free market, while the BNP demands economic protectionism and re-nationalisation. Many in Ukip describe themselves as libertarians who oppose excessive state intervention, while the BNP is authoritarian. Ukip is a "civic" nationalist party, rejects "blood and soil" nationalism and claims to be "open and inclusive to anyone who wishes to identify with Britain, regardless of ethnic or religious background". The BNP subscribes to an ethnic conception of nationalism that defines British identity by race and ancestry, and stems from an openly fascist, race-based ideology.
These sharply different traditions are important because voters are sensitive to the reputation of parties. Ukip is accepted as a legitimate player in British politics, while the BNP is roundly condemned as unacceptable. And this is reflected in evidence – at the 2009 European elections some 62% of Britons told YouGov they had "very negative" feelings toward the BNP, a figure that slumped to just 18% for Ukip. The ceiling on BNP support was far lower than Ukip's because many voters who shared their alienation and opposition to immigration would nonetheless refuse to back a party they saw as compromising democratic principles. But Ukip's potential is far greater because in the eyes of the "left behind", it is offering them a legitimate voice in politics.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140414ea4f000un
