{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3620"}
____
  
Angela Merkel is key partner for EU reform, says William Hague
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
535 words
24 February 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Foreign secretary emphasises role of German chancellor to UK relationship with European Union prior to her London visit
William Hague has suggested that Angela Merkel is sympathetic to the UK's efforts at reforming the European Union, ahead of the German chancellor's visit to London later this week to discuss overhauling immigration rules.
Hague said Merkel understands David Cameron's position and is the most important partner in seeking a new relationship between EU member states.
Cameron appears to be making a special effort for Merkel, who makes a whirlwind trip to London on Thursday, as Downing Street believes she could use the trip to publicly back his efforts to bring about treaty changes.
During the visit Merkel will have tea with the Queen and become the first German chancellor to address both houses of parliament.
Hague said serious renegotiations about the UK's relationship with Brussels will not start until after the next election, but the talks with Merkel will mark the start of finding "common ground" for changes. Asked about overhauling freedom of movement rules, a key demand of the UK, Hague said: "I'm sure these subjects will come up. Germany also has strict benefit rules. Germany doesn't want its benefit system to be abused. I think again with Germany we have a lot of common ground on that."
Lord Heseltine, a former Tory deputy prime minister, separately warned the government against giving too much credence to Ukip, which he called the UK Isolationist Party and compared to the Coalition for Nuclear Disarmament protest movement in the 1980s.
"When the great argument comes about Europe and suddenly people realise that Ukip is saying: We're going to opt-out, we're going to pack it in, we're going to leave the Europe that now exists – 27 countries dominated increasingly by Germany and we're going to sit on our bottoms on an island offshore and think the world is going to say "Oh whoopee … good old Britain they're independent and free"'. The fact is we would just be an offshore island, Americans would immediately start switching their priorities towards Europe, inward investment would start changing its emphasis towards Europe."
He also said it was a bad idea for Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem leader, to have given Ukip credibility as a party by agreeing to debate with Nigel Farage, the Eurosceptic party's leader.
Amid strong Euroscepticism on his backbenches and growing support for Ukip, the prime minister has promised to renegotiate Britain's relationship with Brussels and then give people a vote on membership by the end of 2017 if he is still in power. However, he needs European allies to support his drive for reform.
The key issue for Cameron will be whether he can force concessions on the EU's fundamental principle of freedom of movement, which he says have caused vast movements of people from poorer to richer countries.
However, Jose Manuel Barroso, the European commission president, last week poured cold water on Cameron's desire to reform freedom of movement.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140223ea2o000ul
