{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1387"}
____
  
Immigration target can still be met, says Tory chairman
Patrick Wintour   
theguardian.com
535 words
3 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Grant Shapps dismisses ex-minister's call for Tories to address immigration as Nigel Farage says remarks are 'baloney'
A call by Liam Fox, the former defence secretary, for the government to bring net migration down to tens of thousands, has been fended off by the Conservative party chairman, Grant Shapps, who said it still had a chance of reaching its target before the general election.
Although figures last week revealed net migration standing at 212,000 and rising, Shapps said huge progress had been made on immigration and figures from outside the EU were the lowest for decades.
Speaking on the same programme, Nigel Farage, the UK Independence party leader, dismissed Fox's intervention as "baloney".
Fox said David Cameron he would be guilty of "dangerous complacency" if he failed to address the damage Farage's party could do at the ballot box.
In an interview with the Sunday Telegraph, the Eurosceptic called for the Tories to drop the "statistical nonsense" and develop a clearer narrative on immigration.
Fox said the Ukip leader was "personable and reasonable" and that many of his views were shared by "decent and patriotic people".
Farage labelled Fox's comments as "baloney" and said UKip was the only party offering voters a real response on immigration.
He said: "What Liam Fox and others are saying today is baloney. Only a third of our vote comes from the Conservatives and when you poll UKip voters and say, 'If there was no Ukip candidate, how would you vote?', less than one in five of them would even consider voting for the Conservatives.
"The reasons the Tories won't win a majority at the next general election is not because of Europe, it's because their own voters don't see David Cameron as a Conservative."
Farage repeated his proposal for an Australian-style work permit system, insisting immigration had to be based on the quality as well as quantity of people coming into the country.
Farage said UKip would not publish any domestic policies ahead of the European elections, saying it would look at making savings in the NHS focused on middle management, which has grown by 40%.
He also claimed UKip was the low tax party, saying: "IThe lessons of tax are when you raise taxes, tax income goes down. I would like to think of us doing things the other way round. The most important tax reform is that we need to say  … that anyone paying the minimum wage should not be paying taxes, to incentivise people. If you cut taxes you also have to cut back public spending substantially.
"So the challenge for UKip is after the European elections to put a manifesto together that is not like the last one that resembled War and Peace, that has some numbers and will add up, and we will be working on that. It's coming but not coming until after the European elections. Because over the next few days we want to focus on who governs the country and why cannot we get back control of our borders".
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140302ea33000jh
