{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"973"}
____
  
Yvette Cooper and David Lammy attack Nigel Farage over 'racist' comments
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
946 words
20 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Shadow home secretary and Labour MP criticise Ukip leader after he said he would not want Romanians living next door
Nigel Farage's comments about Romanians have been branded racist by the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, a former shadow minister, Diane Abbott, and the prominent Labour MP David Lammy, after the Ukip leader said people might not want to live next door to immigrants from the eastern European country.
Just hours after Ed Miliband said Farage had made a racial slur but was not racist, his view was contradicted by Lammy.
The MP, whose parents are from Guyana, told the BBC's Daily Politics that Farage's comments reminded him of the racism encountered by his mother and father when they first came to the UK.
"What Nigel Farage said over the weekend was racist. So I'm clear, he's a racist," he said. "I am from a background where my parents arrived here as immigrants. I remember a context in which some people said: 'You don't want these people living next door to you.' That was racist."
Cooper then told ITV News that she thought the position taken by Farage was racist and the party should admit to being wrong.
"It's not racist to be worried about immigration or to want stronger controls, but it is racist to somehow stir up fears about Romanians living next door. So Ukip should say they were wrong on that," she said.
Diane Abbott, a former shadow health minister, also told the Guardian "his remarks were racist" and she was "glad everybody has stopped pussyfooting around".
It comes after David Cameron described the comments as "pretty unpleasant" and accused Ukip figures of saying a "succession of pretty appalling things", but said he would leave others to judge.
Farage said in a Guardian interview that British people should be wary of Romanian families moving into their street. He subsequently repeated his position on LBC 97.3 Radio, saying people would know the difference between living next door to Romanian men and some German children.
"I was asked if a group of Romanian men moved in next to you, would you be concerned? And if you lived in London, I think you would be," he told the interviewer, James O'Brien.
However, the Ukip leader backtracked from this stance on Sunday night, saying: "Do you know what, in life sometimes people get things wrong.
"I regret the fact that I was completely tired out and I didn't use the form of words in response that I would have liked to have used.
"I should have just hit back immediately and said: 'Look, understand there is a real problem here – you can't deny it – too much criminality from these gangs has come to London.'"
Ukip also took out a full-page advertisement in the Daily Telegraph to insist Ukip was not racist but warned about the risk posed by organised criminal gangs from Romania.
"Let me be clear, Ukip is not a racist party and our immigration policy, far from being racist, aims to end discrimination against non-Europeans.
"The vast majority of Romanians who have come to the UK wish to better their lives and would make good neighbours.
"But there is a real problem, an unpalatable truth that our political class would rather not discuss. Since the welcome fall of communism and the awful dictator Ceausescu, Romania has struggled to complete a full transition into a western democracy."
By leaving the EU and "taking back control of our borders" the UK could do the "necessary checks" on would-be immigrants, the open letter from Farage said.
"When this happens, my answer to the question: 'Should people be concerned if a group of Romanian men moved in next door?' will be no."
Despite Farage's statement of regret, Lammy said the comments were "deeply nasty" and must not be tolerated.
"We have seen this before in Europe, in times of recession and depression, and we must take that kind of slur extremely seriously," he said.
Earlier, Miliband told BBC Radio 4's Today programme on Monday morning: "I think our politics is disagreeable enough without political leaders saying about other political leaders 'they are a racist'.
The deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg, said Farage's remarks had revealed his "divisive, nasty approach" to politics.
"I think the mask is starting to slip and I think what's being revealed behind the beer-swilling bonhomie is a rather nasty view of the world," he told BBC1's The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday.
"I think anyone who singles out one community, one nationality, and says: 'I don't want to live next door to them,' I really think that's the politics of division and I think it really should have no place in modern Britain."
Ukip is still a frontrunner to win the European elections this week, although Labour and the Conservatives have also topped some polls.
The party said on Monday morning that its membership was rising rapidly and was on course to reach 40,000 by July.
"If we do well in the European elections, there is every prospect of an even bigger membership surge following over the summer," a spokesman said.
Farage's original comments
Nigel Farage was interviewed by the Guardian's Decca Aitkenhead in April.
Aitkenhead: Should British people be wary of Romanian families moving into their street?
Farage: Ask David Blunkett.
Aitkenhead: But I'm asking you the question. Should they?
Farage: Well of course, yeah.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140519ea5k003mm
