{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"180"}
____
  
Nick Clegg says he fully expected to lose debate with Nigel Farage
Peter Walker   
theguardian.com
844 words
4 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Deputy PM does not 'feel bruised' by debate and says: 'I wasn't going to reverse 20 years of myth-making in two hours'
Nick Clegg has said he fully expected to lose his debates on Europe with Nigel Farage, arguing that it was extremely difficult to dispel decades of "myth-making" on the subject and counter what he described as the simplistic and populist views of the Ukip leader.
Speaking on his weekly LBC radio phone-in show, Call Clegg, the deputy prime minister said he knew his views on Europe were not popular but felt obliged to respond to Farage's opinions, which appealed to "fearful and anxious" people.
Clegg said: "I don't feel bruised at all. I'm delighted we've had this debate. The debate has now finally started."
An instant poll after the BBC2 debate showed viewers backing Farage by a clearcut 69% to 31%, suggesting that an often over-scripted Clegg failed to convince viewers that Ukip was selling the British people a "dangerous con" and a "fantasy".
The Guardian/ICM findings were almost exactly matched by a separate YouGov poll for the Sun, showing that in a sometimes brutal debate, with both men accusing the other of lying, it was the Ukip leader who came out ahead by an even bigger margin than a week earlier.
Speaking on BBC Breakfast earlier, David Cameron dismissed both debate participants as "quite extreme" over Europe, adding that he did not "have a dog in the fight". Clegg responded by arguing that Cameron and his Labour counterpart, Ed Miliband, did not have the courage to say what they thought on the issue.
Asked by co-host Nick Ferrari when he felt he had lost Wednesday night's debate and the earlier outing, Clegg said he had been aware of the challenge from the beginning.
He said: "Going into the debates, when I first challenged Nigel Farage, I was acutely aware that I am making an argument that hasn't been heard for 20 years. For 20 years people like Nigel Farage and others have been merrily going around saying often totally fictional stuff about our membership of the European Union that just hasn't been challenged. I wasn't going to reverse 20 years of myth-making in two hours.
"Also, Nigel Farage has a few, very simple propositions that are understandably very attractive when many people are fearful and anxious about what is going on in the modern world. He says we don't need to get entangled with problems elsewhere in the world, we don't need to allow any immigrants to come to this country, we can do everything on our own, we can disentangle ourselves from Europe – I can totally understand why people go, yes, that's what I want.
"That doesn't mean, however, that I should stop arguing what I believe to be right for the country in the long run. I totally accept that what I say might not be popular – clearly, as the polls have indicated overnight."
Clegg said he would continue to campaign on Europe, noting that anti-EU feeling was strong in several other European nations.
"There are populists from left and from right who are saying to people that the complexities of the modern world can all be solved by turning our backs on the modern world. I understand that's attractive," Clegg said. "But I fervently disagree with it, and I'm not going to stop explaining what I believe in."
Cameron had earlier dismissed the views of both debaters: "I didn't have a dog in the fight, as it were. The problem with this debate is both of the people taking part actually have quite extreme views. Nick thinks there's nothing wrong with Europe, and we shouldn't have a referendum. Nigel thinks there's nothing right with Europe and we should just get out and leave. They're both wrong."
The prime minister rejected the idea that Farage's views were little different to his own, and that the two could "do business" over Europe.
"He wants to get out altogether. He wants to turn his back on Europe and not recognise the fact that we've got to trade and compete in Europe," Cameron said.
The post-debate YouGov poll gave Farage 68% and Clegg 27%, a big increase on the lead he chalked up last week in the first debate, broadcast on LBC radio and Sky News, which Farage won by 57% to 36%.
The two men offered competing visions of what a modern Britain could achieve in or out of Europe, with Clegg trying to portray Farage as a man who shunned the modern world, living in the 19th century.
The Ukip leader accused Clegg of wilfully lying to the British people. He called on voters to join his "people's army" to overthrow the political establishment.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140403ea44000jl
