{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3384"}
____
  
Immigration concerns not prejudiced, says Ed Miliband
Patrick Wintour   
theguardian.com
566 words
17 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Labour leader says party has too often turned its back on such concerns, but he opposes setting 'false targets'
Ed Miliband has said it is not prejudiced to be worried about immigration, and insisted he will not give "false promises" such as setting a target to cut net immigration into the UK.
He admitted during a speech on Thursday that Labour had too often turned its back on people's concerns about immigration. His remarks signal a Labour decision to readdress immigration in the final days of campaigning before Thursday's local and European elections.
He said: "We will never again turn our backs on people who are worried about immigration. But neither will we turn our back on the rest of the world."
In a sign that the party realises the threat Ukip poses to its blue-collar vote, Michael Dugher, the Labour campaign officer, used an interview in the Daily Express – the paper most supportive of Ukip – to attack Nigel Farage as "a bullshit artist".
Miliband, in a speech to Airbus workers in Broughton, north-east Wales, said the election was the most unpredictable in a generation, and he had known for a long time that immigration was "a big issue on the doorstep".
Citing his own history as the son of a immigrant, he said: "With my background and my beliefs, I am never going to tell you that Britain should turn its back on the world. It just won't work. And it is not who we are."
He said his party had been on a journey on the issue of immigration. "I don't believe it is prejudiced to worry about immigration. We said that people needed to change their attitudes. But in fact, we needed to change ours," he said.
"Because people see their communities changing fast around them. They worry about the entitlements people have when they come here and the pressure it might put on the system. And, especially with the cost of living crisis that our country faces, people ask about the impact of immigration on their own wages and terms and conditions."
However, in a BBC World at One interview, Miliband said he opposed the government's target of net immigration falling below 100,000, and rejected blocking the free movement of workers in the EU.
Admitting there was deep discontent in the country, he said: "I am not going to set false targets and make false promises to people. Too many politicians have done that. I do want to get low-skilled immigration down."
He said his would bear down on immigration through a six-month restrictions on benefits for EU migrants and longer transitional controls for new accession countries. "We need to stop a race to the bottom between British citizens and workers coming here from abroad," he said.
Miliband said businesses should be able to freely hire EU citizens, but that could not mean a green light for simply undercutting wages. "Under a Labour government, any company bringing in skilled workers from outside the EU will have a legal duty to provide apprenticeships to the next generation."
He added: "I believe people who come here should speak English, especially when they work face-to-face with the public in our NHS or local councils."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140516ea5h00461
