{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"524"}
____
  
Maria Miller row: Tories step up pressure on culture secretary
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
989 words
9 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
MPs call on ministers to respond to public outcry about culture secretary's expenses and demand reform of ethics watchdog
More Conservative MPs have turned on the culture secretary, Maria Miller, over her expenses, as they demanded reform of the ethics watchdog and a new system to allow voters to sack their political representatives.
In a parliamentary debate, several Tories called on the government to respond to the public outcry about Miller's expenses, after she was told to repay £5,800 in excess mortgage claims and issue an apology
Anger was also directed at the Commons standard committee of MPs, which overturned an original recommendation by the independent commissioner that Miller should repay £45,000.
Three lay members of the committee also raised concerns that MPs are failing to turn up to meetings as they are too "busy" to spend much time policing the standards of their colleagues.
The members, who agreed with the Miller verdict, called for a fundamental rewrite of the conduct rules for MPs.
"If the house is to show that it is not just paying lip service to the importance of high standards then, in our view, more needs to be done to ensure that leadership (one of the seven principles of public life), is shown in this area," they said.
In a significant development, Kevin Barron, a Labour MP who chairs the committee, told MPs he would reconsider how the Commons watchdog deals with complaints.
However, the government appears to be resisting any radical change to the MPs' standards regime. Andrew Lansley, the leader of the House, said he was open to ideas but went on to strongly defend the current system and the decision of the watchdog in the Miller case.
His assurances did not appear to placate some iMPs during a debate called by Labour MP John Mann, who is demanding an end to self-regulation by politicians and has led calls for Miller to lose her job.
Matthew Offord, Conservative MP for Hendon, said people had "raised the issue" of expenses with him on the doorstep and still believe that "nothing has changed".
"Can I ask the leader of the House to take not only the mood of this place but also this country to make the necessary change we need?" he said.
Concerns were also raised by Bob Blackman, MP for Harrow East, about any more "legacy cases" about expenses under the previous regime. "We want to see the House cleared up and cleaned up and know that these cases are at an end," he said.
Jacob Rees-Mogg, another Conservative, said he supports self-regulation of MPs, but he would like to see "a proper and direct system of recall that would allow the electorate to determine" whether MPs keep their jobs.
Other Conservatives gave their support to the culture secretary in the Commons, with former minister Sir Gerald Howarth saying Miller was subject to a "witch-hunt", while Peter Bone said the real issue on the doorstep was immigration.
But outside the house, more of Miller's own colleagues added their voices of criticism, piling pressure on the prime minister to find a way of calming down the controversy.
Cameron has fully backed the culture secretary but he has been warned the row is turning toxic ahead of the European elections. Miller was seen entering Downing Street just after 8am on Tuesday, where she attended a scheduled meeting of the political cabinet at 8:30am. She had refused to answer shouted questions from reporters outside.
The pressure on Miller from within the Conservatives may come to a head at Wednesday's meeting of the 1922 Committee. The prime minister met Graham Brady, the head of the committee, on Monday and the issue of Miller's expenses on the reputation of the party was brought up, sources said.
Philip Davies, MP for Shipley, told the BBC's Daily Politics show that the row was "highly damaging" to the party but that the issue of whether Miller resigns is a "matter for her".
Meanwhile, Mark Field, MP for Cities of London and Westminster, said he had sympathy with the 2010 intake of MPs who are annoyed at being tainted by a fresh expenses scandal. He also told the BBC World at One that Miller had given an "unacceptably perfunctory" apology to the Commons.
Earlier, Zac Goldsmith, Tory MP for Richmond Park, who has campaigned for local areas to be able to sack bad MPs, became the latest backbencher to express concern. "It would be the prime minister's decision who he surrounds himself with. I am surprised that Maria Miller hasn't stepped down," he told BBC Radio 5 Live's Victoria Derbyshire show.
Boris Johnson, the London mayor, suggested on Tuesday morning that MPs should go create a "proper, independent" standards watchdog.
Asked whether she should keep her job by BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Johnson said: "I don't know the facts of the case in great detail, but it seems to me she is being hounded quite a lot and my natural sympathies go out to people in hounded situations – how about that?"
Esther McVey, a Tory work and pensions minister tipped for promotion, told ITV that Miller's 32-second Commons apology for over-claiming expenses was not how she would have done it herself, while Nicola Blackwood, a Tory aide in the business department, indicated that she would be "really quite worried indeed" if in the same position. Jackie Doyle-Price, a backbench Tory, told the BBC she would not expect support from her colleagues ahead of local elections if she were in a similar position to the culture secretary.
Lord Tebbit, a former Tory chairman, and a group calling itself Conservative Grassroots, have previously called for MIller to be sacked.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140408ea49000p9
