{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1602"}
____
Has Nigel Farage booked himself a place in the 2015 election debates?
theguardian.com
1,044 words
28 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Michael White: It is possible the big parties will decide to risk debating with Farage if Ukip does well enough in the EU elections
So, what next? Nick and Nigel have debated under the umpire-ship of another Nick, and Nigel – his name was bound to stand out – was declared the winner by YouGov, a polling organisation he routinely abuses for bias against him. So far, so predictable.
As Anne Perkins writes in today's Guardian, given the unpopularity of governments these days, Farage's 57% to 36% snap poll verdict was not exactly unexpected.
But what next? David Cameron and Ed Miliband were nowhere visible, but we can be sure they and their closest advisers were watching LBC's debate very closely. It was Miliband's old boss, Gordon Brown, who in 2010 broke the rule that says the incumbent always refuses to grant equal status to an opponent.
In desperation he conceded a debate to Cameron, while insisting that Nick Clegg be allowed to take part too, this (so aides later confirmed) in the hope that Clegg, fresh-faced and wholesome, would stem the Tory tide. He did with the result that few – certainly not me (nor Gordon, I suspect) – anticipated, a formal coalition between two tall, Oxbridge males.
So the 2010 TV debate, which also upended and deflated the whole campaign, had a profound effect on the outcome and what happened afterwards. Will that make Cameron and Miliband more cautious in 2015? Probably, but the genie is out of the box, just as it is with the once-despised populist device of a referendum.
Cameron has already rejected a debate with Alex Salmond, the Farage of the north, ahead of the 18 September independence vote in Scotland, where 16-year-olds will be able to vote, another populist device in our less-than-fastidious times. The prime minister has a point: only Scots can vote, it's their decision. But he will be criticised for the decision if Scotland breaks the union.
So will Clegg, who replaced mild-mannered Michael Moore with the bruiser Alistair Carmichael, as Lib Dem Scottish secretary. Though billed as a rottweiller, Carmichael was duly hammered in a TV debate with Nicola Sturgeon, Salmond's feisty deputy and likely successor. As things stand Salmond will eventually face ex-chancellor Alistair Darling, who is no rottweiller either but has more gravitas as a Scots unionist who cares.
Gordon Brown is belatedly on the case too – here's this month's pro-union speech. You can see why the Farages and Salmonds are feeling confident, can't you? There is no aura of invincibility surrounding the current crowd of establishment politicians, is there? Thatcher is dead, Tony Blair tarnished, John Major as quietly decent as ever, but not a knockout man.
As of this morning, my hunch is that Cameron and Miliband will be taking some satisfaction from last night's debate. Clegg was the polished professional, who looked at the camera – the voter on the other side – not at Farage, remembered questioners' names and had the better grasp of Planet Earth facts.
Moderator Nick Ferrari did well too - apart from an early slip – he tossed a coin with "a good old English pound". Farage, who went back to the pub after the show – it's what he really does – must have been pleased too. After all, the hated YouGov gave him the prize.
But, as usual in any encounter with Farage, it was also pretty clear that he is better at assertion and bluster than at engagement with a well armed opponent. As commentators – easily dismissed as part of the Westminster elite – were quick to point out, he slipped up over his key message, immigration, not Europe, and didn't sound very convincing on Europe either.
Not that Ukip voters or wavering Tories will care much. They will have enjoyed watching someone with whom they can identify – the bloke from the pub – stick it to a pompous posh boy from London.
Yes, I know, Farage is a metropolitan public school man too, a former City metal trader and a Brussels-funded MEP too, famously idle and easily prone to self-pity (all that work and so little fun, he protested last night).
As ex-Ukipers confirm there's a temper there too, isn't there? And he's just two years older (49) than Clegg while looking 20 years his senior: a Dorian Gray moment!
But as the scale of mourning after Tony Benn's death serves to remind us, much of political loyalty is tribal and emotional, not rational or calm. There is a case for passion in politics, but is should be a servant, not a master.
Ukip's impassioned case against assorted foreigners may cheer up disaffected voters, much of whose alienation should be respected and addressed by the major parties. But it's answers fall apart as easily as many of Tony Benn's.
So my hunch is that Farage's remark that will resonate for longest and most potently is the end-of-session one about Ukrainian blood on EU hands because Brussels encouraged the Ukrainian revolution which overthrew the corrupt-but-elected pro-Moscow government this winter.
As with much of what Farage says – I've known him slightly for almost 20 years now and he can be nimble and charming – there's a point there that deserves a proper answer. The blame for miscalculation is not all Vladimir Putin's.
But Farage's point is one we expect to hear from communists, anti-imperial leftwingers, rancid or romantic, and from Moscow stooges. Coming from Ukip it may be unsettling to actual or potential supporters. Skilfully deployed it could be a useful crowbar to detach patriotic voters from the Faragista camp.
Who knows, after watching the plucky underdog last night, the big parties may just decide to risk debating him if Ukip does well enough in 22 May's EU election to threaten Cameron's re-election hopes. Like Gordon Brown in 2010 he may feel he has little to lose. Then we'll see some real sweating. But whose?
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140327ea3s000me
