{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2637"}
____
  
Tory MP tells party to end 'obsession' over Boris Johnson
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
782 words
20 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Jackie Doyle-Price says Tories will be seen as out of touch at election if it keeps obsessing over mayor's leadership prospects
A Conservative backbencher has delivered a stinging critique of her party for being in thrall to a "metropolitan elite" and rowing over Boris Johnson's prospects as if leadership is a "bauble to be passed around the old boys' network".
Jackie Doyle-Price, MP for the highly marginal seat of Thurrock, said her party will continue to be seen as out of touch, as it was at the last election, if it keeps obsessing over the London mayor's ambitions rather than addressing issues such as the cost of food, petrol and holidays.
Writing for ConservativeHome,she said: "While people are worrying about whether they are keeping their jobs, whether they will be able to afford the electricity bill and how much it costs to fill the car these days, our commentariat is talking about Boris. We need to stop talking about ourselves and talk about the things that really matter to people. Otherwise we will be seen as out of touch, and Labour's message will resonate."
Her criticism follows weeks of jousting between the camps of Johnson and chancellor George Osborne, as senior Tories position themselves in the future race to follow David Cameron as Tory leader. Education secretary Michael Gove hit out at the number of old Etonians at the top of government, seen as a warning to Johnson, while the mayor of London's father, Stanley, argued that the Conservative party's rules should be changed to allow his son to run as leader while not an MP.
Warning that this is "destabilising", Doyle-Price reserved particular scorn for Johnson's "tiresome" and "unhelpful" interventions, arguing that his irreverent persona has little appeal beyond the M25.
She said: "The first thing to note is that the leadership of the party is not a bauble to be passed around the old boys' network. The party will decide who the next leader is. Not Stanley Johnson and not the media commentariat who are obsessed about whether Boris is about to return to the House of Commons or not. Out there nobody cares about the ambitions of Boris Johnson. They care about whether they can put food on the table and still be able to afford to take the kids away on a decent holiday."
She also said the current leadership needs to tap into the spirit of Margaret Thatcher and Sir John Major if it wants to win seats outside its traditional areas, arguing that most people respect authority and aspire to a better life.
"There is no doubt that Boris has an appeal," she wrote. "It is an appeal to the metropolitan elite that likes to write about him. It is an appeal that doesn't really travel beyond the M25. While the metropolitan elite likes to show contempt for authority, outside the M25 we like to respect it. In essence, he is the right man for the right job where he is.
"Outside the M25 we don't expect our leaders to be tieless or irreverent, look scruffy or travel cattle class. We want to respect our leaders. For those of us who are aspirational, we want to be able to travel club, wear good clothes and have a nice car. These are the people we need to win over to win that elusive majority. We risk undermining our appeal to those people if we constantly run after the agenda the media sets us instead of setting our own."
The phrase "metropolitan elite" has a particular resonance as it caused a storm when Home Office minister James Brokenshire argued this is the group of people who have benefited from immigration, while poorer sections of society have lost out. It has also been deployed by Ukip leader Nigel Farage to characterise the whole of Westminster as out of touch with most people in the country.
While acknowledging that Johnson is a powerful advocate for the capital, Doyle-Price also branded him a "noisy neighbour" whose "interventions can be tiresome".
Labour seized on Doyle-Price's comments as a sign of further in-fighting in the Conservative party.
Jon Ashworth, a shadow cabinet office minister, said: "Even David Cameron's own MPs are now admitting his government is out of touch and run by an old boys' network.
"Once again we are seeing the Tories fighting like ferrets in a sack rather than taking action to tackle the cost-of-living crisis facing hardworking people."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140319ea3k0010a
