{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3426"}
____
  
Romanian and Bulgarian workers in the UK – reaction to official figures [CORRECTED]
Caroline Davies  
theguardian.com
615 words
15 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved  
CORRECTION: An article about a fall in the number of Romanians and Bulgarians working in the UK (Ignoring hysteria, pursuing dreams: Romanians tell their stories, 14 May, theguardian.com) said Migration Watch had predicted that 500,000 people from Romania and Bulgaria would arrive in the UK annually. In fact it predicted that immigration from Romania and Bulgaria would add 50,000 to the UK population annually. (GRULTD, 20/May/2014)
Romanians were put off by hysteria in the press, says Dr Tommy Tomescu, dentist and London MEP candidate
Many Romanians have been put off coming to the UK because of hysteria in sections of the media,
Dr Tommy Tomescu, a Romanian dentist and London MEP candidate for the Europeans Party which is against the discrimination of migrants, has claimed..
"I am not surprised at the drop, because I have discussed it with people from my country and they weren't coming here because of what was happening in the press.
"Some people are, unfortunately because of the press, seeing the UK as having a racist attitude, even though I know that is not true because I live here and know most people are not like that.
"But they read the press, and ask "why are they attacking us just because of our nationality when every country has good and bad".
Tomescu, also a member of the Alliance against Romanian and Bulgarian discrimination, demanded the resignation of Ukip candidates who ran campaigns "based on scapegoating immigrants and scaring people that 29m people will come from Romania and Bulgaria to the UK".
He also called for an inquiry into remarks by Nigel Farage published in an interview in the Guardian, to see of there were grounds for prosecution.
Most Romanians and Bulgarians who wanted to come to the UK were already here, he said, but were self-employed and have only just been allowed National Insurance numbers.
"Before 2014 Romanians and Bulgarians were allowed to apply for a National Insurance number and they did so as self-employed. But there are official figures from the European Union which show that they were wrongly denied the National Insurance number. They weren't even receiving an appointment, which is going against the European Union treaty.
He said some applied up to eight times, but were rejected. "They were asked if they had a fixed line telephone, and a lot did not have one. The same requirements were not asked of other nationalities,' he said.
"So now, from 1 January, they can apply." Many of those now registered as working were already here, he said, but applied for their National Insurance numbers after 1 January knowing it was now not mandatory to be self-employed.
"Anyone who wanted to come to the UK is already here. They did not really need this lifting restrictions because most were working as self-employed, as doctors, dentists, construction workers, cleaners.
"People will still come, if they want to. Not in the great numbers that Migration Watch said of 500,000 every year.
"We expect an apology. Because of this campaign there has been an increase at the same time in attacks against Polish people, Romanians, Bulgarians, Slovakians. We have seen petrol bomb attacks, we have seen pipe bomb attacks. Some have been beaten."
One Romanian dentist had been told by a patient he should "be working on a farm," he said.
"All of this has happened around January 1 when the politicians decided we will go against the migrants, and we will use that because it is easy."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140514ea5f001p5
