{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"179"}
____
  
The shocking story of Yashika's deportation is dispiriting, but it does bring hope
Owen Jones   
theguardian.com
612 words
4 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Owen Jones: First thoughts: The anti-immigration lobby is cynical in how it uses extreme examples to win hearts – now we can fight back with Yashika
What a cold, miserable country we have been made to look today by Home Office officialdom. With Yashika Bageerathi deported back to Mauritius, the government can congratulate itself on a job well done: Britain is finally free of a model 19-year-old A-level student whose studies have now been trashed. Aspiring young mathematicians in Enfield no longer have to suffer the imposition of the tutoring and coaching she has been volunteering to do in her spare time. She has been dragged from the loving care of her mother, whose case is being held separately. Let the slow handclap commence.
The Yashika campaign will be feeling very dispirited this morning. It managed to get 175,000 people to sign a petition demanding that she be allowed to stay; they won the support of the local Conservative MP, David Burrowes, who has said he was "deeply disappointed". The story caused a social media storm and achieved the sort of media attention these cases rarely get. After all that – and despite British Airways and Air Mauritius originally refusing to take her in the last week because of the furore – Yashika is gone.
Odd though it might sound, I can see some hope in all this. The level of "debate" – if "lots of inflammatory language crowding out facts and reality" can be called a debate – about refugees and migrants in Britain has been perverse. The media relishes finding extreme, unsympathetic examples of immigrants guaranteed to make readers' blood boil: foreigners with multiple kids being housed in palaces made out of plasma television sets, that sort of thing. In last night's EU debate, Nigel Farage was blaming immigration for everything from a lack of jobs to booming social housing waiting lists.
For those who want to drive back the tide of xenophobic bile, Yashika is a lifeline. We can scream the facts about immigration until we combust: that immigrants pay in more than they take out; that areas with some of the highest rates of youth unemployment – such as Hartlepool, Middlesbrough and Hull – have low levels of immigration; and that there are 5 million Brits living abroad. But as the US political linguist George Lakoff points out, people connect better with stories than with facts and statistics. We are, after all, emotional human beings, not machines. Our powers of empathy kick in for people, not for dry figures and facts. Yashika gives a human face to people who are usually either demonised or airbrushed out of existence.
That isn't to say that cases such as Yashika's will dramatically shift public perceptions alone. It may well be that voters will simply look at such examples simply as unfortunate deserving exceptions. Anti-immigration sentiment is being driven by a lack of social housing (because governments won't build), falling wages (because of weak unions, a "race to the bottom" model of globalisation and a devalued minimum wage), and a lack of secure jobs (because of deindustrialisation). Until these issues are solved, there will always be raw material to fuel the great anti-immigration backlash.
But the case of Yashika humanises a broken and cruel system, and appeals to a sense of justice that most people do have. For those of us who want a different sort of debate about immigration, it should encourage us to give a platform to other voices, too.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140403ea44000jj
