{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1881"}
____
  
Report reveals little evidence foreign migrants put British workers out of jobs
Alan Travis   
theguardian.com
387 words
7 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Conservatives insist official study, previously blocked by Downing St, supports their policy of reducing net immigration
There is little evidence of foreign migrants putting British workers out of jobs during periods of economic growth, an until now secret official study on immigration has found.
Conservative ministers seized on its secondary finding that some UK workers have been displaced by the arrival of large numbers of migrants from outside the EU during financial downturns, including the recent recession.
The immigration minister, James Brokenshire, said the study, which was part of a cross-government review, vindicated the Conservatives' claims that immigration had damaged the job prospects of unemployed Britons, particularly those looking for low-skilled jobs.
The report was rushed out after it was claimed Downing Street was blocking its publication because it undermined the government's policy of driving down net migration to Britain.
The report's main conclusion reads: "There is relatively little evidence that migration has caused statistically significant displacement of UK natives from the labour market in periods when the economy is strong."
But it does goes on to state that: "However, in line with some recent studies, there is evidence of some labour market displacement, particularly by non-EU migrants in recent years when the economy was in recession. This is consistent with the idea that labour market adjustment is slower during a recession, and with wider international evidence."
Brokenshire was asked by the Guardian whether the report showed that British workers were being put out of jobs as a result of immigration in times of economic growth and when non-EU migration was falling. He said this could not be ruled out, adding that the report was a literature review and was backward-looking.
Meanwhile, Brokenshire used a speech at the thinktank Demos in London to launch a strong attack on Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat business secretary. Brokenshire said it was people like Cable who had benefited most from immigration, while the working class
had lost out.
The open warfare between Tory Home Office ministers and Cable threatens to wreck what remains of coalition policy on
immigration, but Brokenshire insisted he could still work with the business secretary.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140306ea37001jq
