{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3030"}
____
  
Labour must revive the politics of hope, not have Nick Clegg chased by a cat
Owen Jones   
theguardian.com
752 words
8 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Owen Jones: First thoughts: A party political broadcast belittling the Lib Dem leader won't be enough to get Ed Miliband into Downing Street
When British politics reaches a low ebb, I find myself turning to YouTube. Not just for videos of skateboarding cats or dogs that don't want to have baths: sometimes, I'll cheer myself up with a speech made by the 1970s US civil rights icon Harvey Milk. "There's hope for a better world, hope for a better tomorrow," he tells a cheering audience. "I know you cannot live on hope alone, but without it life is not worth living." Ah, what a line.
If only Labour could have imported the late Harvey Milk from across the Atlantic to produce its election broadcasts. Instead, it has David Axelrod. I presume he's at least partly responsible for Labour's latest offering, a 1950s-style sci-fi B-movie spoof featuring Nick Clegg as "The Un-Credible Shrinking Man". He's surrounded by sadistic, braying Tories, gleefully embracing policies that hammer the poor while a squeaking Clegg becomes ever smaller. The craven, diminished Lib Dem leader is eventually chased across the table by Cameron's hungry pet cat, Socks.
It's wittier than the average party political broadcast, which is admittedly a pretty low bar to set. It has people talking, which is no mean feat either. There is a rationale: Labour is keen to pre-empt any move by the Lib Dems to cynically tack left and win back those who have defected to Miliband's fold, and apparently there are former Lib Dem voters who have yet to find a political home. It's not exactly a scientific poll, but a few non-politico mates of mine quite liked it.
But this really is a classic example of politics with the hope stripped away. Booo, nasty Tories! Those of us who aren't fans of Cameron's crew have probably made up our minds up about that one. Ed Miliband's team is unlikely to crib many policy suggestions from the late Tony Benn, but perhaps they could draw inspiration from his summary of progressive politics: "The flame of anger against injustice, and the flame of hope that you can build a better world." It matters, and not because it's morally righteous. Anger without hope leads to resignation: people may yell at the television sets every time a Tory crows about a recovery that is an abstract concept to most, but they will remain uninspired about any alternative.
The Tories and their allies are determined to fight a campaign based on fear and despair: encouraging struggling people to envy unemployed people, public sector workers and immigrants living it up at their expense, that sort of thing. Labour should respond by bombarding the electorate with an uncompromising message of hope.
In theory, Labour shouldn't even be in consideration for the next election. There are few precedents for oppositions to end up in government after one term. Labour's chances are artificially inflated because the Tories have been in electoral decline since 1955, and can no longer win cities like Manchester, Sheffield or Liverpool; Cameron couldn't win against Brown's kapput administration in the midst of economic calamity; governing parties rarely increasing their share of the vote; ex-Lib Dem voters have shifted to Labour's camp; electoral boundaries help Labour; and Ukip-mania is unlikely to vanish by 2015, eating into the Tories' lead.
But these are artificial factors that do not guarantee Miliband will be waving outside No 10 in a year's time. Despite being occasionally portrayed as the second coming of Vladimir Lenin, Labour's key policies are a mixture of backing Tory spending plans for a year, real-term cuts to public sector pay, restoring the 50p tax (apparently temporarily), a short-term energy bill freeze and more secure private-sector tenancy agreements. Labour really needs to be showcasing a coherent set of policies that deals with low wages, the housing crisis, a lack of secure jobs, a bailed-out financial system that carries on like before, tax justice, public utilities run by profiteers, and a lack of affordable childcare. The politics of hope, in other words. Not US-style attack ads with a shrunken Lib Dem leader being chased by a cat.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140508ea5800065
