{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1192"}
____
  
Religious leaders warn about climate of fear in run-up to European elections
Matthew Taylor   
theguardian.com
565 words
22 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
CofE bishop and Muslim Council leader call on politicians not to scapegoat minority communities to win votes
Religious leaders have warned that minority communities are living in a "climate of fear" and have called on politicians and the media not to stoke tensions in the run-up to May's European elections.
Pete Broadbent, the deputy Bishop of London, and Farooq Murad, secretary general of the Muslim Council of Britain, said many minority communities in the UK were being used as scapegoats by politicians and the media looking to win quick political points.
Their intervention comes amid increasingly hostile rhetoric around immigration – most recently focused on the supposed influx of Romanians and Bulgarians to the UK – and ahead of the UN'son's anti-racism day tomorrow. Immigration is likely to be a key battleground in the European elections.
Broadbent said that in the weeks and days before the elections, the media and politicians needed to be "very careful they acted responsibly in what they say and publish about immigration".
"There is too much exaggeration and too much scapegoating going on at the moment and it is creating a climate of fear around many of our minority communities."
Broadbent, who is also the Bishop of Willesden, said London benefited hugely from "the richness and diversity of many generations of migrants".
"That is what makes this city – and this country as a whole – what it is and we can't afford for that to be undermined by the short-term aims of politicians trying to appeal to a very small section of voters in middle England whom they think are going to decide the next election."
Murad said the UK's Muslim population was bearing the brunt of inflammatory political statements and headlines around immigration.
"The language is now coded: benefit scroungers, alien cultures, British jobs being snatched, ban the burqa, trojan horses, but racism persists," he said.
Tomorrow, anti-racism campaigners will join trade unions, religious organisations and migrant groups for a march in central London. It is one of several being held across Europe to mark the UN's anti-racism day.
Murad said: "The coming European elections are an opportunity for us to mobilise our mandate and send out a message: whether it be in entrepreneurial spirit, sporting prowess or cultural creativity, Britain's minority communities are a powerhouse for our nation."
Weyman Bennett, from Unite Against Fascism, said: "As the European elections get nearer, political parties in many countries are allowing politics and the media to be dominated by racism and xenophobia. This is a chance for us to come together and challenge that."
Bishop Broadbent said all Christians believed that the scapegoating of immigrants was abhorrent.
"All people are made in the image of God, equal in dignity and it can never be right to target groups of migrants and blame them for our social or economic ills."
Frances O'Grady, general secretary of the Trades Union Congress, said the targeting of immigrants and other vulnerable groups distracted attention from real and complex problems. "This inflammatory rhetoric stokes tensions and distrust among communities, and diverts us from tackling the biggest economic issue we face – the decline in living standards suffered by migrants and UK nationals alike."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140321ea3m00109
