{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3387"}
____
  
Family on loyalist Belfast estate targeted in latest race hate attack
Henry McDonald   
theguardian.com
446 words
17 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Window of black woman's home on Rathcoole estate smashed with a brick, as violence against immigrants continues
Racists have targeted a family in another hate crime attack in the Greater Belfast area as violence and intimidation continues against immigrants across Northern Ireland.
A black woman and her three children were not injured on Thursday night after the front window of her house on the loyalist Rathcoole housing estate in Newtownabbey was smashed with a brick.
It was the second time in less than a year that Kerry Ann Brown's home was the target of racists. She said that racist graffiti had been daubed on her house in the previous incident.
Brown, who lives in the house with her three sons aged 10, seven and two, said she thought the attackers were trying to break in to the property.
She said she didn't know how to explain to her sons what was happening to the family.
"I don't even know myself why it has happened. The only conclusion I can come to is that I am black, I'm an ethnic minority. There are so many other houses in the street and mine is the only one that has been attacked."
She stressed that her neighbours were "lovely people" and she had no problem with them.
This brings to at least six the number of race hate attacks in Belfast over the last few weeks, all of them taking place in loyalist working class districts.
Billy Webb, a councillor for the cross-community Alliance party, appealed for locals to give any information they had to help the police catch those responsible.
"We must take action to combat the recent spate of racist attacks. I am pleased that the police have organised an operation as a result of these hate crimes, but is important that it is successful in preventing future attacks.
"People who have moved to Northern Ireland are here to contribute to our economy and society. We must be open and welcoming to all," he said.
In response to the recent upsurge in racist violence, the police service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) has launched Operation Reiner, which has resulted already in the arrest of three people in East Belfast following attacks there.
The victims include Africans and Polish immigrants who have settled to work in Northern Ireland. The small Roma community has also been targeted, including a young man who was showered with a bag of excrement while riding a bike down the loyalist Newtonards Road earlier this month.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140516ea5h002bd
