{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2514"}
____
  
Labour should be thankful for Tony Blair – and not just for his money
John McTernan   
theguardian.com
613 words
6 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
John McTernan: Blair's donation should be a welcome reminder that Britain's greatest postwar prime minister was also Labour's greatest ever leader
"He's coming home, Tony's coming home." The mooted donation to the Labour party by Tony Blair comes at an opportune moment. It's not that a party gearing up for a general election needs money – though it does. It's not that a party facing reductions in funding from trade unions needs more cash from individual donors – though it does. It's that the Labour party desperately needs to come to terms with Tony Blair and what he did for them.
The Tories rather cheekily briefed that they were disappointed by news of this donation, they had rather hoped he might come over to them. A manifestly ridiculous statement, of course – no one who stood for Labour in 1982 and 1983 when led disastrously by Michael Foot – as Tony Blair did – is anything other than tribal. Blair has only ever had one party – the Labour party, which he loved and saved and took to its greatest victories. But the Tories were canny, they were exploiting a running sore within Labour – its inability to come to terms with Blair and his government, and a belief among some members that he was never really Labour.
It's interesting to listen to the shadow frontbench. They've come to terms with the Brown government – they simply pretend that it never actually happened. For them, there was only a Blair government. And its record, as they tell it, was appalling. Blair was, we are told, wrong on immigration – he shouldn't have let eastern European workers come here before the rest of Europe. This is arrant nonsense. Freedom of movement was, together with giving up some of the EU rebate, part of a political strategy to bind the 10 countries of eastern Europe into the EU. A strategy that looks pretty far-sighted now with the way Russia is occupying parts of Ukraine.
The story is the same on the economy. We never hear of Labour's record of smashing the neoliberal consensus that improving working conditions causes unemployment. Blair presided over rising employment while every year he was prime minister workers and unions were given new rights. In health and education his achievements aren't celebrated – mainly because his reforms have been adopted by the Tories. For some this is the proof that he was really a Tory. No, it's proof of Blair's political victory. It's the mark of political hegemony that the other parties have to adopt your policies.
Perhaps the 80s and 90s are too far away. Labour people forget that the public realm was starved of cash. Public services were being whittled away. Schools in 1997, yes, 1997, still had outdoor toilets. Hospitals from the health plan of 1963 had still not been built. When Blair bowed out, schools and hospitals across the country were building sites.
Before you can form a new government, you need an account of why you lost power, what you achieved in government and what you could do better – or just simply got wrong. Labour under Ed Miliband hasn't done the reckoning. Tony Blair's donation will be a welcome reminder that Britain's greatest postwar prime minister was also Labour's greatest ever leader. And a moment that today's Labour can settle its accounts with him and start to be proud of all that he did for them and for Britain.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140305ea36002s1
