{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2332"}
____
  
Lisa Cholodenko to direct TV version of bestselling novel The Slap
Ben Beaumont-Thomas   
theguardian.com
427 words
20 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
The Kids Are All Right director will adapt Christos Tsiolkas' novel The Slap for US network NBC, after it became one of the most-discussed books of recent years
Lisa Cholodenko, director of The Kids Are All Right, is to direct the opening episodes of The Slap, a TV adaptation of the controversial novel by Christos Tsiolkas to air on US network NBC.
The 2008 novel became a reading group staple thanks to its fractious story of a father who slaps another family's misbehaving three-year-old son at a barbecue, setting off tensions and anger throughout the families present and bringing bigotry to the surface. It became an international bestseller, was longlisted for the Booker prize, and has already had one TV adaptation in its native Australia. While it garnered some excellent reviews, other critics were vocal in their opposition: India Knight called it "unbelievably misogynistic" with a "ludicrous, comedy-macho sensibility."
Tsiolkas wrote in the Guardian: "I wanted to write about complacency, the fact that Australia at the turn of the century had become one of the wealthiest and most prosperous nations on the planet... The great waves of post-first world war immigration, the impact of feminism, the assertion of Aboriginal sovereignty; all these were a challenge to the masculine myth of mateship that was such a strong part of the culture... How were we to make sense of these contradictions? What did it say about us as a people, as a nation, as a culture?"
This is ideal ground for Cholodenko, whose films explore the tensions, hypocrisies and foibles of liberal middle-class life – The Kids Are All Right concerned the children of a lesbian couple reconnecting with their biological father, and the emotional mess he ends up creating, while her calling card High Art looked at a lesbian romance fraught with thwarted ambition.
She is also gearing up to direct another book-to-TV adaptation, Olive Kitteridge, starring Frances McDormand and Richard Jenkins, and set to appear on HBO. Tom Hanks is to executive produce the show, which will be a four-hour miniseries based on the 'novel in stories' by Elizabeth Strout. The novel is a set of 13 interrelated short stories set in a working-class coastal town in Maine full of betrayal and romance, linked by the titular character, a stormy yet empathetic maths teacher. It won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction in 2009.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140520ea5k0012x
