{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1236"}
____
  
Tory backbenchers urge party to tone down immigration rhetoric
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
446 words
24 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
New group called Conservatives for Managed Migration criticise 'arbitrary' pledge on net migration and efforts to outdo Ukip
A group of Tory backbenchers this week will urge David Cameron to tone down his rhetoric on immigration and will criticise the "arbitrary" pledge to bring down net migration to the tens of thousands.
The new group, called Conservatives for Managed Migration, will call on the leadership to stop its obsession with reducing immigration in growing efforts to "outdo" Ukip.
Mark Field, a Tory MP leading the group, said efforts to bring down numbers of foreign students were damaging because they discouraged talented students who would be good for the economy.
He told Sky News: "The point that I'm making – and I think quite a lot of my colleagues feel this – is we went into the last election with a bit of a frenzy about immigration across the political divide, therefore came up with this idea of net migration figures. The trouble with net migration figures is there's so little control over it.
"It is a net figure and actually in many ways the success of the British economy compared to EU nations over the last four or five years has meant that more Spanish and French want to come here and, by contrast, many people who might have left haven't gone.
"We need a policy on migration that isn't about headline figures because what that has ended up doing is targeting people who we shouldn't be discouraging – students across the globe, some really very talented individuals, who are perhaps getting in here but it's taking a hell of a long time."
The intervention shows a growing split within the Tories between those using increasingly negative rhetoric about immigration in the face of a threat from Ukip and others who feel the anti-immigration stance is harming the party's reputation for open business and trade.
David Cameron has promised to make it harder for new arrivals to claim benefits, with his stance on immigration hardening over the past year. But weekend reports suggested that the European commission may announce legal action within weeks against the UK over its efforts to limit benefits to EU citizens by imposing new tests.
The prime minister wants the EU to re-examine its principle of free movement, warning there have been vast migrations from poor to rich countries and abuse of national benefit systems. However, any attempt to water down this core principle of the bloc would be fiercely resisted by the European commission.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140323ea3o000rw
