{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1883"}
____
  
David Cameron and Nick Clegg brush off questions about foreign nannies
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
405 words
7 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Ministers' staff in spotlight after Tory James Brokenshire says wealthy elite's demand for cheap labour fuelling immigration
David Cameron and Nick Clegg have brushed off questions about their employment of foreign nannies after a Tory immigration minister suggested the "wealthy metropolitan elite" have been fuelling high immigration by demanding cheap labour.
Downing Street suggested the nationality of Cameron's domestic staff was not relevant after James Brokenshire, a new Home Office minister, gave a speech arguing that well-off families and big business are the main beneficiaries of "cheap tradesmen" and other domestic labour.
In his speech, Brokenshire said immigration was too high and suggested those who employ foreign labour have done well out of the situation "for too long". Attention has turned to whether this argument implies people, including government ministers, are wrong to employ people from abroad.
Cameron has employed Nepalese and Australian nannies to look after his children. Asked whether he still employs domestic staff from overseas, the prime minister's official spokesperson said: "I'm going to keep talking about government policy".
Brokenshire's predecessor as immigration minister, Mark Harper, also employed a cleaner from Colombia for years, which only led to his resignation when it emerged she did not have a legal right to work in the UK.
Clegg, the Liberal Democrat leader, was also asked on his weekly LBC radio phone-in show about whether he employs a foreign nanny, gardener or cleaner and initially said: "I'm not going to go into that."
However, he subsequently said he employed a staff member with a Belgian passport.
Brokenshire's speech infuriated companies, with the Institute of Directors saying it was "feeble and pathetic" to use such divisive language. It has also caused coalition tensions, with Vince Cable, the business secretary, due to give a speech on Thursday night warning that those who want to "bear down on immigration" risk depriving the UK of valuable skills.
The deputy prime minister admitted that confidence in the UK immigration system has declined, but attacked the Conservative aim of cutting net migration to below 100,000. Clegg said it was absurd to have a target over which the government does not have full control because in part it depends on the number of British people who leave the country.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140306ea370020a
