{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1596"}
____
'Soft Power' - a key asset in new international order
Richard Norton-Taylor   
theguardian.com
592 words
27 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
• UK should use 'soft power assets' to increase influence• Alternative to increasing reluctance to use military power• Meanwhile, hats off to a 100 year-old journalist
With the (understandable) reluctance of members of the world's most powerful military alliance to use their economic might, let alone armed forces, it may be particularly appropriate to consider the use and value of "soft power".
A committee of the UK's House of Lords may not be the most influential body in the west, but it came up on Friday with a timely message: "Britain must do a better job of telling its story to the world".
Britain needs to use "new methods and adopt new priorities to make the most of its soft power strengths", said the crossparty committee. While strong armed forces remained "the bedrock" in safeguarding national interests, new ways of projecting power projection were now required.
Among the UK's soft power assets, the committee's report mentions its successful creative industries; the natural advantage stemming from the adoption of English as a global working language; the Commonwealth; its "agencies of cultural communication" such as the BBC World Service and the British Council; its commitment to international development and the work of its non-governmental organisations - and its universities and world-wide educational links.
Britain should tell a better story on the shifting world stage, it says. Too often its reputation and its power to attract and influence are damaged by negative measures or stances, or by neglect of key assets.
In a clear message to the divided coalition government , the report states: "Visa and immigration policies, as at present handled, detract from the vital message that the UK is open for business". The committee warns that if the government did not face the facts of the transformed international order, the UK would risk finding itself "outwitted, out-competed, and increasingly insecure."
Ministers should set up a "new strategic unit at the heart of government", the Lord committee says. "Its purpose would be to assist the prime minister in guiding all departments in their international dealings to tell a more compelling story, uphold and enhance the UK's reputation and swiftly counter any potentially damaging policies or messages."
Lord Howell of Guildford, the committee's chairman, said: "Power has shifted away from the 20th-century pattern of western dominance, and away – to some degree – from government and central authorities altogether, as the internet and digital connectivity have built up new networks, alliances, lobbies and relationships around the planet". And after all, Barack Obama denounced Russia's use of "brute force" over the Ukraine crisis on his trip to Europe this week, and referred to western values. He also appealed to west European members of Nato to stop their decline in their military budgets. It is a message they are unlikely to heed.
• Hats off to veteran journalist Chapman Pincher, who celebrates his 100th birthday tomorrow, Saturday Friday 28 March. He has written an autobiography (Dangerous to Know, Biteback Publishing) which gives an entirely new meaning to the concept of vanity publishing. But we should forgive him for the sheer mischievious delight in which he recounts his exploits - one chapter is entitled "Momentous Lunches". He delighted, too, in the historian E P Thompson's remark that he was a "kind of official urinal" into which senior members of government and intelligence agencies stood "patiently leaking in the public interest".
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140327ea3r001e4
