{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1640"}
____
Mind your slanguage, and don't be an erk. YOLO
Gary Nunn   
theguardian.com
1,166 words
28 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Gary Nunn: Slang should be celebrated, not condemned. It enriches our language – from bloomers to booze, from cool to ceebs, and from doing a Lohan to LOLZ
The borderline-cult film Mean Girls contains an amusing insight into young people's eagerness to leave their linguistic trademark on the world. Schoolgirl Gretchen Wieners describes any pleasant situation as "fetch" in an attempt to coin a new term for cool: "It's, like, slang from … England." Anti-hero Regina George shoots her down: "Gretchen, stop trying to make 'fetch' happen. It's not going to happen!"
How many potential new slang words have been dumped for not being sufficiently cool? Not enough, some will argue.
Yes, yoof speak can be well annoying. In his new television series, Chris Lilley's alter-ego schoolgirl Ja'mie introduced "quiche", meaning attractive. The randomness of something your nan enjoys cooking being the new yoof term for hot is, of course, the cheesy bite of the satire.
Yoof slang is often regarded as attention-seeking, dramatic, lazy, neurotic and puerile.
It's refreshing, then, that the new fourth edition of Tony Thorne's Dictionary of Contemporary Slang (Bloomsbury) takes a different approach: "Slang, considered objectively, is not a defective or substandard form of language, but one that creatively mobilises all the technical potential of the English language."
Thorne unapologetically rejoices in "heteroglossia – the many voices we can potentially speak in – [which] may go further to produce new forms of creative expression in the arts and media". He challenges us to relax our linguistic prejudices. His academic approach provides endless fun; see the three deadly serious explanations of "titwank".
Some youth slang terms are so unequivocally irritating that they've been adopted – in a totes ironic fashion – by the profesh elite. Many are just shouty acronyms – YOLO (you only live once), FOMO (fear of missing out), and the infuriatingly impatient initialism TL; DR (too long; didn't read) sum up the collective attention deficit disorder of our youthful neologists.
Things get slightly more creative (or irksome) when abbreviations become longer versions of themselves. So "bee tee dubs" is BTW (by the way); "ceebs" is CBA (can't be arsed), which is deliciously meta – young people can't even be arsed to say "can't be arsed". "Oh em gee" has gone back to initialism form with ZOMG – the Z a way to add hysteria to "oh my God". LOLZ has also acquired the superfluous hysterical Z. Or you're erupting into a LOLcano/riding the LOLlercoaster. Get it? LOL.
Scoff we may, but Thorne has a point. Move past the ones that make us pessimistic about the fate of humanity, and there are some linguistic innovations. "Ethiopia!" is a jocular farewell, coined by analogy with "Abyssinia!" ("relexicalisation"). Portmanteaus account for some harsh insults and interesting etymologies: "gimp" is thought to derive from grandfather and limp.
Etymologies for older slang terms are fascinating. "Taking the mickey" is cockney rhyming slang for Mickey Bliss (piss). "Taking the piss out of" is thought to represent taking the piss out of a man's morning glory – deflating it and removing the false sense of pride. New cockney is being coined, too: putting on your baracks means your jim jams (Barack Obamas = pyjamas).
The etymology for "munter" – "someone who looks disgusting and smells" – makes for uncomfortable reading. It's thought to derive from "munt", Afrikaans racist slang for a black person, deriving from the Bantu umuntu (person).
Personification plays an important role in the lingo of Gen Y. "Doing a Lohan" is used for an example of embarrassing behaviour. Not so fetch. "Biebering" – for showing off obnoxiously. My favourite, a "Hasselhoff", means a bizarre explanation for an injury. The slang was coined when David Hasselhoff claimed in 2006 that he'd hit his head on a chandelier while shaving – severing four tendons and an artery in his arm. We could anglicise this one with a "Harvey" – named after the East 17 singer Brian Harvey, who ran over himself in his own Mercedes in 2005, blaming it on eating too many jacket potatoes.
Those who sneer at the defacement of our language probably litter their sentences with old-school slang that was once considered intensely irritating yoof talk. "Cool" was born in jazz clubs, coined to denote a gentler, progressive style as opposed to "hot" jazz. As such it became the word for unperturbed suave. It has subtly changed, though – I use it more often than I'd like to indicate affirmation. Many people use it to indicate approval of something trendy or excitement at something fun. I asked Thorne for other expressions that were once youth slang, and there are many: "trendy; rip-off; laid back; lose it; trash (as a verb); smoothie; paranoid; kooky; sleazy; biker; booze; dosh" are just a few examples.
Like "fetch", some never made it into the colloquial mainstream. Archaic slang terms include "nause" (an unpleasant person); "crackle" (money); "crackling" (attractive female); "erdie", "erber", "nerk" and "erk" – all meaning a foolish, unfashionable person.
Slang isn't the exclusive domain of the young. "Granny slang" terms are used by young people to mean something entirely different. So granny slang "batty" (slightly crazy) and "booty" (loot, plunder) both mean your backside if you're under 35. Other granny slang words are adorable: "argy bargy"; "bloomers"; "frock"; "courting"; "gallivanting"; "hullabaloo"; "jiggery-pokery"; "malarkey"; "poppycock"; "rapscallion"; "tomfoolery" – all evocative of a gentler, less shouty age. If only there was a museum for these words, so they don't die out with their generation.
Slang differences are international as well as generational. "Butter(s)" means ugly in British Jafaican – but beautiful in American slang. "Aardvark" is UK student slang for "hard work"; in American English it's more graphic – it's an uncircumcised male. FOF stands for "friend of a friend" in the UK; use it in America and it's slang for an illegal immigrant ("fresh over the fence"). Slang terms refresh so fast it can be tricky to keep up – this dictionary defines "toey" as Australian slang for "nervous, agitated" but visiting tourists beware: I've only ever heard it to mean horny. This could cause confusion.
Slang will always be loved by the young. When there are too many chaperones at the party, they'll find new, creative – and yes, often annoying – ways to communicate to the utter bewilderment of their 'rents (already archaic). Having a Dictionary of Contemporary Slang is as important as the glass cases hosting museum artefacts. This printed record of youth diction reflects the current fears, anxieties, faults, quirks, wit and humour of an entire generation.
If you made it this far, congrats. For some readers, it may have been a case of TL;DR.
Gary Nunn is a regular contributor to Mind your language. His posts appear on the last Friday of every month. Twitter: @GaryNunn1
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140328ea3s000jh
