{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2730"}
____
  
Why are the nerves of empathy severed when it comes to immigration?
Jonathan Jones   
theguardian.com
873 words
2 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Jonathan Jones: Framing the debate: That the Daily Mail can print this picture confident it will not make people want to help these men is a distortion of Britain
Men are running behind a truck, trying to jump up and grab on to it, so they can hitch an illegal lift into Britain. It's a self-evidently dangerous game. Like the "super-tramps" in Depression-era America who jumped on and off moving goods trains to get from city to city, these migrants are risking life and limb in search of a better life, or at least another place to be poor in.
Eighty years on, who fails to feel sympathy for the victims of economic and political world turmoil in the 1930s who left their homes or were driven to the adventurous lifestyle described by WH Davies in his Autobiography of a Super-Tramp? Perhaps one day these truck-jumpers will be celebrated as heroes or mourned as victims. But right now there is little compassion for those who come across a continent or a world in search of a life in Britain: no curiosity about motives, no pity for need, no recognition of potential.
Why are the nerves of empathy severed when it comes to immigration?
This picture was published on the front cover of the Daily Mail today, over the headline Dying to get into Britain. Its context was not calculated to make British people feel for the men in the picture, but apparently to urge us to fear them, for it was connected by the Mail with claims by MigrationWatch UK that 500,000 newcomers will arrive in Britain in the next five years and that EU migrants into Britain can boost their income with benefits totalling up to £300 a week.
How is it that the Mail, pushing fears of immigration and the EU as leading Little Englander Nigel Farage prepared for his second televised debate against Nick Clegg, can put this moving and concerning picture on its front page in full confidence that it will not make people want to help these men or even know anything about them but add to widespread longings for a "tough line" on immigration?
Britain is suffering an atrophy of imagination about our place on a complex and interlinked planet. It is terrifying to see how easily economic anxiety closes minds. Perfectly nice people feel justified in narrowing their focus to themselves, their families and "this country". This is a monstrous betrayal of our best traditions. The other day I visited the RAF museum in north London. Many of the people getting emotional in front of Spitfires were Polish – naturally, for Polish pilots played an absolutely crucial part in the Battle of Britain. And we owe Poles – for instance – nothing? But even that is the tip of the iceberg. Britain could have avoided war with Hitler. We were not forced to fight – we chose to. On behalf of a wider humanity. That is what made it our finest hour.
This, by contrast, sometimes appears our meanest hour. If EU migrants are vilified and slandered, the plight of Africa's poor ceases to pluck heartstrings the moment the poor stop suffering in their proper place, faraway. Once again historical amnesia fuels a cosy viciousness. Britain is the last place on earth that can claim to be a little country with no responsibilities except itself. There is no country – not even the US or USSR – so deeply entwined with The Rest of the World.
You don't need to be a pious liberal EU fan to see that. Believe the rightwing historian Niall Ferguson, whose book Empire shows more clearly than any Marxist ever did how profoundly imperial our story is. The British empire shaped the modern world and mixed our history with that of almost everywhere on earth. There may even be causes for pride in parts of that global British story, as historians such as Ferguson claim. What there is not, and cannot ever be, is any excuse for any British person still enjoying the benefits of a history that was imperial from the Tudor age onwards ever to turn away from the outside world and claim to owe it nothing.
What a miserable, pathetic distortion of Britain is this petty fear of outsiders. Surely, looking at this photograph, we can see the bigger picture. One of the most famous poems in the English language recognises that "No man is an island / Entire of itself / Every man is a piece of the continent / A part of the main."
If John Donne could see this in the 17th century, why is Britain succumbing to an island's delusions of solitude in the 21st? The seas are smaller now than they were then. The world is just a tunnel or airport or a click of the internet away. There are no borders to humanity, and the fools and bigots who want to build them are the true threat to Britain's grand cosmopolitan nature.
Ignore their words. Look at this picture. The Mail has accidentally published the truth.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140402ea42000xh
