{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2473"}
____
  
No 10 'blocks' report that challenges impact of immigration on British jobs
Alan Travis   
theguardian.com
429 words
5 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Unpublished research said to show that the impact of extra migrants on workforce is weaker than government has claimed
Downing Street is believed to have blocked publication of a politically sensitive report that shows the impact of immigration on the job prospects of British workers is well below that claimed by ministers.
The new research is reported to challenge claims made by the home secretary, Theresa May, based on a 2012 Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) study showing that "for every additional 100 immigrants … 23 British workers would not be employed".
But the BBC's Newsnight programme said the new unpublished analysis by civil servants is much less pessimistic and estimates that the cost to existing British workers of new arrivals is much lower.
The BBC quotes officials saying Downing Street has prevented publication of the report, which has been ready since last year, to avoid igniting controversy.
The quarterly net migration figures published last week show that far from being on track to hit the Conservatives' target of getting below 100,000 a year, the number is now at 212,000 and rising. New official research showing that the impact of extra migrants on the British workforce is weaker than previously claimed is said to be politically unhelpful.
In fact, the latest labour market statistics published show that 87% or 367,000 of the 425,000 new jobs in the UK economy in the past year went to British workers. Only 54,000 of the extra jobs in the economy, or 13%, went to foreign nationals.
This is a radically different picture from two years ago, when the original MAC research was published after the number of British workers in jobs fell by 166,000 and foreign nationals in UK jobs rose by 166,000.
Internal Whitehall emails seen by BBC Newsnight suggest that the cross-governmental report was commissioned because the original MAC research was not considered sufficiently "robust" by either the Treasury or the Business department.
It also sharply conflicted with Department of Work and Pensions research at the time that showed that the displacement impact of migration on low-skilled British jobs was mixed with only patchy evidence.
Home Office officials are said to have protested that the new research, in parts, reflects an "institutional bias" in favour of migration among officials at the Treasury, Foreign Office and Business department.
A government spokesman said: "We don't comment on internal government documents."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140304ea35003s5
