{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2654"}
____
  
Immigration minister pledges full investigation over Yarl's Wood death
Kevin Rawlinson   
theguardian.com
621 words
1 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Announcement comes in wake of claims that Jamaican detainee Christine Chase was denied medical attention
Claims that a woman who died at Yarl's Wood detention centre on Sunday was denied medical attention will be investigated in full, the immigration minister has said.
The woman, a 40-year-old Jamaican detainee named by the country's high commission as Christine Case, died after suffering what is thought to have been a heart attack.
In an urgent question in the House of Commons on Monday, the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, said there were claims that staff at the centre also refused the NHS's offers to help other inmates who were distressed.
"You will be aware, and I welcome your response that there is a full investigation in place, you will also be aware that there are unconfirmed reports that the detainee was initially denied medical assistance," she said.
Cooper said: "Can you assure the House that all of those reports are being fully looked at as part of the police and wider investigation?
"You will also be aware that there are reports that Yarl's Wood had turned down offers of help from the local NHS for other detainees who were distressed after witnessing the death.
"Can you tell the House whether that is the case and what further support was provided to others at Yarl's Wood yesterday?"
The immigration minister, James Brokenshire, responded that he could not comment on the specific points raised by the shadow home secretary. But he added: "I can assure you that those matters … will have been heard by those with responsibility in terms of the police and the inspectorate and certainly I would expect all issues to be thoroughly analysed and investigated in the appropriate way given the nature of this incident."
Keith Vaz, chairman of the home affairs select committee, said that the cases of Jimmy Mubenga and Alois Dvorzac, who both died while in the custody of immigration officials, served as a reminder of the importance of the issue.
Yarl's Wood detention centre is run by government contractor Serco. Vaz said: "Last year, the chief executive of Serco wrote to me and said that seven of his employees had been dismissed for inappropriate conduct at Yarl's Wood over the last few years.
"Do you agree that, even before the inquiry is concluded, you need to contact these private sector companies and remind them of the huge responsibility they have when dealing with the lives of individual people, and they ought to treat those lives with great care, and they have to have staff who are properly trained?"
Brokenshire replied: "You have highlighted some very significant issues and clearly there have been some shocking and disturbing cases in the course of the last few years that you reference. You will know there are ongoing police investigations and indeed criminal proceedings in respect of those cases, which makes it difficult for me to comment on the specifics.
"I can underline the Home Office has conducted its review of the methods of restraint and the use of force in these difficult circumstances of removal."
In a statement released to the Voice newspaper, the Jamaican high commission said: "It is with deep regret that the Jamaican high commission has received news of the untimely passing yesterday of Ms Christine Case.
"The high commission wishes to extend sincere condolences to the family and friends of Ms Case, who have since been advised of her death. We join them in mourning her loss and wish them God's comfort in this difficult time."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140331ea41001xj
