{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2943"}
____
  
Farage's admiration for Putin shouldn't be dismissed as the musings of a clown
David Priestland   
theguardian.com
750 words
31 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
David Priestland: Both leaders trade on the politics of resentment – and Britain's model of capitalism generates the inequality that creates it
Vladimir Putin, we learn from GQ magazine, is Nigel Farage's political pin-up. The Russian president, he declared, was the world leader he admired most, though "as an operator, rather than as a person" – reiterating the pro-Russian sympathies he expressed in last week's debate with Nick Clegg.
The Lib Dems have ridiculed this as the "I agree with Vlad" position, and the response of many politicians has been great hilarity, mixed with relief. Farage's Putinophilia just proves what an attention-seeking buffoon he is, and such reckless outbursts as this will quickly disillusion his supporters.
But this is dangerously complacent, for Farage's extravagant praise for Putin is not merely the off-the-wall musing of a political clown. In the past few years, Putin has set himself up as the spokesman for a culturally conservative but populist ideology that has more support in the west than its detractors might like. And as inequality continues to soar, the Kremlin's no-nonsense, "tough-guy", anti-EU message will attract increasing support.
Underlying Putinism is the view that the west's elites are imposing socially liberal "post-1960s" values on the masses. "Most people," Putin explained in a recent presidential address, "yearn for stability and security, favour traditional family values over feminism and gay rights, and prefer nation-based states to multicultural melting pots." But arrogant and out-of-touch leaders ignore the majority, he said; in pushing for gay rights and multiculturalism, they are destroying "traditional values from above"; their ideas are "inherently undemocratic" and "based on abstract ideas".
It is no surprise that Putin is admired by some on the right for his forthright attacks on "liberal elites". Leading American conservative Pat Buchanan has been particularly approving, insisting that, though "his stance as a defender of traditional values has drawn the mockery of western media and cultural elites, Putin is not wrong in saying that he can speak for much of mankind".
Buchanan is wrong up to a point: western societies have become, and are becoming, more culturally liberal, and post-1960s values on gender, sexuality and ethnicity become stronger with each generation. But he is right that many continue to resent them deeply, particularly some older, poorer and less well-educated people – precisely those who vote for Ukip and other such parties.
These are the losers from globalisation, and Putinism provides a compelling explanation for their plight: cosmopolitan liberals have betrayed their own working people and favoured "different folk", whether immigrants or gay people. Putinism also captures the anger at the growing gap – both economic and cultural – between the lower-skilled poor and the metropolitan elites. Most of the population, this strain of the right argues, can't afford liberal compassion, and in a tough economy gay marriage and liberal "rights" are self-indulgent luxuries. What's needed, so the argument goes, are tough, rough and unsentimental leaders, such as the judo-wrestling Putin or the fearless Farage, who speaks his mind. For many, this is a much more persuasive message than abstract discussions about bank regulation and economic rebalancing.
Russia – a country where 110 individuals own 35% of the country's wealth – is an ideal place for this politics of populist resentment, as Putin (a plutocrat himself) understands well. But it is not surprising that in the west, too, as inequality has risen since the 1980s, so has the far right. And now for the first time Britain has its own successful party to the right of the Conservatives, Ukip. As the recent book by Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin, Revolt on the Right, argues, Ukip is not a party for "Tories in exile": it is a well-established populist party, drawing much support from Labour, with a potential electoral "market" of 30% of the vote.
Farage's admiration for Putin is therefore unlikely to damage him and, as long as our model of capitalism generates such gross inequality, Ukip will continue to flourish. In the cold war, the Lib Dems' accusation that Farage was "taking his talking points straight from the Kremlin" would have been a body blow. Now, it seems, to be a Kremlin fifth columnist is a political badge of honour.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140331ea3v001b9
