{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2008"}
____
  
Anti-Ukip drive should focus on the party being ridiculous rather than racist
John Harris   
theguardian.com
1,181 words
29 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
John Harris: The cross-party campaign to expose Ukip as racist could backfire – better to focus on its entire ideology that doesn't make sense
At around this time last year, you may recall, the UK Independence party was set to do very well in looming county council elections. So, possibly with the help of backroom staff from Conservative central office, the social media activities of their candidates were closely analysed, and no end of evidence was found of extremely ugly opinions. The Facebook page of a party activist from Leicestershire endorsed the English Defence League; a candidate in Kent advised Londoners to take medical precautions before Bulgarians and Romanians arrived; the Leeds branch of Ukip had put up a page describing refugees as "primitives".
The allegations of racism and general nastiness continued, through election day and beyond, and had absolutely no effect on the party's prospects. Indeed, on 2 May 2013, Ukip managed a watershed breakthrough, winning unprecedented numbers of seats on councils throughout the south and east of England, and taking yet another step towards the huge success that looks set to materialise at next month's European elections.
Twelve months on, here we are again. One William Henwood has been granted his 15 minutes with the discovery of a tweet advising Lenny Henry to emigrate to a "black country". A party member and star of a recent Ukip TV broadcast named Andre Lampitt – "born British in Rhodesia," he says – has made less-than-enlightened online comments about slavery, Islam, whether Ed Miliband is actually Polish, and more. Meanwhile, Nigel Farage is justifiably accused of hypocrisy for claiming Europeans take jobs from British workers while employing his German wife as his secretary, and an odorous whiff hangs over his expenses arrangements. Ukip, then, is still a party smattered with racists and oddballs who is led by a shameless opportunist who evidently thinks there can be a world of difference between what you say, and do. Who knew?
Thanks partly to the Migration Matters Trust, there is now to be a new – and distinctly last-minute – cross-party campaign aimed at once again exposing Ukip as a racist party. It is to be led by Barbara Roche, a former Labour MP and immigration minister, who once upon a time came over all tough and made rather Ukip-ish noises about the fate of asylum seekers ("The 1951 United Nations convention is being used as a back-door route for illegal immigration," she said in 2001), but now fancies her chances as the mouthpiece for much more liberal views.
She is apparently going to accuse Farage's lot of being "Euracist", because "instead of targeting migrants from Africa and Asia they are targeting migrants from within the EU". If she has a chat with the average Ukip activist, she'll actually find that they tend to "target" them all, but whatever. "Every day another example of Ukip racism is exposed, and every day Nigel Farage attempts to dismiss it with the same lazy 'few rotten apples' argument," she says. "It won't wash."
Now, I don't necessarily blame metropolitan politicians for huffing and puffing about Ukip's fairly toxic politics, but two dangers spring to mind here. The first is bound up with a simple enough fact: that members of the political class – and, come to think of it, the so-called commentariat – responding to people's concerns about immigration by throwing around accusations of racism is one of the key things that has fed Ukip's support. As the New Statesman's Rafael Behr put it in a brilliant piece the other week, back in the boom years, among the people who now form Ukip's electoral bedrock, "the liberal determination to expunge prejudice from public discourse was interpreted as denial of permission to be cross about immigration", and Farage eventually made hay.
Among whole swaths of people, this source of anger remains: there is clearly a difference between calling out a party for its racism and doing the same to is supporters (which clever old Ken Clarke did last year), but if you're not careful, one will blur into the other, and Farage may well chuck another couple of points on his poll rating.
The second drawback with Roche et al's approach is that it is patronising beyond words. The public are not daft: most of them well know that Ukip's membership contains people with poisonous views, and that Farage is an absolute chancer. But the people who are minded to support Ukip are so dismayed with the current state of things and furious with Westminster politicians that those very things often feed into the defiant act of voting for them.
Note also that even if the attacks on Ukip somehow succeed and the party sooner or later shrivels, without much greater appreciation of what drives their support, something else will simply come along to take its place. Not that long ago, the BNP had a go at opportunistic populism; do not think that something even more ugly may yet appear in the future.
What's missing in the current attacks on Ukip is any understanding of something that the British mind tends to find just as damning as bigotry, and which eventually did for Nick Griffin and his party: simple absurdity. Just look at Ukip's leader: never, surely, has anyone so affected managed to convince so many journalists that he is somehow authentic. And what of their basic ideas? They are, let us not forget, a party commanded by uber-free marketers who, given half a chance, would turn the country they claim to love so much into a flat-tax, small-state version of Britain in the 1950s – like the Isle Of Man, only much bigger. And yet they rattle on and on about the iniquities of modern labour markets, the modern British housing crisis and all the other symptoms of an ongoing social breakdown to which they have no answers at all.
When I interviewed one of its senior activists last year, he told me that "all taxation is immoral" and that "if people needed roads and there wasn't this comfort blanket of the state providing everything, they'd be built". In other words, a lot of these people may or may not be racists, but they're also completely ridiculous. If senior politicians had the wit to point that out, rather than following Nick Clegg's example and exploding in a cloud of moralistic fury, things might start to improve – but I wouldn't get your hopes up.
Anyway, let us see how this latest clodhopping attempt to take Ukip down a few pegs actually fares. We know what to look out for: if Roche and her people succeed, up and down the country, the pubs and clubs will soon be alive with talk about the modern scourge of "Euracism". I think not.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140429ea4t000gr
