{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2969"}
____
  
David Cameron hints at TV election debate with Nigel Farage
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
739 words
10 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
PM suggests for first time he might be willing to take part in television debate with Ukip as well as other party leaders
David Cameron has declared he may be willing to sign up to television debates Nigel Farage, while claiming the "very unpleasant" remarks of some Ukip supporters should make voters question the party's competence.
The prime minister has made a series of direct attacks on Ukip in the past few days as Farage's party continues to ride high in the European election polls.
In a sign that Cameron may be preparing to tackle Ukip head-on, he said for the first time that he would consider taking part in a television debate with all the party leaders. That could mean a head-to-head with Labour's Ed Miliband and a separate debate also involving Farage, Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg and the Green party leader, Natalie Bennett.
However, Farage expressed scepticism about whether the debate would take place.
He told LBC 97.3 Radio: "He doesn't want to have a debate with me, of course he doesn't … because, he knows that there are two issues on which he can't win. One is the European question, the promise of a referendum … But, the big one, and the one that no one wants to debate, and the reason they're throwing all this abuse at us is this, it is completely pointless to talk about immigration figures and targets all the while we're members of the European Union."
A senior Lib Dem source accused Cameron of "ducking and weaving" to get out of the debates, while Labour said he should "stop dithering, appoint his negotiators and get on with it".
Cameron's concession on television debates comes after he branded Ukip a threat to both his party and to Britain. One survey suggests most people who vote for Ukip in this month's elections will not return to the traditional parties at the next general election.
Speaking on the BBC, Cameron blamed the popularity of Ukip on a "painful and difficult recession", and frustration over issues such as welfare reform and immigration. He urged voters to be patient and think about who could achieve the changes they wanted to happen.
In an article in the Times, Farage insisted Ukip was a party of minorities and would be more popular with people from immigrant backgrounds than the "snooty" Conservatives in a few years.
But Cameron highlighted controversial remarks made by some Ukip candidates, which have been described as racist and anti-Muslim.
"During this election … we have seen some extraordinary statements, in many cases very, very unpleasant statements from Ukip financial backers and candidates and I think it does go to the issue of the competence of the party: what on earth are they doing selecting people and allowing people like this to be in their party?" he said.
"So it does go to my core point which is you've got to, when you think of voting, think about the competence of people who you are going to send to Strasbourg and Brussels, the competence of people that are going to run your local council and if they can't control what they are saying then that does raise a very big issue of competence."
Cameron also defended his ability to renegotiate Britain's relationship with Brussels before a referendum in 2017, amid renewed fears within his party that it is unachievable, and over immigration figures expected later this month. Clegg, the Lib Dem leader, will warn in a speech on Friday that Cameron's aims of a new settlement are "wishful thinking".
However, the prime minister declared himself "very upbeat, very bullish about what Britain can achieve" in coming negotiations.
"As prime minister, I have shown we can make changes in Europe: an £8bn cut in the budget; people said I wouldn't be able to veto a treaty – I've vetoed a treaty; people said you'll never get powers back – I got powers back," he told BBC Breakfast.
Cameron also suggested he would not resign in the event of Scotland voting for independence and confirmed he had held drinks for DUP politicians, which has been seen as a sign he is wooing them for a potential coalition.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140509ea5a0005v
