{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3383"}
____
  
Conservative leader in Euro parliament courts Danish anti-immigration party
Nicholas Watt   
theguardian.com
1,187 words
17 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Moderates warn that inviting Danish People's party to join Conservative group would damage Britain and the Tories
A row has erupted between moderate and Eurosceptic Conservatives after their leader in the European parliament, Martin Callanan, confirmed he is courting a highly controversial Danish anti-immigration party to join the Tories' group in Strasbourg.
Sir Robert Atkins, a veteran Tory MEP who served as a minister in John Major's government, warned that any association with the Danish People's party would be damaging for Britain and for the Conservatives.
Mats Persson, director of the Open Europe thinktank, said that the prime minister's EU reform plan would be complicated by the inclusion of the DPP (the Dansk Folkeparti) in the European Conservative and Reformists group as liberal parties would take fright.
Atkins and Persson spoke out after Callanan, chairman of the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) group in the European parliament, confirmed that he has been in talks with Morten Messerschmidt, who is standing as an MEP for the Danish People's party.
The party, which forced the country's centre right government in 2011 to introduce tougher border controls as the price for supporting the annual budget, is fiercely anti-immigration. A party spokesman once likened the Muslim headscarf to the Nazi swastika.
Amid reports that the Tories will struggle to re-establish their ECR group in Strasbourg, Callanan has been holding informal talks with candidates from across the EU. He needs to secure the support of at least 25 MEPs from seven different countries, a quarter of EU member states.
Callanan confirmed the contacts with Messerschmidt to the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten. An English translation of the newspaper quotes Callanan as saying: "We do not comment on a regular basis about parties that we may be – or not – in contact with about a potential ECR membership. But we have a very good relationship with Mr Messerschmidt; we have worked closely with him in the present parliament, and his views on Europe are close to the ones held by the ECR."
Messerschmidt, who currently sits with Ukip in the Europe of Freedom and Democracy group, welcomed the overtures. He is quoted as saying: "I will not hide from you that I am very satisfied with the credentials of the ECR. I recognise the statement. There have been cases where I have worked more closely together with the ECR than with my own group."
Callanan told the Guardian of his email to the Danish newspaper: "I may have said something like that. I wouldn't like to deny it. That is not saying he has applied or we will accept him for membership. I cannot comment because he has not applied. At the moment there are no pending applications."
Atkins warned that it would be a mistake for the Tories to join forces with the DPP and the Finns Party, formerly the True Finns, who are also believed to have been in contact with the ECR group.
The former minister, who is retiring as an MEP at this year's election, told the Guardian: "The two fundamental priorities are the best interests of Britain and the best interests of a negotiating position for the prime minister in the lead up to the referendum. Anything which causes problems for the prime minister in relation to that is something that I and many of my colleagues will be very upset about. Those options [admitting the DPP or the Finns Party] would seem to me to be unhelpful in achieving the prime minister's objectives."
Persson said: "There's a tricky trade-off for the Tories: securing and expanding the ECR, which may involve teaming up with more nationalist parties, in turn possibly turning off parties on the liberal right, many of which are natural allies for EU reform. In particular, joining up with the Danish People's party, which has a very robust stance on immigration and a controversial history, would not go down well at all with some governments."
The decision of Callanan to open talks with the DPP has alarmed moderate Tory MEPs. They fear the party's leadership in Strasbourg appears to be courting a party, some of whose members espouse views similar to outspoken members of Ukip, just as the prime minister intensifies his attacks on Nigel Farage.
One senior Tory said: "When we were originally looking at the construction of the ECR under the leadership of Iain Duncan Smith, who is not exactly a left-winger, he said that the Danish People's party was beyond the pale and that we should not even talk to them, let alone associate with them. That situation has not changed."
Callanan describes himself as a friend of Dan Hannan, the Tory MEP who is campaigning to leave the EU and who is the leading light in the global wing of the Tory group – the Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists (AECR) which includes the AK party of the Turkish prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Hannan enjoys warm relations with Ukip.
Callanan said: "We work very closely together. Dan is a very good friend of mine." The ECR chairman insists his group in the European parliament will be a mainstream force because he has rejected applications from hard right parties such as the Northern League from Italy. He is confident it will succeed in meeting the conditions to form a group.
Callanan said: "There are no problems whatsoever. We have enough members already signed up to the group to match both thresholds. We will easily get 25 and we will easily get seven member states and perhaps many more in negotiations with lots of parties across Europe.
"Suffice it to say I would confidently say that in the next European parliament the ECR will be both bigger numerically and bigger in terms of member states than we have at the moment. We are only interested in talking to mainstream non-racist parties. There are a number of parties we have rejected approaches from."
The ECR group currently includes Anna Rosbach, a former member of the Danish People's party. But she left the party in 2011.
Gareth Thomas, the shadow Europe minister, said: "David Cameron clearly made the wrong choice for Britain when he walked his MEPs out of a mainstream centre-right group in the European parliament, which is dominated by Angela Merkel's Christian Democrats, and joined up with a collection of politicians who are on the fringes of European politics.
"He even ignored those in his own party who warned him at the time that this would leave Britain isolated in Europe.
"But speculation now that his MEPs might now be forced to rely on the support of political parties with dangerous, extreme-right views, is a very troubling development.
"It's time for David Cameron to come clean about his MEPs' links with these parties, and whether he is considering closer ties with them after the European election on 22 May."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140516ea5h004ph
