{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3177"}
____
  
How councils can put schools at the heart of the community – live debate
theguardian.com
538 words
11 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Join us on April 17 from 12pm-2pm to discuss how councils can use schools to bring communities together
The exact role local authorities should have in education is not always clear cut. The chief inspector of schools Sir Michael Wilshaw, speaking last year, said the role of councils had shifted from being suppliers of education to "championing its consumers". But how can councils make sure that they do this?
Schools have the potential to be more than just places where people learn during the day, functioning more like community hubs as well. In a discussion on the Local Leaders Network, John Fowler, policy manager at the Local Government Information Unit, said that councils have had a historic role in encouraing learning and engagement out of school hours.
This often involves promoting recreational learning activities, helping young people with the transition to adulthood, and facilitating further and higher education classes. "That's not forgetting early years which I don't think has got a mention. There is an increasingly important role in securing early education for 40% of two-year olds," Fowler said.
In ethnically diverse areas, schools can also help build strong links within the community and bring people together. Using schools to encourage langugage learning is one way this can be done. Engaging parents in areas with high migrant populations is often hindered by language barriers and this can impact negatively on a child's education.
Organising lessons for children to learn English after school or using schools to help other members of the community struggling with language learning is a good way of integrating people into their communities. Southampton city council provides a £60,000 annual grant to teach minority languages to children from immigrant families; a scheme that is under threat of being axed. The local authority funds the teaching of about 800 children from minority communities to help them learn their heritage languages.
Join us on April 17 12pm-2pm to discuss how councils and local authorities can put schools at the heart of the community. We will discuss the following:
• How can schools become more than just places people go to learn?
• What after-school activities can benefit the whole community?
• What work is going on in this area?
• What more can be done by schools and councils to engage parents in areas of high migrant populations?
Expert panel
Mike Harris is a councillor in Lewisham and chairs the audit panel.
Claudia Megale is a senior lecturer and CPD/PQ programme leader at Middlesex University and head of practice, Learning, at Enfield council. She is also the author of the book Psychosocial and Relationship-Based Practice which will be published by Critical Publishing later this year and is researching the impact of fear and trauma on leadership, professional identity and decision-making.
To be considered for the panel please contact sarah.marsh@theguardian.com.
• Want your say? Email sarah.marsh@theguardian.com to suggest contributions to the network.
Not already a member? Join us now for more comment, analysis and the latest job opportunities in local government.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140410ea4b000ma
