{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1119"}
____
  
The Tories have a fatal weakness: they don't attract minority voters
Andrew Gimson   
theguardian.com
742 words
6 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Andrew Gimson: Cameron's party needs to reflect Britain's changing ethnicity – but fails to understand the patriotism of immigrants
Policy Exchange has performed the useful service of providing, in a dispassionate report titled A Portrait of Modern Britain, an account of a potentially fatal problem facing the Conservative party. The report points out that black and minority ethnic (BME) people already make up 14% of the UK's population, and by 2051 can be expected to make up 20% to 30% of it.
Yet at the 2010 general election only 16% of BME voters supported the Conservatives, while 68% backed Labour. Already the Tories' weakness among such voters is making it far harder for the party to win an overall majority. If the weakness persists, that goal will become completely unattainable, and the party will find itself permanently excluded from power.
The word "modern" in the title of the report may be thought to hint at the solution to this problem. The Conservatives need, evidently, to modernise themselves. But their predicament is actually much more intractable than that.
When David Cameron won the Tory leadership in 2005, his position was analogous to that of an editor who has taken charge of an old and famous magazine with a declining circulation. There were going to have to be changes – any fool could see that. But the great danger of modernising a magazine is that you may lose your existing readers, who have a deep emotional attachment to the old way of doing things, faster than you gain new ones.
If you looks dispassionately (which I admit is a difficult thing to do) at what Cameron has done to the Conservative party, I think you have to admit that he has done quite a bit to modernise it, in the sense of making it more reflective of Britain in 2014, rather than of Britain in the 1950s. There are three times as many Tory women MPs as there were when Cameron took over, and the men of the 2010 Tory intake are also from a wider range of backgrounds and ethnicities than would once have been the case. The first member of that intake to reach the cabinet – the new culture secretary, Sajid Javid – is the son of a Muslim bus driver from Pakistan. Same-sex marriage has just been passed into law.
So although you can always complain that there has not been enough modernisation, it would be unfair to pretend that there has been none. Cameron's problem is that the changes he has already introduced have been greeted with deep repugnance by many on his own side. A new party, dedicated to the proposition that life was better in the 1950s, will almost certainly take a large number of votes from the Conservatives in the elections to be held on 22 May. Ukip draws its support from disappointed patriots, many of whom are also disappointed Tories.
What is Cameron to do? Like a reforming editor, he needs to convince people that his changes are designed to strengthen, not undermine, the inestimably valuable tradition of which he has the privilege to be the temporary custodian. His purpose is to make the country greater, not to wreck it. He is actuated by a generous patriotism.
And this can also be the way to appeal to people of immigrant descent. Very many of them came to Britain, or their parents or grandparents came here, because they admire and value its tradition of liberty. They love the way one is left in peace to practice one's own religion and live one's own life: for whether or not we believe in God, we certainly believe in privacy.
Research published by Policy Exchange and others confirms that people of immigrant descent are far more inclined to think of themselves as British. They are patriots: a point the Conservatives have not always understood, let alone been able to articulate. Our tradition is enlarged and strengthened by this infusion of energy and aspiration. There need, of course, to be strict limits on immigration: most immigrants will tell you that. But there needs also to be a much more convincing expression of the pride we can all feel in this country, whether we have only just arrived or have lived here for centuries.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140506ea56000b8
