{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1558"}
____
Yashika Bageerathi's case is important, but let's not forget what asylum means
Diane Taylor   
theguardian.com
898 words
27 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Diane Taylor: Individual stories make dramatic headlines, but they should not obscure our duty to protect all those fleeing persecution
One of the reasons why the case of 19-year-old Mauritian asylum seeker Yashika Bageerathi has attracted so much media attention is because it has all the ingredients of a Hollywood tale.
She is a charming, intelligent and hard-working school student who has secured a clutch of offers to study at top universities. The Home Office seems determined to forcibly remove her and her family back to Mauritius. The family claim their lives there will be in danger. Yashika is the underdog in the story and has mounted a David v Goliath struggle against this monolithic government department. An assorted supporting cast are cheering her on from the sidelines. More than 100,000 people have supported her campaign to stay in the UK on change.org. Celebrity model Cara Delevingne has tweeted her support and the headteacher of her school, Lynne Dawnes, along with staff and students, has publicly backed her campaign.
And there are plenty of cliffhangers thrown into the mix – she was arrested and detained, released, redetained, and taken to the airport in preparation for forced removal. At the eleventh hour she was given a reprieve and taken back from the airport to her detention centre to continue the fight. Later she received a letter saying that her grounds for appeal were baseless, and that her entire family would be deported with her. And so it goes on.
Like Yashika, thousands of other asylum seekers are also fighting against removal. Many are from conflict zones such as Sri Lanka or Democratic Republic of Congo, where widespread torture has been well documented. Some would eschew the kind of publicity Yashika has received, while others would welcome it but are unable to secure it because their story isn't quite so media friendly.
Asylum seekers are often labelled liars, scroungers and sometimes worse. Few of their critics have ever met an asylum seeker, but stereotypes fill the knowledge void. Schools are one of the best ways for these stereotypes to be dismantled. Asylum-seeker students often become integrated into the life of the school and valued by their friends and teachers. Having fled conflict zones where schooling was either patchy or nonexistent, they are often highly motivated and eagerly absorb the education they receive here. If an asylum-seeker student is suddenly threatened with forced removal from the UK it affronts the basic values of fairness espoused by the school community.
School campaigns like Yashika's are less common now than they were a decade or so ago because there has been a significant fall in asylum seekers in recent years. But they can be very powerful.
In one case, that of teenager Lorin Sulaiman, a Kurd who fled persecution in Syria years before the current conflict began, she attended Mayfield school in Portsmouth, an area that had a strong BNP presence at the time. When, like Yashika, she was arrested and detained, her school friends mounted a vigorous campaign to prevent her from being removed. Among the students petitioning the Home Office against the removal were some of the children from BNP families.
"I'm going to tell the prime minister that this is not acceptable," one said. "Lorin is our friend and we want her to stay at school with us." Ultimately, Lorin was freed and granted leave to remain in the UK. The headteacher organised counselling for the students, some of whom had difficulty reconciling their pre-existing views about asylum seekers with the reality of Lorin – a bright, pleasant and highly motivated student who was held in great esteem by all in the school community.
Knowing that support for asylum seekers in school communities can be very strong, the government recently quietly shelved proposals for schools to check the immigration status of students.
But high-profile campaigns against the forced removal of children and young people can work both ways. In Lorin's case the campaign, in tandem with sound legal representation, worked well, and she was granted leave to remain. In another case, involving the children of the Ay family, Kurds from Turkey, the campaign to keep them in the UK which was backed by – among others, JK Rowling – made the then Home Secretary, David Blunkett, dig in his heels. The family was forcibly removed to Germany, where they had first claimed asylum, although Blunkett had discretion to keep them in the UK. They later received a six-figure sum from the Home Office for unlawfully detaining them.
When it comes to media reporting of asylum it is often individual cases that make the headlines, sympathetic or unsympathetic depending on the politics of the media outlet. These individual stories are an important way to humanise the complex debate about asylum, but it is important that the personal stories do not obscure the wider and very important issues about the right to protection of those who have fled persecution: people whose lives would be in danger if they are forcibly returned to their countries, who have a right to protection under the Geneva conventions when they reach safe countries, but who don't always get it.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140326ea3r001jm
