{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2582"}
____
  
Sick of hearing politicians say the global financial crisis was Labour's fault?
Alex Andreou   
theguardian.com
1,133 words
17 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Alex Andreou: The coalition's tendency to simplify the past into an easily consumed narrative risks making voters see lies in every version
The first time I saw Akira Kurosawa's film, Rashomon, I was left slightly disappointed – not with any aspect of the film-making, which is clearly masterly. The problem was that my 16-year-old brain, accustomed as it was to the linearity of Teen Wolf, Porky's and The Goonies, expected a revelation of the definitive version of the truth at the end. I felt cheated and confused by its absence. Many years later, when I saw it again, I understood that this was precisely the point – to examine how we all construct the truth from a plausible, but misleadingly selective, sifting of the past.
I was reminded of the Rashomon effect recently, while watching Nick Clegg deputise for David Cameron during Prime Minister's Questions. On a number of occasions he managed to repeat what has, of late, become a mantra-like timeline of events, a highly selective, simplified version of what went wrong and how we got to where we are. I don't remember another government being quite as intricate or insistent with its selective rendering of the past.
Essentially, the narrative being put forward is this: the historical effect of all previous events and governments, up to and including Margaret Thatcher's and John Major's, is erased, even when it is direct. The universe in which we live begins at the 13-year Labour administration. The clearest example of this is the idea that the energy oligopoly, which is causing so many problems in that market, is a result of Labour's policies and specifically those of Ed Miliband as energy secretary in the year and a half between October 2008 and May 2010. The direct contribution of previous Conservative governments, for example, in privatising energy and setting up the regulatory framework is nil.
The global financial crisis in 2007-08 was the result of Labour's spending record. It was having too many nurses and teachers that caused the sub-prime lending bubble, the US housing bubble, and the collapse of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Northern Rock and Lehman Brothers. In Nick Clegg's words, "Labour was the party that crashed the British economy." This is despite all parties acknowledging, at the time, that they were in the midst of an international maelstrom and broadly endorsing, applauding even, Gordon Brown's reaction to events.
Anything negative that has occurred since May 2010 is down to external factors – namely, EU regulation, immigration, profligate southern European economies, the euro crisis, aggressive Chinese expansion, the weather being too hot, too cold, too wet or too dry, the "mess we inherited", the extra bank holiday, the dog eating our homework. Conversely, every plaudit for anything positive is due exclusively to the "difficult decisions" this government is making.
This is, by no means, a phenomenon unique to the British political scene. Whenever I am in Greece, listening to Prime Minister Samaras's speeches, I often have a sense that they are direct translations of Cameron's equivalent scripts. "Difficult decisions", "the mess we inherited", "we are on the right track, but need more time", "hard-working people" all feature regularly. One only needs to listen to either a Democrat or a Republican in the US explain the reasons for their coming so perilously close to a "fiscal cliff" a few months ago, or observe how the Crimean situation is perceived by Russia and the west respectively, to observe the Rashomon effect in full swing.
One could dismiss it as cynical political positioning, just spin – and perhaps this is how it begins. However, when a particular narrative is repeated often enough, two things happen. First, it becomes dominant, and alternative versions of the truth are suppressed. We have actually seen this very clearly with opposition to the cuts. Once it became clear that the bulk of the media had tuned into the idea that cuts to public services were necessary (rather than stimulation or increased revenue – the other side of the deficit equation), dissenting voices became paranoid that they may be perceived as shrill or irrational, and so adopted this narrative of necessity and moved on to the next battle (of how much, how fast and what we ought to cut).
Second, and possibly more important, the teller of the tale begins to believe it as the only and definitive version of the truth. It evolves into unshakeable dogma. We all do this. The birth of every child, for instance, has its own mythology. It is usually based on a kernel of truth, but the more time that passes, the more exaggerated and unshakable the "facts" become. By the time we reach puberty, we know with certainty that we were either born in minutes or that labour lasted eight days and nights; that we were very early or very late; that our mother had no warning at all or 10 false alarms; that the obstetrician was called Jimmy and the midwife Hendrix. We cease to question it. It makes us feel special.
I discussed the tendency to edit the past with the author of How to Stay Sane, psychologist and regular Guardian contributor, Philippa Perry. "Selecting what to focus on is necessary," she says, "otherwise we would be swamped by an overload of incoming information and be so overstimulated we couldn't function. If it's really bad, I call it 'looking at life through a straw', only able to see what backs up a rigid opinion." I think "looking through a straw" best describes the polarised political climate in which we live. The truth is often somewhere in the middle. Extremely cold weather may play a part in the economic downturn of one quarter, just as much as mild weather in the upturn of the next. Poor or astute policy decisions played a part in both, too.
Rashomon was concerned with the apportioning of blame, but also with the right way to move forward, how to distribute wealth, whom to trust with the raising of the next generation. We cannot allow discourse about the future of the country to become a sort of battle between VHS and Betamax, where one must prevail and the other perish. When it becomes this pathological, it is unhealthy and, vitally, it affects our ability to make informed decisions going forward; we begin to become confused, to disengage – like the commoner outside the Rashomon gates – by seeing the lie in every version, rather than finding the truth in it; it hinders our collective political ability to problem-solve.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140317ea3h000p3
