{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3070"}
____
  
Ministers told to 'get a grip' on deporting foreign prisoners
Andrew Sparrow   
theguardian.com
446 words
26 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Commons committee publishes report complaining about slow rate foreign inmates in English and Welsh jails are deported
Ministers have been urged to "get a grip" as the Commons public accounts committee published a report complaining about the slow rate at which foreign prisoners in English and Welsh jails are deported.
There are just under 11,000 foreign prisoners, comprising 13% of the jail population, and the committee said that getting them out of the country would be the best way of reducing the cost of the prison system.
Responding to the report, the Ministry of Justice said that the foreign prisoner population was lower than it was in 2010.
But Margaret Hodge, the committee chair, told the Today programme on Friday that this was not because the government was getting better at speeding up deportations.
"When ministers claim there are fewer foreign nationals in our prisons, that is because there are fewer coming in, fewer are getting convicted, not because they are getting better at dealing with the backlog," she said.
The number of deportations actually went down between 2009 and 2012, she said. Describing the problem as frustrasting, she said: "We would really like them to get a grip on dealing with this backlog."
Failure to increase the pace of deportations was costing the taxpayer hundreds of millions of pounds, she said.
"[The National Offender Management Service] should work with the Home Office to understand why there are delays in removing foreign national offenders, and tackle the barriers to their removal."
Jeremy Wright, a justice minister, said the government was committed to reducing the number of foreigners in jail and that in 2012 more than 4,500 foreign criminals were deported from the UK.
An EU prisoner transfer agreement is in place and the government has also negotiated prisoner transfer agreements with Albania and Nigeria, he said. But he said that Poland was exempt from the EU agreement until 2016, and that this was significant because "Polish people are the largest single national group in our prisons".
He also said the immigration bill currently going through parliament would severely restrict the ability of foreign prisoners to appeal against deportation.
Sadiq Khan, the shadow justice secretary, said: "David Cameron's terrible record on failing to send home foreign prisoners also rightly comes in for criticism. Back in 2010, he promised to personally intervene to send thousands back to their home countries. With only a handful actually sent back, this broken promise is clogging up our jails and costing taxpayers hundreds of millions of pounds."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140425ea4q000bl
