{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2914"}
____
  
Mauritian student wins late reprieve from deportation
Mark Tran   
theguardian.com
688 words
31 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Nineteen-year-old Yashika Bageerathi due to be flown out from Heathrow on Sunday without her mother and siblings
The 19-year-old Mauritian student threatened with deportation at 5pm on Sunday has won a further reprieve although it was unclear why she was not being sent back to Mauritius as planned.
According to Lynne Dawes, principal at the Oasis Academy Hadley in north London, where Yashika Bageerathi is studying for her A-levels, Air Mauritius refused to take her.
"We believe now that Air Mauritius refused to fly her," Dawes told Sky News, adding that there had been no official word from the Home Office on why the deportation was not going ahead.
"The Home Office told her there was a technical problem with the plane. We can only think Air Mauritius have listened to our campaign."
Air Mauritius said flight MK053 had not been cancelled and was still scheduled to leave Heathrow. On Tuesday, it was claimed that British Airways had refused to put her on its flight and she was returned to a detention centre
A petition by the students calling on May and James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, to stop the deportation has gathered more than 164,000 signatures on website change.org.
Campaigners said: "Yashika Bageerathi arrived in the UK along with her mother and brother in 2012 to escape abuse and danger. In that time, Yashika has proved herself a model student and valuable member of the community. However, now that she is legally deemed an adult, she is to be torn apart from her family and deported to Mauritius without even having the chance to compete her education … The students feel that to deport Yashika at any stage would cost the UK a valuable member of society. To do so just weeks before she is about to complete her education, in their opinion, would be an uncompassionate and illogical act of absurdity."
Bageerathi, who has been at in Yarl's Wood immigration removal centre since 19 March, was told by a Home Office officiall on Sunday morning that she would not be leaving for Mauritius on the 5pm flight. Lawyers acting on behalf of her school had planned to lodge a high court injunction to block her deportation. One appeal has already failed, a spokesman for the school said.
More than 40 of her fellow students gathered in London on Saturday to protest against the decision, carrying banners and singing slogans in support of her right to stay.
Yashika came to the UK with her mother, sister and brother to escape a relative who was physically abusive and claimed asylum last summer. On Tuesday, Yashika, her mother and younger brother and sister were told they faced the threat of deportation after receiving a letter from the Home Office. The 19-year-old was threatened with deportation without her mother and two siblings because, as an adult, her case was considered separate to theirs.
Yashika's mother, was "struggling" and tearful, said Dawes.
David Hanson, the shadow immigration minister, said he would ask the Home Office to review the decision.
The MP said on Twitter: "I am contacting the home office minister to intervene personally in #yashika case to ask for urgent further review."
May has said that the teenager's case had gone through the "proper process" and she would not be stepping in. Speaking over the phone from Yarl's Wood, Yashika told Sky News she did not know what to do, and that she just wanted to finish her A-levels.
"I just want to be with my mum right now and celebrate Mother's Day as we do every year because I know she is very special to me," she said.
A Home Office spokesperson said: "We consider every claim for asylum on its individual merits and in this case the applicant was not considered to be in need of protection. This case has gone through the proper legal process and our decision has been supported by the courts."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140330ea3v0005l
