{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3076"}
____
  
Labour must stop taking minority votes for granted
Lola Okolosie   
theguardian.com
754 words
25 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Lola Okolosie: The claim that BME voters drift towards the Conservatives is sloppy thinking, but that's no excuse for complacency
Research published today by the thinktank Demos on the importance of the black and minority ethnic (BME) vote in 2015 was earlier this week greeted with much fanfare; "Middle-class ethnic minority voters could help Tories win elections"; "Black middle-class 'will turn to Tories'" [paywall]. "Dear God, no" was my immediate reaction to these headlines. Could I one day vote Tory? Was this the inevitable pay-off of a university education and social mobility? Well, not quite. Greater wealth will not dissipate my loathing of a party that only 33% of South Asians and 20% of black people believe is fair. Asked the same question about Labour, the figures leap to 66% and 78% respectively.
The headlines are an optimistic take on today's essay by the former chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, Trevor Phillips, and Richard Webber, professor of geography at University College London, on the nature of the BME vote. Noting that there are 5 million BME voters in the UK and that one in four schoolchildren are from such backgrounds, they argue that minority status will be a decisive element in upcoming elections.
What's certainly true is that neither party can afford complacency here. The last US election, in which the minority vote tipped the balance in Barack Obama's favour leaving Republicans floundering, offers lessons.
Much has been made of the notion that increased social mobility across generations will weaken the BME instinct to avoid the Conservatives. Phillips and Webber state: "The expectation would be that succeeding generations of minority voters may drift away from their parents' reflex support for Labour – or at the very least, might not inherit the first generation immigrant's hostility to Conservatives." Their data, however, finds "little evidence to support the hypothesis".
So too the idea that middle-class BME voters moving from more diverse inner-city locations to predominantly white areas will, by osmosis, adopt the political ideologies of their neighbours. Among BME voters, Labour has between a 24-50 percentage point advantage over the Tories. But before smugness sets in, it's always worth remembering that the devil is in the detail. In more diverse communities, Labour gets 60% of the BME vote compared with 48% in white areas.
Ethnic and religious differences can't and shouldn't be lumped together under the banner of "non-white" with an assumption that this will result in a homogeneous voting entity. What Phillips and Webber's research shows is the difference in voting behaviour of particular communities. Muslim and black African voters remain Labour supporters when in predominantly white areas, while the Labour-voting proportion of Indians of Hindu heritage falls from 39% in ethnically diverse areas to 13% in those that are white.
Even so, these voters are not running from the left into the grateful arms of the Tories or even the Liberal Democrats. They are drifting to smaller parties such as Ukip and the Greens. This isn't a win for the main parties.
The argument that "ethnic minority voters are more likely to turn to the Conservatives as they become more middle-class" is thus sloppy. It is predicated on the idea that social mobility will be translated to a move to the right for all BME voters.
The legacy of Enoch Powell – a prevailing belief that Tories are the party of and for the rich, and cuts that disproportionately affect BME communities – is proving very hard to shift. For their part, Labour may well feel pleased that legislation like the Equality Act of 2010 has stood them in good stead with BME voters. It must, nevertheless, ask itself why a fifth of such voters desert it when they become upwardly mobile.
Phillips and Webber make clear that in seats with small Tory majorities and large numbers of middle-class black or Pakistani voters, such as Enfield and Dewsbury, seemingly insignificant margins could give Labour a chance of winning. Yet this will only become a reality if Labour stops taking minority votes for granted; it needs to understand the reasons behind the drift. Gone are the days when either party could afford complacency over the BME vote as either already bagged or not worth bothering about. We count, and we're not all the same.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140425ea4p000ma
