{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1237"}
____
  
Enfield student's deportation would be 'very unfair', says shadow minister
Natasha Clark Kevin Rawlinson   
theguardian.com
833 words
24 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Sixth form student Yashika Bageerathi faces being sent back to life of abuse in Mauritius after Home Office refused her appeal to stay
The case of a teenager threatened with deportation without her family within days should be reviewed urgently, the shadow immigration minister has said.
More than a hundred people held a demonstration at the Home Office on Sunday in support of Yashika Bageerathi, who came to the UK in 2012 to seek shelter from threats of violence in her home country.
She faces being sent back to her home country Mauritius as early as Tuesday after the Home Office refused her appeal to stay in the UK. Her case was considered separately to that of her mother, brother and sister because, at the age of 19, she is considered an adult.
Yashika, 19, fled Mauritius after threats of violence by a family member, who is allegedly involved with drug dealing and accused of an attempted sexual assault.
Labour's David Hanson called the decision to remove her from the UK "very unfair" and urged the Home Office to consider a fresh appeal lodged by her lawyers arguing that deportation would infringe her right to a family life.
"It seems very unfair for the Home Office to deport Yashika without considering her family circumstances and to deport her alone, given the circumstances of her original move to the UK. I know that representations have been made and I hope the Home Office can review those urgently," Mr Hanson said.
Yashika has been attending Oasis Academy Hadley for more than two years, and she is now being held at Yarl's Wood detention centre.
Her friends, family and teachers say she is "one of their best students" and valuable member of the community. They are fighting for the government to allow her to stay to finish her A-levels. They have been urging the public to sign an online petition.
Speaking from Yarl's Wood, Yashika said she was extremely frightened. She was kept in the detention centre for 42 days from December, and was sent back there last Wednesday.
She spoke of the terror she feels at the prospect of going back to her home country. "My family will know where I am. He [the family member] is already after our lives, he says he has people waiting at the airport for us to come back. He lost a lot of money because of us to do with his drug-dealing."
Life in the detention centre is mixed. "Some people are actually really nice, while some treat you as if you are a criminal," she said. "I barely talk to anyone."
She said of her supporters: "I never expected this to happen … I've been getting so many phone calls from all of them, I love you all."
"I really don't have the words to describe what it has been like to study at Oasis Hadley. It's amazing. Everyone helps you, the teachers support you a lot. I can tell them anything, at any time."
A statement from the school said "to deport Yashika at any stage would cost the UK a valuable member of society. To do so just weeks before she is about to complete her education would be an uncompassionate and illogical act of absurdity."
She is predicted an A* in maths and french, and a B in chemistry. She has university offers at all five of her choices, including scholarships at Newcastle and Queen Mary's.
Headteacher Lynne Dawnes said: "Yashiska is a fantastic student who has made an outstanding contribution to the Academy. To send her away from her family is unjust."
An online petition to the Home Office to persuade them to let her stay to complete her education at Oasis Academy Hadley, has reached more than 13,000 signatures.
Supporters are using social media with the hashtags #FightForYashika and #SaveYasikha to spread the word.
Her mother said that the family left the country as a result of death threats from a family member and violence from local gangs.
"She is still a child because she is still in school," her mother said. "I have no house … no person there to take care of her."
David Burrowes, the MP for Enfield Southgate, the community where the school resides, and where Yashika lives, tweeted: "Am doing all I can to #FightForYashika and support her. Have made contact with Home Office to try and urgently stop deportation."
It is understood that Yashika's case was considered separately to that of her mother, brother and sister because, having turned 18, she was legally considered an adult. A Home Office spokesman said: "The UK has a proud history of granting asylum to those who need it and we consider every application on its individual merits. We do not routinely comment on individual cases."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140323ea3o0015p
