{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"523"}
____
  
Maria Miller aide says media storm is revenge for press regulation
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
1,249 words
9 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Mary Macleod texted Tory colleagues to say ongoing furore over culture secretary's expenses claims were 'due to Leveson'
An aide to Maria Miller has accused the media of whipping up a "witch-hunt" about the culture secretary's overclaimed expenses because she was an architect of press regulation and gay marriage legislation.
Mary Macleod said she thought newspapers had a "hidden agenda" in pursuing the story, after the Commons watchdog ordered Miller to pay back £5,800 in mortgage expenses and make an apology in the House of Commons.
As some Conservative MPs broke ranks to suggest the culture secretary should resign, Miller's parliamentary private secretary defended her boss on Sky News and insisted she had been cleared of all accusations.
"Every allegation has been dismissed," Macleod said. "I think it's Leveson and probably equal marriage as well. She was asked to make an apology, that is correct, but it was her that brought up the £5,800 that she felt she owed due to fluctuating interest rates and that is what she has paid back … Why do you think when allegations are being dismissed, they are continuing this story every day?
"Why would they continue unless there was a hidden agenda? And it's not just me saying this, there's a lot of MPs saying this. Maria has a lot of support and I think she's a brilliant culture secretary. I think that the media role behind this is about Leveson … They are not treating her fairly."
Macleod, who also accused newspapers of harassing the culture secretary's elderly parents and children outside her house, sent a text message to backbench Tory colleagues saying she believed there was a "witch-hunt on Maria due to Leveson". It added that Miller "would really appreciate your support".
A source close to Miller said Macleod was an independent MP and the culture secretary was absolutely not behind her decision to send a text to MPs. Miller has never said the press is pursuing the story because of the threat of regulation, the source added.
It came as Miller offered a second apology directly to her constituents in a column for the Basingstoke Gazette, saying: "I am devastated that this has happened, and that I have let you down."
However, she preceded the apology by saying she had been cleared of the central allegation and ended the column with a plea for the "focus to once again be on Basingstoke".
"I am pleased that the committee has fully dismissed all of the allegations made against me," she said. "Separately, I have already apologised and repaid an over-claim of my expenses, having myself drawn the committee's attention to the matter immediately I was aware of it."
Number 10 declined to say whether the prime minister thought there was a link to the Leveson reforms of the press, but a source said David Cameron was only interested in the fact that Miller was cleared of the central allegations and has done everything the Commons standards committee asked of her.
However, Macleod's decision to blame the press for the controversy over Miller's expenses is only likely to intensify the row within the Tory party about whether the culture secretary should still be in her job.
On Tuesday, more Conservative MPs turned on Miller, demanding reform of the ethics watchdog and calling for a new system to allow voters to sack their political representatives.
Cameron has fully backed Miller, but has been warned the row is turning toxic ahead of the European elections and the issue may come to a head at Wednesday's meeting of the 1922 Committee. The prime minister met Graham Brady, the head of the committee, on Monday and the impact of Miller's expenses on the reputation of the party was brought up, sources said. Philip Davies, the Shipley MP, argued the row is reflecting badly on the party.
Miller was told to repay £5,800 in excess mortgage claims and issue an apology. An independent commissioner originally recommended that Miller should repay £45,000, but this was reduced by the Commons standards committee of MPs.
Anger about the controversy was also evident in a Commons debate called by Labour MP John Mann, who is demanding an end to self-regulation by politicians and has led calls for Miller to lose her job.
Matthew Offord, Conservative MP for Hendon, said people had "raised the issue" of expenses with him on the doorstep and still believe that "nothing has changed". "Can I ask the leader of the House to take not only the mood of this place but also this country to make the necessary change we need?" he said.
Concerns were also raised by Bob Blackman, MP for Harrow East, about any more "legacy cases" about expenses under the previous regime. "We want to see the House cleared up and cleaned up and know that these cases are at an end," he said.
Jacob Rees-Mogg, another Conservative, said he supported self-regulation of MPs, but he would like to see "a proper and direct system of recall that would allow the electorate to determine" whether MPs keep their jobs.
Other Conservatives gave their support to the culture secretary in the Commons, with former minister Sir Gerald Howarth saying Miller was being hounded by the media, while Peter Bone said the real issue on the doorstep was immigration.
But outside the house, more of Miller's own colleagues added their voices of criticism, piling pressure on the prime minister to find a way of calming down the controversy.
Mark Field, MP for Cities of London and Westminster, said he had sympathy with the 2010 intake of MPs who are annoyed at being tainted by a fresh expenses scandal. He also told the BBC World at One that Miller had given an "unacceptably perfunctory" apology to the Commons.
Earlier, Zac Goldsmith, Tory MP for Richmond Park, who has campaigned for local areas to be able to sack bad MPs, became the latest backbencher to express concern. "It would be the prime minister's decision who he surrounds himself with. I am surprised that Maria Miller hasn't stepped down," he told BBC Radio 5 Live's Victoria Derbyshire show.
Boris Johnson, the London mayor, suggested on Tuesday morning that MPs should create a "proper, independent" standards watchdog. Asked on BBC Radio 4's Today programme whether Miller should keep her job, Johnson said: "I don't know the facts of the case in great detail, but it seems to me she is being hounded quite a lot and my natural sympathies go out to people in hounded situations – how about that?"
Esther McVey, a Tory work and pensions minister tipped for promotion, told ITV that Miller's 32-second Commons apology for overclaiming expenses was not how she would have done it herself, while Nicola Blackwood, a Tory aide in the business department, indicated that she would be "really quite worried indeed" if in the same position.
Jackie Doyle-Price, a backbench Tory, told the BBC she would not expect support from her colleagues ahead of local elections if she were in a similar position to the culture secretary.
Lord Tebbit, a former Tory chairman, and a group calling itself Conservative Grassroots, have previously called for Miller to be sacked.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140408ea49000xh
