{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2470"}
____
  
Government to accept proposed 3% minimum wage rise
Chris Leslie Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
543 words
5 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
David Cameron pledges to restore value of minimum wage and agrees rise to £6.50 should take place in October
David Cameron has confirmed the government will accept recommendations for a 3% rise in the minimum wage and has pledged to "restore its value" in the longer term.
The prime minister said he agreed that a rise to £6.50 should take place this October, in line with the advice of the Low Pay Commission, and after George Osborne said he ultimately wanted it to rise to £7.
Speaking in Coventry on Tuesday, Cameron said: "Restoring the value of the minimum wage is a vital part of how we secure a recovery for all, with economic security for every working family in Britain … So yes, I look forward to accepting this recommendation."
In a speech on the economy just two weeks before the budget, the prime minister rejected criticism of his public spending cuts by senior members of the church, including Archbishop Vincent Nichols, and many Church of England bishops.
Cameron said it was wrong to let British taxpayers fund people to live a life "with no purpose, dependent on benefits" and to open the country's borders to rapid immigration. He said: "I don't care whether you are the leader of the Labour party or the leader of the church, this kind of failure is just wrong."
The prime minister also suggested he wanted to use future savings on public spending to fund tax cuts. He said "every efficiency" found could help provide "a bit of extra cash" for hard-pressed families – enough for parents to pay for trainers or a birthday meal for their children.
"Too often we've given the impression that we're just about fixing problems rather than changing things for a purpose," he said. "It's not just what we are doing that matters, it's why. It's all about values.
"And the most important value right now – after a difficult time for our country – is giving people a sense of economic security and peace of mind."
Senior Tories are calling for Osborne to lift the tax burden on middle-class earners by increasing the level of income at which people have to pay a higher rate of tax from £41,500 to £44,000.
However, Cameron has said he is prioritising tax cuts for the lowest earners, making it more likely Osborne will reveal a further increase in the level at which people start paying tax from next year's threshold of £10,000.
Cameron's attempts to cast his party as one that would help workers was ridiculed by the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, Chris Leslie.
He said: "David Cameron has revealed his true values by the choices he has made. He's chosen to give the top 1% of earners a £3bn tax cut while everyone else is worse off.
"Working people have seen their wages fall in real terms by over £1,600 a year on average under David Cameron's government. Tax and benefit changes since 2010 have also left families £891 a year worse off."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140304ea35002uv
