{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"182"}
____
  
Yarl's Wood death: family and fellow detainees tell of shock and despair
Diane Taylor   
theguardian.com
1,311 words
4 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Women at immigration removal centre plan memorial service for Christine Case, who collapsed and died last Sunday
The white daffodils in the yard at Yarl's Wood immigration removal centre in Bedfordshire are in full bloom. On Sunday, exactly one week after the death of 40-year-old Christine Case at the centre, female detainees plan to cut them and take them along to a special memorial service they have organised for their friend. The women are preparing songs, poems and other tributes to mark Case's sudden death, which has left them all in shock.
Just after 7.30am last Sunday Case's roommate raised the alarm. Something was clearly wrong with her as she staggered across the room. Staff from Serco, the private contractor that runs the centre, attended.
Case collapsed into the arms of her roommate. A spokesman for East of England ambulance service said a call was received from the centre at 8.17am to help a woman experiencing cardiac arrest. An ambulance reached the centre 10 minutes later.
The ambulance spokesman confirmed that a defibrillator was on the scene and that Case was pronounced dead approximately one hour later.
A postmortem found that Case, a Jamaican national who had been in Yarl's Wood for 10 days, died of a massive pulmonary thrombo-embolism with secondary causes obesity and a large fibroid uterus. An inquest at Ampthill coroner's court in Bedfordshire was opened and adjourned on Wednesday. A full hearing is scheduled for September of this year.
Case arrived in the UK on a visitor's visa 14 years ago and is understood to have overstayed. She was due to be removed from the UK on 27 March, but made a fresh application for leave to remain in the UK which was understood to be under consideration by the Home Office at the time of her death.
The family are now waiting for a full explanation about how and why their sister died, and why there was an eight-hour delay before they were informed.
Case's brother Wesley said: "Christine died early on Sunday morning but we weren't informed about her death until 4pm that day. When I got the news my whole body went numb and I couldn't stop shaking. I haven't been able to sleep since then. I can't believe that I spoke to Christine on Friday night and was planning to go and visit her on the day she died. Now we are waiting for answers about why and how our sister died. I'm upset that it took them so long to inform us about Christine's death."
Case's sister Dianne said: "Christine was such a lovely, bubbly person. She would do anything to help anyone. We talked about what we would do when she was released from Yarl's Wood. The first thing we were going to do was go to church together. It was very hard to go and collect her belongings from the detention centre – her purse, her keys and her bus pass – knowing that she won't be using them any more. Christine's mum, Monica Turner, lives in Jamaica. We have asked the Home Office if she will be granted a visa to come over for the funeral but we don't know yet if she will be allowed to come to bury her daughter. "
A spokesman for Serco said that Case had received a comprehensive health check from a nurse and a doctor the day she arrived at Yarl's Wood. The spokesman said that the time delay was because Case had not provided next-of-kin details when she arrived at Yarl's Wood and the matter had to be passed over to the Home Office to deal with. He said he had been alerted about the incident as soon as the centre made the 999 call and that Serco was keen to inform Case's family of her death as soon as possible.
Four of the detainees of the centre have spoken of the final minutes of Case's life. They say they heard her crying in pain and watched the Serco staff and then the on-site medical staff arrive in her room.
"I heard her crying and screaming in pain from some time after 7.30 until I went for my breakfast at around 10 past eight," said one woman. "After that Christine went silent and I didn't hear anything more from her. You could tell from the way she was screaming that she was in a lot of pain before she died."
Another detainee said she had done Case's hair for her the day before she died. "She complained that she couldn't breathe properly and that she had a pain in her heart," she said.
On the day that Case died the women in Yarl's Wood staged a sit-down protest in the corridor and refused to attend roll call or to eat lunch or dinner.
"We have all been crying and wondering if we will be the next one to die here," said one woman. "It's not dignified to die in detention, to be returned to your parents in a coffin. The UK has the rule of law that some other countries don't have and that is why some people run here to be safe. But when we come here the laws work against us. Christine's death has affected us all so much. It has taken away our last hope."
The death of Case was raised in parliament on Monday. The shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, raised concerns about the death. The immigration minister James Brokenshire said: "I reassure the house of the seriousness that we attach to the incident. We expect all issues to be properly investigated and pursued."
There have been 14 deaths in immigration removal centres in the past 10 years. A few weeks ago the prison and probation service ombudsman published a Learning the Lessons Bulletin following repeated concerns about these deaths.
The bulletin flagged up a lack of clear and effective systems to ensure that the nature of emergencies is correctly communicated and that healthcare and detention staff in these centres are sufficiently trained and equipped to deal with medical emergencies. In three deaths before Case's that are currently under investigation, an inadequate emergency response, delays in calling an ambulance and healthcare staff not accessing emergency equipment quickly enough have been flagged up as problems.
Emma Mlotshwa, co-ordinator of the charity Medical Justice, which works to protect the health of immigration detainees, said: "We are mindful that concerns have been identified in the past by the prison and probation ombudsman about the response to medical emergencies in immigration removal centres.
"Our independent doctors have come across instances of inadequate healthcare in detention. We are anxious for the outcome of the inquest and hope it does not reveal failings in healthcare as in past cases."
The family's lawyer, Irene Nembhard of Birnberg Peirce & Partners, said: "There is always a great concern when someone dies in custody. The family want to know that everything was done for Christine in Yarl's Wood that would have been done for her had this happened in the community."
The director of Yarl's Wood, John Tolland, said: "This tragic event has affected us all deeply. Ms Case had been in the centre for 10 days. The wellbeing of those in our care at Yarl's Wood is always our top priority, and the quality of the healthcare we provide has been endorsed by recent reports by both HM chief inspector of prisons and the Care Quality Commission.'
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140403ea440015p
