{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3782"}
____
  
Ukip can only be beaten 'if MPs embrace stricter rules for themselves'
Patrick Wintour   
theguardian.com
697 words
28 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Fabian pamphlet says Ukip support stems from deep disillusionment with Westminster, and urges handing of more power to local communities
Mainstream parties would only see off Nigel Farage's brand of anti-establishment populism if politicians embraced both stricter rules on their conduct and handed power down to local communities, a new Fabian pamphlet has warned.
The work has been seen as a further sign that the Left was waking up to the long-term threat posed by Ukip, including a growing belief that Ukip was drawing support not just due to its view on Europe or immigration, but from a deep seated disillusionment with Westminster politics and politicians.
The Fabian pamphlet stemmed from workshops with groups of non- or swing voters into what had made them disillusioned with politics and what might revive respect for the political class.
The research found that "almost every non-voter or swing voter interviewed talked about changing politicians themselves: who they are, the way that they talk and act, and the kinds of issues they prioritise. For many citizens, a lack of trust in politicians not to abuse the system, and a belief that they don't understand the issues that matter to local communities, is an insurmountable barrier to feeling that they have any kind of control over decision-making."
The workshops aimed to test ideas that might reduce the democratic deficit. But the voters themselves demanded more to deal with MPs' conduct, suggesting the impact of the expenses scandal five years ago was still potent. The focus groups proposed a stricter set of rules for MPs, restrictions so that MPs had only one job, a requirement to spend more time in their constituencies, further transparency about salary and expenses, and a reduction in the overall number of MPs.
The pamphlet pointed out that Ukip was arguably weakest as an anti-establishment party on the issue of expenses, yet few mainstream parties liked to attack it on the issue, arguing it merely reminded voters of the general issue of expenses and so lowered the general perception of politics.
The Fabian research into how to address the democratic deficit found that swing voters were most interested in taking power from central government to local councils. They were not highly engaged by the idea of a constituency right to recall MP, or reducing votes to 16.
The shadow leader of the Lords, Lady Royall, writing in the Fabian pamphlet, urged politicians to recognise the scale of the problem. She warned that there was a serious danger that populist parties of the right could do so well in the European elections that European institutions would become unworkable. She wrote that the European parliament could be made "near unworkable by the rise of inward looking groups with neither the inclination nor ability to see Europe's democratic institutions work for the people of Europe. Beppe Grillo and Nigel Farage's blends of populism share little, but together they threaten to bring it all to a grinding halt."
Politics was viewed by many as a game played by a small elite, with the great majority of people "neither able nor welcome to join in", she wrote, adding that for many voters "many politicians don't sound or behave like normal human beings".
David Lammy, the Labour MP for Tottenham, called for the GLA and London mayor to be given increased decision making powers for the capital, including the ability to hold on to more of London's tax receipts.
He wrote: "On entire areas of policy – such as childcare or education – the mayor is barely able to influence what happens in the city they were elected to serve. More powers are slowly being devolved to City Hall, but at a rate that is far too slow and with a scope that is far too narrow. Instead, the London Assembly should be given more fiscal power. London should be allowed to keep hold of the taxes it generates, and its leaders allowed to use that revenue to invest in the city."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140427ea4s000ji
