{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"107"}
____
  
Yashika Bageerathi's final appeal against deportation rejected by judge
Mark Tran   
theguardian.com
596 words
3 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Lord Justice Richards refuses to grant emergency injunction as Mauritian student, 19, is taken to airport
A judge has rejected a final appeal against the deportation of a 19-year-old Mauritian student hours before she was due to depart Heathrow.
Lawyers for Yashika Bageerathi lodged papers with a judge at the high court seeking an emergency injunction to block her removal and give her time to take her case to the court of appeal as she was being driven to Heathrow on Wednesday to await her flight at 9pm.
Lord Justice Richards refused to order a stay of deportation in a telephone hearing.
A spokesman for the Oasis Academy Hadley in north London, where Bageerathi has been studying, said she was set to fly out of terminal 4 on an Air Mauritius flight. This will be the third attempt to send her back to Mauritius in little over a week.
Bageerathi was "very distressed and worried", the spokesman added.
He said: "She is on her way in the van but I really hope we can keep her here. We're encouraging everyone to tweet Air Mauritius and to phone them to stop this."
She was supposed to have gone on Sunday, but her supporters said Air Mauritius had refused to fly her out, following an earlier refusal by British Airways. But despite a vocal campaign for Bageerathi to stay so she can finish her A-levels, the Home Office is adamant that she should return to Mauritius.
On Monday, James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, told the House of Commons that the Home Office would not intervene. He said her case had been through the proper legal process and the Home Office's decision that she did not need protection from violence or persecution in her homeland had been upheld.
Brokenshire said that "given the extent and level of judicial and other scrutiny", the home secretary, Theresa May, had decided not to intervene.
Bageerathi has been held at Yarl's Wood immigration removal centre near Bedford since 19 March. She came to the UK with her mother, sister and brother in 2011 to escape a relative who was physically abusive, and they claimed asylum last summer. But the family were told they all faced the threat of deportation. Bageerathi is being deported without her mother and two siblings because, as an adult, her case was considered separate to theirs.
A petition calling on authorities to stop the deportation has gathered more than 175,000 signatures on the website Change.org.
Campaigners, who include her schoolmates and the school principal, said: "Yashika Bageerathi arrived in the UK along with her mother and brother in 2012 to escape abuse and danger. In that time, Yashika has proved herself a model student and valuable member of the community. However, now that she is legally deemed an adult, she is to be torn apart from her family and deported to Mauritius without even having the chance to compete her A-levels."
More than 40 of her fellow students gathered in London on Saturday to protest against the decision, carrying banners and singing slogans in support of her right to stay. A spokesman for her campaign urged her supporters to call Air Mauritius asking the company not to take her back.
He said: "We have to keep her in the country because we are afraid that once she is gone it will be 'out of sight, out of mind'."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140402ea4300109
