{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2513"}
____
  
The evidence for a rational case against migration is crumbling away
Anne Perkins   
theguardian.com
815 words
6 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Anne Perkins: First thoughts: Theresa May blocking an inconvenient immigration report shows how much politicians rely on emotions rather than fact
Politicians like to tell voters that their policies are a rational response to a perfectly discoverable set of facts. That is the first untruth, for as they know policy is, at its best, an attempt to impose a framework on an emotional mess of romanticism, reaction, self-interest, altruism and all their many subsets. The debate about migration, which has now reached a new pitch of absurdity, illustrates this eternal truth in slow and painful steps.
Last night it emerged that the Home Office has been sitting on a report that disproves one of the big claims it made about migration – that for every 100 immigrants of working age, 23 British workers lost their jobs (or were, as the economists say, "displaced from the market"). The absurdity is that the original statistics, which came from the government's migration advisory committee, have been undermined ever since they were first published two years ago by official labour market surveys. The latest shows that nearly nine out of every 10 new jobs created go to British workers and just 13% go to people from outside Britain. But they suited Conservative ambitions to reflect voters' concerns about migration back to them, as a problem solved.
From the start, the MAC figures were considered dodgy by people in the know. As Jonathan Portes from the National Institute for Economic and Social Research points out in a blog today, the report's own authors admitted anxieties, and the way they presented their findings put, what we non-economists would call, a fair bit of spin on them. So the problem is not with the new report that the home secretary, Theresa May, would rather not publish, but with her original one, that she used as evidence to justify renewed efforts to limit migration.
Like all politicians who try to pretend they're doing science, May is having a difficult time with these numbers. Last week, her preferred target – net migration – suddenly reversed from its promising if slow downward trend towards the "tens of thousands" target on which the Tories campaigned in 2010, and leapt in the opposite direction by a head-in-the-hands 30%: 212,000 more people came into the country last year than left it.
The home secretary's problem is becoming a commonplace. In every government department, the collapse in voters' confidence in politics means that there is a bottomless appetite for external authority. Policy must at least appear to be developed by the scientific method, as if the process of government were some kind of repeatable laboratory experiment. One consequence is that statistics are required to carry a burden greater than they can bear. Scores of committees have been set up – like the Migration Advisory Committee – that are described as both "government" and "independent". For self-evident reasons, this often ends in tears.
The Home Office insists that it's not suppressing this latest report, merely awaiting completion of peer review. Curiously that's just the same explanation used by the environment department after sitting on a report into the rapid growth in the use of food banks that came out, finally, last month. It had been completed nearly a year earlier and – this is a surprise – it countered a ministerial claim that more people were using food banks just because there were more food banks.
Governments are entirely right to want to show sceptical voters that they have reliable methods of developing policies and measuring outcomes, but finding a way of doing it is at the very most a work in progress. The danger is that while they try to find a way of doing it, voters just get more and more sceptical. On migration, voters clearly hold two conflicting thoughts. They like parties that promise to do something, but simultaneously do not expect them actually to succeed in doing it.
And oh, that is the joy of Farage. His great insight is to dispense altogether with the framework with which other parties attempt to mediate difference and channel emotion. Instead, he just keeps on pumping up the idea of the party as an unashamed repository for nostalgia and reaction. Who needs a programme in which no one believes, even one that its leader thinks is drivel, when preaching the language of betrayal brings a warm glow of recognition to a swath of the electorate.
The evidence to support a rational case against migration is crumbling away. That makes countering the irrational one even tougher. But the really challenging piece of evidence, which can't be analysed away, is that not talking about it just stokes it up some more.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140305ea360018j
