{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3729"}
____
  
Lord Deben attributes 'unpleasant' Ukip's success to Labour's failure
Fiona Harvey   
theguardian.com
694 words
22 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Lack of an appealing alternative will lead to protest voting in the European elections, says the Tory politician formerly known as John Selwyn Gummer
The UK Independence Party, led by Nigel Farage and tipped for a resounding result in Thursday's European polls, owes its success to the failure of the Labour party to offer an "appealing alternative", according to one of the UK's most senior Tories.
Lord Deben, who as John Selwyn Gummer served under prime ministers Margaret Thatcher and John Major, told the Guardian that voters who were at odds with the current coalition felt they had nowhere else to turn. Voters wishing to register a "protest vote" might normally opt for the opposition, but with the Liberal Democrats in government, they faced a choice between Ukip and Labour – and Ed Miliband had failed to offer an argument sufficiently tempting, he said.
"There are people who would normally turn to an alternative, which is Labour, who are clearly not seeing an alternative that is very attractive," he said. "The traditional alternative of Labour is not attracting people. People want to protest. And the number of people [planning to vote for Ukip] is what happens."
If Ukip should win a large share of the vote on Thursday, Tories should resist any temptation to turn towards its policies, he said, and should talk about the benefits of being in Europe and of taking an "international" and "moderate" view on key issues, from the economy to the environment. "Moderation is not as exciting in politics as extremism," he warned.
Lord Deben, who is chairman of the Committee on Climate Change, laid into Ukip for what he called "a fundamental lack of generosity, a lack of solutions, a lack of willingness to understand" the complexities of governing. He called Nigel Farage "ungenerous and unpleasant" over his remarks on wishing not to live near Romanian immigrants. "He did not say that because he was tired [as Farage has claimed] but because that revealed what he really thinks."
He challenged the proposition, put forward by Ukip and supported by some in the Conservative party, that overseas aid should be cut in order to improve the UK government's deficit figures. "We have to tell people what is true," he said. "We are a very rich nation. Of the average amount paid in tax [by average wage earners in a year], about 37p is spent on overseas aid. Is that an exorbitant amount? It is the amount you put in the charity box. To try to stir people up on this question is wrong. It is just wrong."We need to talk about decency. It is a terrible suggestion by Ukip that you can be careless about people living in other parts of the world. We are giving a tiny amount of money in overseas aid." The overseas aid budget is currently ringfenced and so has been protected from cuts.
Lord Deben said that politicians such as those in Ukip, who are outside the main parties, were taking advantage of people's fear of change. "Ukip plays on their understanding of fears, of people faced with a rapidly changing world. But it is the fundamental job of a politician to tell the truth." Ukip, he said, had not told the truth, that the UK would have to carry on changing to keep up with the modern world. He also said Ukip had made "untrue" claims about the amount of UK legislation that originates in Brussels.
But Lord Deben also challenged politicians in the three main parties for being "too snooty" to listen to people's real concerns. "We have to listen to people. It's wrong to be so snooty. People have understandable concerns, about the economy and the environment."
He said that climate change was one of the biggest challenges faced by the world, but that people were "understandably" unwilling to deal with the consequences, because they would entail massive changes to the economy and to people's way of life in developed countries.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140521ea5m00462
