{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2804"}
____
  
Cutting legal aid is an easy gimmick – this is part of a pattern
Sadiq Khan   
theguardian.com
873 words
28 February 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Sadiq Khan: The need to make savings was an opportunity for radical reform. Chris Grayling has chosen instead to weaken the justice system
Plans for the criminal legal aid system announced by the Ministry of Justice today will bring major changes to the way legal aid is procured.
Chris Grayling's package will cut fees for barristers and solicitors and, if predictions are correct, the changes could mean the eradication of hundreds of local legal firms up and down the country, and the loss of some serious specialist expertise. Cheapness will trump quality of legal representation; fee structures could put undue pressure on defendants to plead guilty, even when innocent.
The Ministry of Justice's own report, commissioned from KPMG, makes it clear that in London the model won't even work. This risks leaving the capital's justice system in a mess. The ramifications for our justice system generally could be more miscarriages of justice and a dramatic loss of public confidence.
Changes will prevent many vulnerable groups accessing legal aid to challenge wrong decisions by the state, receiving harsh criticism from the UN high commissioner for refugees, the children's commissioner, Shelter and the Refugee Council. Secretary of state for justice Chris Grayling knows that neither prisoners nor immigrants invoke massive sympathy from the public, yet the very small amounts of money his further cuts to civil legal aid will save are dramatically dwarfed by the displacement of costs on to other arms of government and the damage it will do to access to justice.
What's more, those working in legal aid are among the most diverse in the profession, and it is a crucial route by which a wider range of backgrounds are getting into our judiciary. These changes could shut down this important avenue into the legal profession with disastrous implications for diversity.
There is a pattern in all this. Attacks on human rights; curtailing judicial review; restricting no-win, no-fee cases; and restrictions in access to legal aid all add up to a huge assault on the rights of individual citizens, and a government insulated from being held to account. This is fundamentally wrong. But to Grayling, a lord chancellor more interested in gimmicks than serious reform, none of this seems to be of the slightest concern. Our precious justice system will be all the weaker as a result.
Legal aid gets a bad press. Some rail against handing taxpayers' money to criminals, others attack fat cat lawyers, while some argue that we spend far more on legal aid than other countries. But let's get some facts straight: saying that legal aid is just about criminals is wrong – most goes to people before any decision is taken on their guilt. After all, our legal system rightly presumes innocence during a court process where legal aid plays its biggest role. Victims want to know that the true perpetrators of their crime are convicted – legal aid helps achieve this.
Legal aid is central to righting wrongs and rectifying injustice. High-profile cases have benefited from legal aid, like the family of Jean Charles de Menezes; Janice Sharp, mother of Gary McKinnon, who said her son "would not be here" without it; and Gerry Conlon, one of the wrongly imprisoned Guildford Four who said he would still be in jail if it weren't for legal aid.
Besides, you simply cannot compare our legal aid spend with that of other countries with distinctly different legal systems – it's like comparing apples and pears. Legal aid is one of the three branches of our welfare state, yet we spend less than 0.5% of GDP on it. In a recent ComRes poll, 68% thought this modest amount was a worthwhile investment in our basic freedoms.
It depresses me to say it, but the government has stooped into stereotype and prejudice with its remorseless attacks on legal aid and smearing those who work in it. No one in the justice system denies we need to make savings; nor do I. That is why experts have come forward with alternative proposals. Each has been dismissed out of hand by Grayling. I know from my own experiences how much is wasted on abandoned and delayed trials which, if the lord chancellor seriously had the desire to do something about, could deliver considerable efficiency savings.
This is a chance to be seriously radical; nothing should be off-limits – streamlining the way our courts work, using town halls and council buildings for low-level proceedings, stripping out duplication of court buildings in towns up and down the country. We should be forensic in what we are prepared to do to protect access to justice. And with Labour's zero-based spending review we will be truly radical about how our legal system functions.
Instead, the lord chancellor has gone for the easy option of salami-slicing legal aid and imposing his crackpot plans. And in the process he has managed to preside over the greatest loss of confidence by the legal profession in a lord chancellor in living memory.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140227ea2s002ut
