{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1425"}
____
  
Power to make terror suspects stateless concerns human rights committee
theguardian.com
485 words
4 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Parliamentary joint committee says Theresa May's late addition to immigration bill risks breach of UK's international obligations
MPs and peers have raised significant concerns over Theresa May's new powers to render naturalised British citizens stateless if their behaviour "seriously prejudices" the national interest.
A report by parliament's joint committee on human rights says there is a "very great risk of breaching the UK's international obligations" if the new power is used to prevent a naturalised British citizen returning to the UK from overseas.
The new power was a last-minute addition to May's immigration bill, currently going through the House of Lords, to help thwart a rebellion by Tory rightwingers over tougher measures on the deportation of foreign criminals.
The new power to strip a person of their UK passport will only apply to people born abroad who have become British citizens. It is most likely to be used against terror suspects as a way of making it harder for them to return to Britain if they travel abroad.
Peers and MPs on the joint human rights committee say there is a real danger that, if used, these powers would breach Britain's international obligations to the country that had admitted the British citizen, as they would then have a stateless person on their hands.
The committee also says it is surprised that the home secretary has refused to tell parliament how many times her existing powers have been used to deprive UK citizenship from those who hold dual nationality, and how many of those cases have been based on secret evidence that cannot be made public.
The MPs and peers also want safeguards to protect the children of those who are made stateless under these powers and make sure their interests are also considered when such an order is made.
Dr Hywel Francis, the chair of the joint committee on human rights, said Britain had historically been a champion of efforts to reduce statelessness and it was disappointing to see this position shift in such a radical way.
"The new power will lead to an increase in the number of stateless people and exposes British citizens to the risk of being left stateless. As the supreme court recently said, statelessness is an 'evil': it takes away the right to have rights.
"The power does not in itself put the UK in breach of any of its international obligations in relation to statelessness but it does pose the risk of breaching our international obligations to other states," said Francis.
"We are particularly concerned about the power being used when citizens are abroad. Parliament needs more information about how similar powers have been used in the recent past and assurances about how this power will be used in the future."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140303ea34002pc
