{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"66"}
____
  
Scrap immigration cap, Tory MP tells Cameron
Nicholas Watt   
theguardian.com
559 words
26 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Mark Field launches Conservatives for Managed Migration amid fears cap is impractical and risks damaging economic growth
Britain's future as a trading nation is being threatened by the Tory cap on immigration, a leading Conservative backbencher has warned as he called on David Cameron to stop trying to "out-Ukip Ukip".
Mark Field, the MP for the Cities of London and Westminster who was speaking ahead of the launch of a new moderate group on immigration, said the cap was impractical and would not be met in this parliament.
Field is launching the Conservatives for Managed Migration group amid fears among moderate Tories and business leaders that Cameron risks damaging economic growth with his pledge to cut net migration to the tens of thousands.
The government has all but admitted that it will fail to meet the target by the next election after official figures released at the time of last week's budget showed the Treasury expects net migration to run at 150,000 next year.
The prime minister is still officially committed to the target to cut net migration to tens of thousands even after figures released last month by the Office for National Statistics showed a net flow of 212,000 migrants to Britain in the 12 months to the end of September. This compared with 154,000 in the previous year.
Business leaders are concerned that the government, which is powerless to stop migration from the EU, is preventing talented migrants from entering Britain from outside the EU. Field said Britain was in danger of losing future "ambassadors for the UK" from India, China and South Korea.
The backbencher told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: "There is a fundamental problem with having what we now have which is this net migration policy which targets headline numbers alone. Very few voters out there believe we can deliver on it. All the evidence suggests it is now moving in the wrong direction. Very few businesses believe it is practical. It risks sending out the wrong signals about our openness and Britain's traditional openness as a trading nation to the world at large.
"One of the problems is that we have been victims of our own success. One of the reasons why we are not able to achieve the net migration figure is that our economy is so over performing and outperforming our neighbours that many people are coming from Spain and Portugal and France – [they] want to come to these shores, fewer people want to leave and therefore net migration is going up and up."
Field called for a calm debate and for the Tories to distance themselves from the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, who has called for immigration controls even if they damaged economic growth.
He said: "We need a more calm debate about this. We are not going to be able to out-Ukip Ukip. I have a lot of respect for Nigel Farage but his view is even if it affects economic growth we should close the drawbridge. I don't think it is sensible to try and pursue that particular line of argument. We are a global trading nation and we need to encourage the fit, the brightest and the best."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140325ea3q000p4
