{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2043"}
____
  
Ukip attracts more hostile headlines, but Nigel Farage's support grows
Roy Greenslade   
theguardian.com
789 words
28 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Roy Greenslade on how critical coverage in national newspapers is making no difference to Ukip
Ukip is top of the national newspapers' agenda yet again today. The party gets front page coverage at The Times and The Guardian, and is also the subject of headlines in the Daily Telegraph, The Independent, The Sun, Daily Mail, Daily Express and Daily Star.
Most of the articles are negative, nosing off on criticism of Ukip by two cabinet ministers - health secretary Jeremy Hunt and treasury secretary Danny Alexander.
By contrast, The Times's splash centres on a claim that "Labour's core vote" will be "hit hard" due to defections to Ukip because the party has become too middle class.
It is based on an interview with Lord Glasman, described as "a policy guru" and "a leading ally" of Labour leader Ed Miliband.
Further down the article is the reference to Hunt's accusation that Ukip is attracting racists such as the Ukip candidate William Henwood who suggested that comedian Lenny Henry should emigrate to a "black country".
Hunt was, said The Times, echoing David Cameron's "infamous remarks" in 2006 that Ukip was made up of "fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists".
The Hunt attack was the Telegraph's page 2 lead, as it was in the Mail here. And was also a strong page 2 top in The Sun.
The Independent preferred to highlight a coming attack by Danny Alexander, who is expected to accuse Ukip of "appearing to almost revel" in the outcry sparked by its election posters and the "racist" remarks of its candidates.
It was the latest YouGov survey, showing Ukip is ahead in the poll of voting intentions in next month's European election, that caught the attention of The Guardian. And, with 2,051 comments below that story as I write, it has clearly moved the paper's readers too.,
Similarly, the poll gave the Express its main page 2 headline: "Tory jitters as Ukip set to gain 31% of euro vote".
More interesting than the news stories were the commentaries. The Mail argued that although it could not countenance Ukip's leaders being trusted "with the levers of power" it thinks it is time for the mainstream parties to grasp why Nigel Farage's party is attracting so much support,
Abuse, it says, won't stop voters backing Ukip. Why> Because "the overwhelming majority of Ukip supporters are decent people, heartily fed up with having their views ignored by the political class." It continues:
"If they want to regain lost ground, the mainstream parties should try heeding voters' wishes on such issues as uncontrolled immigration, human rights madness and the relentless surrender of our sovereignty to Brussels."
In the Telegraph, Harry Wallop agrees that the media ordure heaped upon Ukip and Farage is making no discernible difference to the party's standing.
After listing the gaffes, the allegations of racism and the rogue elements within Ukip, he quotes politics professor Tim Bale as saying:
"They may appear to be gaffes to commentators, but they are not necessarily gaffes to their core supporters...
They are articulating a wider feeling that politics has become disconnected from ordinary people. The key to understanding them is their populism rather than their policies. Ukip's appeal is that they are outside that Westminster elite.
Both European integration and the immigration we saw under the Labour government play into that feeling, because those are two things that large numbers of people in this country don't agree with, and which were done without really consulting us."
He also points out that it is just not possible to attract the support of 32 per cent of voters – even in a poll – if drawing from a shallow pool of voters.
Wallop goes on to contend that "the old pattern of success in the Euro elections followed by failure at the general election may not repeat itself" in Ukip's case.
Leo McKinstry says much the same in the Express, if in more truculent and supportive terms:
"Ukip's surge is a quintessentially British rebellion against the thought police, the race relations commissars, the diversity doctrinaires and EU propagandists. The establishment's anti-Ukip efforts also exude the foulest stench of hypocrisy...
The great irony of Ukip is that it owes its success to the political establishment. If the main parties had not derided the views of the people for so long, especially on immigration and the EU, then Farage's party would never have gained ground.
The establishment is about to pay a heavy and deserved price for that disdain."
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140428ea4s000bc
