{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1642"}
____
So cats are giving us TB? It must be time to fight back
Naomi McAuliffe   
theguardian.com
708 words
28 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Naomi McAuliffe: Let's stop pussy-footing around and get rid of these monsters before they've had their wicked way with us
So what we have long suspected has finally come true; cats are trying to kill humans. Those furry evil geniuses who have been plotting from the comfort of your very own lap have revealed themselves as carriers of tuberculosis trying their best to infect their owners.
For years we've been wondering why they've been staring at us like that, why they are so withholding with their affection, why white cats only ever sit on your black clothes. It is all becoming terrifyingly clear now. First, they came for the sparrows and I said nothing.
The choice seems clear and we have a precedent in this country; we are going to have to start culling our cats. It might not have worked on badgers, but that doesn't mean it won't work for Socks, Mufti and Chairman Miaow.
People are already making the case for culling cats but it is not that straightforward.
Firstly, cats have to be killed nine times, which is hugely labour intensive, and they can't be killed by pushing them off high places.
Secondly, we would have to stop ancient millionaires leaving their fortune to their cats as this money can be used to further their murderous regime. We'd need to freeze the assets of the hundreds of cat charities wilfully keeping them alive.
Thirdly, we need to target the ruthless feline PR machine by taking down all internet videos of kittens on roombas, kittens saying "yum" as they eat, cats playing pianos, fighting with printers and most definitely Simon's Cat. Basically half the internet needs to be taken down. As the other half of the internet is porn, we also need to hunt down and ban all the cat porn, starting with this.
The Daily Mail needs to get onside, perhaps by pointing out that domestic cats are immigrants or that women are delaying childbirth because they are getting cats instead. But no one show them Cats That Look Like Hitler. There are, however, a couple of problems with killing all the cats in the UK.
There is a strong cultural association between women and cats, probably dating back to when witches roamed freely, so any cull is likely to be viewed as misogynistic. Cat bin lady was not only a harbinger of this anti-cat fervour, she was also a traitor to her gender. Feminists are already well-equipped for the protests, they've already got the "Hands off our pussies" placards.
Cats have got some very powerful allies, and not just Blofeld. Lenin liked his cat, Mark Twain hinted at the masonic link to cats when he said "When a man loves cats, I am his friend and comrade without further introduction", and I for one am not messing with Gilgamesh. And although these people may be dead or fictional, there are humans that the cats haven't already killed who will still be willing to shill for the cat military-industrial complex.
Brian May may be busy with the badgers but we can rope in Elaine Paige, who would leap at the chance of rerecording Memory with Postman Pat. Yusuf Islam demonstrated his stand against felines when he changed his name – when are we going to see this kind of patriotism from Cat Deeley?
No. It is clear that we must welcome our cat overlords and tolerate the killer pussies among them. Until David Cameron is willing to publicly execute Larry the cat and the other 100,000 cats on the British government's payroll (yes, that's how many are employed to keep down the mice population on government property, jobs that could be done by British workers), then there will be no leadership in the fight against them. Plus, we can't give dog-owners the smug satisfaction, or even more of our telly will be invaded by Gaby Roslin hosting Britain's Doggiest Dog. In this ongoing war, I'm siding with the cats.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140328ea3s001gu
