{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2044"}
____
  
TS Eliot and the politics of culture
Roz Kaveney   
theguardian.com
868 words
28 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Roz Kaveney: TS Eliot – part 5: The poet's meditative writings in the late 1920s and early 30s mask a certain chill
TS Eliot was one of the most intellectually adroit of poets, a fine mind with a breadth of cultural and other knowledge that few writers since can equal or even attempt to emulate. He often felt humbled by the weight of all that had come before him; much of what he says in his essay Tradition and the Individual Talent is attractively modest in the limited programme it proposes for poetry – not to explore ever finer and newer and more original emotion, but to find, through technique, a coldly rational way of honing language for its own sake "not the expression of personality but an escape from personality … Only those who have personality and emotions can know what it means to want to escape from those things".
Like Stravinsky setting aside the rhythmic invention and freedom of Le Sacre du Printemps for the chill neo-classical beauty of Orpheus or Apollon Musagete, Eliot wanted in the later 1920s and early 30s a poetry of concentration and meditation rather than the brilliant insightful dangerous randomness of The Waste Land. His conversion to high Anglican Christianity, and the growing dominance of his work by devotional and religious themes, made this programme inevitable – he could not allow himself to stray again into the dangerous irrational territory of Sweeney Agonistes. Indeed, in his 1933 lectures After Strange Gods, he specifically calls the irrationalist neo-primitivist strain in modernism diabolical, especially in the case of DH Lawrence, whom he admires but sees as a source of spiritual danger to anyone less versed in the true meaning of orthodoxy than Eliot himself.
When we look at Eliot's writings on culture, we see a fine critical intelligence allied to a fear of possible consequences that is deeply terrifying in the way that in it elitist arrogance masquerades as humility and passionate concern to keep things as they are as a broadly accepting humanism. After Strange Gods is a work that Eliot never reprinted, with good reason, but he did not disavow it so much as replace its clear statements with vaguer ones. Notoriously – although in 1933 the persecution of Jews by the new Nazi regime was only just beginning – he stated that in the sort of cohesive intellectual culture and organic society he thought desirable: "The population should be homogeneous; where two or more cultures exist in the same place they are likely either to be fiercely self-conscious or both to become adulterate … and reasons of race and religion combine to make any large number of free-thinking Jews undesirable."
In Eliot's ideal society, tolerance is not seen as an especially good thing; he says almost virtuous sounding things about the necessity of caring for the environment, but he ties this closely to a desire that people not travel very much, that most people stay where they were born. It's worth remembering that he gave these lectures in Virginia, in the Old South in a time of Jim Crow laws and racial segregation; he talked of the American civil war as a disaster and of the US's industrial north as wrecked by immigration. Eliot was far too clever a conservative to ally himself directly with Italian or German fascism – they were far too modern and flashy for him.
Later in his life, he expresses similar views in a way that is more tactful rather than essentially different. He talks endlessly of a Christian society, as one in which traditional values are transmitted in a traditional way, arguing that for a Western European or North American sensibility to cast itself adrift from those traditions is to head off into the night without any clear landfall in sight. "If Christianity goes, the whole of our culture goes. Then you must start painfully again and you cannot put on a new culture readymade. You must wait for the grass to grow …"
There is, of course, a double dishonesty in all of this. There is the assumption that it is not possible to retain, in a secular society, those values which we have learned as matters of good sense from a Christianity in which they were supported by revelation; it is a standard trope, unsupported by reason of modern conservatism that if we discard part we stand to lose all of our historical culture – and Eliot was too clever a man not to know that this was, and remains, mere assertion. The other dishonesty is that Eliot's Christianity, like that of many rightwing intellectuals, is an underpinning of the status quo rather than a force for social justice or the ecstatic joy of Easter Day for believers. Agnostics and believers ought to find this cold-hearted promotion of religion as being useful rather than true considerably more repulsive than we do; luckily, these ideas are not all of the story about Eliot and belief. However chill Eliot was as a thinker, in prose, the best of his religious poetry is rather different.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140428ea4s00064
