{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"837"}
____
  
Should the government hold auctions for UK visas?
Julian Norman David Metcalf   
theguardian.com
1,266 words
27 February 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Head to head: David Metcalf and Julian Norman agree that the investor route to UK migration needs reform, but not on the idea of auctioning
David Metcalf: it's one part of a wider reform to benefit UK residents
The UK has for two decades provided indefinite leave to remain, often leading to citizenship, for high-net-worth individuals and their families. Many other countries have similar schemes. But the purpose of this UK immigration route is not set out anywhere – so what is in it for the UK's residents?
At the outset, three points should be understood. First, as with all migration flows, the main beneficiaries are the migrants. Investors benefit from, for example, the rule of law, property rights and access to efficient markets. Second, the investment is a loan, not a gift. Third, the standard £1m investment threshold has not been altered since 1994.
Most stakeholders – including law firms, accountants and consultancies which help organise the affairs of such investors – assert that this route is self-evidently beneficial. Such an assertion is inadequate. It is possible that the route benefits UK residents but evidence, rather than assertion, is required.
There are three possible mechanisms by which UK residents as well as migrants may gain: funding the budget deficit, spending and tax revenue, and productive efficiency.
Most individuals invest in gilts – they loan the UK government £1m for five years. But we do not need such investment to fund the deficit. We are selling about £300m of gilts every day – therefore the capital market is working very efficiently. The annual aggregate loan via the investor route is currently equivalent to less than two days of our budget deficit.
Investors and their families spend money in the UK. This may generate employment and revenue, but these gains are typically exaggerated. For example, it is often pointed out that the UK government gains stamp duty revenue if the investor buys a house. Such an argument completely neglects the fact that someone else would buy the house if the investor did not.
Some investors – probably a modest number – engage in entrepreneurial activity to the benefit of the UK. But we already have an entrepreneur route, so it is not self-evident that such activity should occur via the investor route. Perhaps, instead, the entrepreneur route needs some reform.
In its report, the migration advisory committee is not stating that there is little or no gain to UK residents from the investor route. Rather, we express some healthy scepticism concerning the benefits normally asserted. But we believe that there are some straightforward reforms which would make it much more likely that UK residents gain. These include: raising the investment threshold, encouraging alternative investments, auctioning some slots, and altering the residency requirements.
The £1m investment threshold is probably too low – it has not been raised since 1994. The MAC recommends raising it in line with earnings growth since 1994, yielding a threshold of £2m.
Alternative investments should be considered. These include infrastructure bonds and venture capital.
A further reform might involve auctioning some of slots (with, as always, due diligence concerning the investors). At present it is not possible to determine the optimal price – investment threshold – for a visa under the investor (tier 1) route. One approach to determining the price would be to auction a certain number of slots, say 100, with a reserve price a little above the investment threshold (recommended to be £2m), perhaps £2.5m. The government would receive the excess over the £2m. This surplus could go to a good causes pot analogous to National Lottery spending.
To encourage investors to enter the auction, the MAC recommends that investors who gain an auction slot should receive accelerated settlement after two years, and that the residence requirements for such investors are relaxed.
One final issue is worth noting. The distribution of income matters as well as the level of income. And the investors route – like other migrant routes – has an impact on the distribution. For example, it is plausible that because the supply of housing is inelastic, house owners – particularly in London – gain from this route whereas non-house owners do not. Such considerations need to be factored into any evaluation.
David Metcalf is the chairman of the UK's migration advisory committee.
Julian Norman: such a system would be impractical and vulnerable to abuse
There is a strong argument in favour of reform of the investor route to migration in the UK, but auctioning visas is not the change that is needed. At present, an investor needs to show that they have £1m of their own funds to invest in UK government bonds or in active and trading UK registered companies. Five years on, if they have maintained the investment, they are entitled to permanent residence – at which point their funds can be withdrawn again. There are two-year and three-year routes to permanent settlement for those with a spare £20m and £10m respectively.
Attracting the wealthy migrant is arguably a benefit in itself: they are consumers with high budgets. Yet, as the MAC will point out, there is no direct benefit to the UK economy of the money being invested: the minutes of one MAC meeting suggest that tourists spend more in total than investors.
One idea is that the money should be invested in universities such as the London School of Economics – where David Metcalf, chair of the MAC, holds the post of emeritus professor. That is a positive suggestion, although many would argue in favour of the investment being directed towards struggling schools. The other is to auction visas: a scheme simultaneously naive and cynical. What's wrong with it?
• It lacks both transparency and certainty. Depending on who applies, and how much they offer in the closed auction, the amount could be anything from the minimum £2.5m up to tens of millions. The rule of law requires that an individual knows the criteria against which their application will be assessed and is able to make representations. If the law will vary depending on the number of applicants and the depth of their pockets, that principle cannot possibly be applied – and someone will challenge it.
• The administration involved would make Kafka weep. The bureaucracy involved in setting up and administering the scheme for the purpose of 100 visas is disproportionate. There could be no appeal right, because the amounts offered by the successful bidders could not be disclosed.
• It fails to solve the problem identified. If the problem is, as David Metcalf has said, that the current route is a loan to the UK not a gift, then the solution cannot be to retain the loan route but make it more expensive and less predictable.
• It entrenches inequality. At a time when, as the All Party Parliamentary Group on Migration has highlighted, many British citizens are forced into emigrating or separating by the UK immigration rules, it is quite wrong to advertise an auction to wealthy foreign nationals.
• It could encourage bad practice. If a keen bidder is committing upwards of £2.5m, it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that he would spend a little more to investigate his competitors' intentions and gazump them. Even the best organisation can be vulnerable to a leak – or worse.
• It is just a bit tawdry. Residence in the UK should be a privilege, not a purchase. A fair, credible system is priceless.
Julian Norman is a barrister
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140226ea2r001xi
