{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1584"}
____
Farage versus Clegg: the verdict from the newspapers' 'spin room'
Roy Greenslade   
theguardian.com
730 words
27 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Roy Greenslade on how the press reported and commented on the EU debate
"Nigel Farage emerged triumphant," said the opening words to the Daily Express news story about the Ukip leader's debate with the deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg.
The Daily Mail's headline said: "It's first blood to Farage" while the Sun's said: "Nige fries Clegg for breakfast." And The Times agreed: "Farage is the winner of round one in TV tussle with Clegg."
This spin in "news reports" was largely founded on the results of an instant YouGov online survey, which found that 57% of the 1,003 respondents thought Farage had performed best compared to 36% for Clegg.
The Guardian pointed to the source in its headline: "Instant poll says feisty Farage beat cool Clegg". The Independent's report by Andy Grice saw beyond the debate itself to the wider political arena: "Clegg and Farage agree on one thing: Labour and Tories lost."
The Daily Telegraph chose to run a piece by its sketch-writer, Michael Deacon, on page 1 with the headline "Farage was in his element at his chance to shine."
Without wishing to be over-critical of the sub who wrote that, it didn't quite reflect Deacon's measured reportage.
The Telegraph also carried verdicts from another quintet of its writers. In varying ways, four of them thought Clegg had done rather well.
The fifth, Ben Brogan, in arguing that rhetoric rather than facts is popular with people, concluded with a political dig at the prime minister:
"Where was David Cameron? Many Conservatives will wonder when their leader will make his appearance in this argument... What does he offer to those Conservatives who will have listened to Mr Farage and nodded along? It is possible to lose from the sidelines."
Many Telegraph readers may not have gone any further than Matt's excellent front page cartoon: "The morning-after pill is not for people who regret listening to the Farage-Clegg debate."
In The Times's sketch, Ann Treneman noted Farage's glowing, sweaty appearance (as did other commentators) before she pointed to the main reason for Farage to celebrate: the debate had attracted massive media attention. Her conclusion:
"If Nick won the battle, and I'm not even sure of that, then Nigel won the war. The leader of Ukip, the buffoon with the pint of beer, had finally arrived on the main political stage and he didn't fall over."
Like Treneman, The Independent's Don Macintyre referred to the assembled members of the press inhabiting the "spin room". He believed the debate to be "the liveliest political event for quite a while, albeit one without a knock-out."
He argued that Farage "performed a welcome service to politics" by obliging Clegg "to rediscover his inner liberal – especially on immigration... it was probably Clegg's night on points."
Anne Perkins, in The Guardian, thought "the debate had hard lessons for all the main parties." Quoting details from the YouGov poll, she noted that Conservative supporters preferred Ukip and Farage by 3 to 1 over Clegg while Labour "will be much more dismayed to find their vote split almost evenly between the two men."
And she picked up on "the astounding assertion" with which Farage ended the debate: Europe had blood on its hands over the Ukraine. Perkins wrote: "That's one that might make his supporters wonder whether he really is any judge at all of the merits of the case for Britain in the EU."
Another "spin room" writer, the Mail's Quentin Letts, wondered whether anyone would choose to be represented by either of the jabbering maniacs.
He note that about halfway through the debate Farage "tried to inject some humour to his replies but it did not erase a rather over-emphatic, ranty delivery." Although Clegg "was smooth" it "is not altogether a quality to be desired."
Overall, Letts saw it as "an interesting duel" in which "neither combatant sustained anything more than a glancing flesh wound."
So what did the avowedly pro-EU Daily Mirror - the paper being marketed as the "intelligent tabloid" - think of the debate? For some reason, in print at least, it had nothing to say. How very odd?
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140327ea3r0012x
