{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"181"}
____
  
Government announces moves to end face-down restraint of patients
Norman Lamb James Meikle   
theguardian.com
468 words
4 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
'Outdated' form of restraint used in hospitals and care homes is addressed after the Winterbourne View scandal
Moves to end the "outdated" use of face-down restraint of patients in hospitals and care homes have been announced by the government after the Winterbourne View scandal.
Pinning people in such a way so that they cannot move is potentially dangerous, according to new guidance, which also seeks to reduce other ways of controlling challenging behaviour, including rapid sedation and isolated confinement.
Restraint can also cause physical and psychological harm to patients and staff, it says. The latest measures follow the scandal at the private care home near Bristol first exposed by the BBC in 2011 Six staff were later jailed and another five given suspended sentences for abusing residents.
A government review later reported there had been well over 500 cases of restraint in a 15-month period. A study by the charity Mind also found restraint was being used too often, for too long, often not as a last resort and even to inflict pain, humiliate or punish.
Norman Lamb, the care and support minister, said: "No one should ever come to harm in the health or care system. Although it is sometimes necessary to use restraint to stop someone hurting themselves or others, the safety of patients must always come first. This new guidance will stop inappropriate use of all types of restraint, reduce this outdated practice and help staff to keep patients safe."
Paul Farmer, the chief executive of Mind, said: "When someone is in a mental health crisis they need help, not harm. Physical restraint can be humiliating, dangerous and even life-threatening and our own research indicates that some trusts are currently using it too quickly."
The guidance recognises there might be rare occasions when staff need to restrain people, such as stopping someone from harming themselves, but that it must be used only as a last resort and for as short a time as possible. It must not involve restraint that in any way blocks people's airways, breathing or circulation, so that face-down restrain on any surface, not just the floor, must not be used. Only people detained under mental health legislation should be placed in seclusion, the guidance states.
The guidelines will apply to services for people with mental health and autistic spectrum conditions, learning disability, dementia, and personality disorder, as well as older people more generally and to health and social care staff working in non-health settings, including police cells, immigration removal centres and prisons. But police and other people working within the criminal justice system will continue to follow their own professional guidance.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140403ea44000up
