{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"2612"}
____
  
Scottish independence: Labour sets out tax and housing benefit devolution plan
Severin Carrell   
theguardian.com
1,006 words
19 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
With six months to go before referendum, party pledges income tax powers for Holyrood, including setting new 50p rate for richest
The Scottish parliament would be given powers to control billions of pounds worth of income tax and housing benefit under Scottish Labour's plans for greater devolution.
The party said on Tuesday that Holyrood should be given new rights to set variable rates of income tax – including fixing new higher rates for the wealthiest of at least 50p, raising an additional £100m – and to set separate housing benefit policy from the rest of the UK.
Labour said the income tax power – the central plank in its fight against the Scottish National party's quest for independence – would allow the Scottish parliament to raise 40% of its own finances, as well as transferring £1.7bn worth of housing benefit to Scotland.
The Scottish government insisted these powers did not go far enough; Scottish Labour, which rejected proposals in its interim report published last April to give Scotland control over income tax rates in full, has been left open to attacks that it has "watered down" its devolution reforms.
Johann Lamont, the Scottish Labour leader, said the new powers devised by her party's devolution commission were not an "exercise in political vanity" or designed to appease nationalists. They were designed to "bolster, defend and energise" devolution, she said.
She said Labour had decided not to devolve full powers over all income tax rates because that could leave Scotland more vulnerable in future to economic shocks, currently underwritten by the UK Treasury. "This is the right balance between fiscal accountability and insuring us against risk," she said.
Speaking as yes campaigners marked six months to go before the independence referendum on 18 September, Lamont said: "I believe this package of measures makes the Scottish parliament more accountable and gives it real power to change the lives of the people of Scotland. Power lies with the Scottish people, not Westminster."
She added: "Our guiding principle was to make Scotland a fairer, more socially just society." She said it was designed to balance the need to pool resources at UK level while giving Scotland the powers it needed.
The income tax powers, given a preview by Gordon Brown earlier this month, would extend Scotland's forthcoming but limited powers under the Scotland Act 2012 to set its own income tax rates, from 10p in the pound from 2016 up to controlling at least 15p in the pound.
In addition, it would give Holyrood new powers to set new "progressive rates" for highest earners and introduce additional rates of tax.
That would see the Treasury's direct grant to Holyrood cut in proportion, but the central principle of the Treasury's Barnett formula giving Scotland higher levels of funding per head would be protected. That means Scotland would keep any surplus money raised by higher tax rates.
Labour's proposals, which are understood to have been endorsed by Ed Miliband, the UK party leader, also include:
• Giving Holyrood full control of the work programme to tailor unemployment policy to Scottish needs and devolving attendance allowance for carers, worth about £500m.
• Allowing Holyrood to control employment tribunals and set up a Scottish health and safety executive.
• Rejecting Scottish government demands to devolve corporation tax and air passenger duty – a proposal loudly supported by British Airways and Ryanair last month – because it would lead to tax competition in the UK and damage the environment.
• Requiring the crown estate to allow local councils and communities the power to control seabed, foreshore and land holdings in Scotland, which are key to renewables strategy.
• Working on a reform of local taxation with other parties, with an aim to introduce property taxes that impose higher rates on the largest or most valuable homes.
Despite pressure from some devolution campaigners, Labour has emphatically rejected devolving power over other taxes, including alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties, capital gains tax or vehicle exercise duty, claiming those would also destabilise the UK's tax base. VAT rates cannot be devolved under EU law.
Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland's deputy first minister, said the new proposals from Labour, and the powers being offered by the Lib Dems and hinted at by the Tories, would fail to give Scotland the powers it needed.
"If we want to have the powers in Scotland that allow us to address the key challenges that we have as a country – how to grow the economy, how to grow our working age population and how to protect public services and close the gap between rich and poor – then we need to have full power over tax, employment, welfare and immigration," Sturgeon said on BBC Radio Scotland. "And nothing I have seen from the proposals I have seen from the other parties would offer anywhere near that package."
Sturgeon refused to confirm her party would match Labour's pledge to reintroduce a 50p higher rate of income tax. While it was the party's "instinct" to do so, Sturgeon said that tax policy could only be made close to the 2016 Scottish elections.
"It's clearly the case that a chancellor [of an independent Scotland] would have to make that assessment at the time," she said on BBC Radio Scotland.
"The chancellor of the exchequer right now wouldn't tell you what would be in his budget in 2016. It's not reasonable to expect a Scottish government to do that about independence."
Marking six months before the referendum, Sturgeon added that there were now "six key reasons to vote for yes": creating more jobs based on Scotland's economic needs; spending taxes on Scottish priorities such as universal childcare; protecting the NHS from Tory privatisation; setting a Scottish retirement age; a pensions policy linked to Scotland's different life expectancy rates; and setting up an oil fund using surplus tax receipts from North Sea oil.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140318ea3j001bd
