{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1880"}
____
  
Vince Cable did not mean to offend teachers, says Clegg
Patrick Wintour   
theguardian.com
612 words
7 March 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Deputy prime minister says business secretary's comment about teachers not knowing about world of work taken out of context
Vince Cable the business secretary had not meant to cause offence and was quoted out of context when he said teachers know absolutely nothing about the world of work, the deputy prime minister Nick Clegg has said.
Cable's remarks are regarded as a huge political error since the Liberal Democrats are making a big push to win back teachers by mounting attacks on the education secretary, Michael Gove, and calling for more teachers to be qualified.
During his weekly LBC phone-in, Clegg also said it would be "rather undemocratic" for either main party to seek to govern alone if they failed to secure an overall majority at the next election.
He also defended his voting record in the European parliament from an attack by the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, and declared the Conservative immigration target as perilous and absurd.
Defending Cable, Clegg said the business secretary was a great admirer of teachers, adding it "was absolutely not his intention to cause offence". He said: "Teachers are the lifeblood of society. I know Vince would not have wanted to cause offence. Self-evidently, I am a massive admirer of what teachers do day in and day out."
He said the wider point being made by Cable concerned the inadequacy and patchiness of careers advice in schools, something he had said he planned to improve. He said all politicians sometimes express themselves in ways they wish they had not.
Clegg's attack on Farage was the latest jibe in a row between the two politicians ahead of their televised debate before the European elections. Farage had hit back at Clegg's accusation that he had a poor voting record in the European parliament. Farage said Clegg had attended only 22% of votes between 2010 and 2014 and in the previous parliament had voted only 42% of the time. Farage told Clegg: "I don't think you have picked the right battle here, my old son."
Clegg replied that his voting record as an MEP had been better than that of Farage, asserting: "I voted a lot more than he did", without giving any figures. He defended his low Commons voting record: "It is invariably the case that senior politicians in senior positions in government do not vote as much as others."
Clegg also defended coalition politics accusing the main parties of hubris "if they think they can dictate to the rest of the country how they should be governed if no party can secure an overall majority".
He said: "In a democracy if you do not secure a majority you do not have the right to simply decide you are going to govern the country nevertheless."
He denied the coalition was riven by disputes, describing the government as "a remarkable display of collective decision-making by two parties that are different and do not agree".
Clegg admitted confidence in the UK immigration system had been battered, but attacked the Conservative target to cut net migration below 100,000, saying it was absurd to have a target over which they have no full control because in part it depends on the number of British people that leave the country.
The deputy prime minister also called for Paddy Power to make a donation to a charity fighting domestic violence out of the proceeds it received from asking punters to bet on the outcome of the Oscar Pistorious murder trial in South Africa.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140306ea37001e1
