{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"106"}
____
  
Car boot sale Britain: Len McCluskey's acute critique of state of the nation
Michael White   
theguardian.com
1,449 words
3 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Michael White: Unite chief's assessment of the coalition, our democracy and the unions deserved to be noted as much as his criticisms of Labour
After listening to Len McCluskey, Britain's most important trade union leader, speak at a Commons press gallery lunch yesterday I opened today's newspapers with some trepidation. Unite's general secretary had declared his didn't want to say "too many controversial things", but proceeded to say several. The former Liverpool docker ( I didn't just work inside an office but on ships, he insisted) was very likeable, thoughtful and smart, a sharp sense of humour too.
It's a dangerous combination, but my fears were exaggerated. McCluskey said what he is quoted as saying, though the event inevitably generated one-sided accounts on the grounds that a union leader criticising his own side – Labour – is more newsworthy than his critique of David Cameron's coalition. Yet that critique was at least as interesting. It reminded me of the last decent speech we heard at a press gallery lunch – John Major's eloquent plea last October for those Etonian Tory ministers to do more for society's "silent have-nots".
Yesterday's upshot was reports like this in the Guardian, this in the Daily Mail (which is concentrating on illegal immigrants, not wicked unions, today) and similar reports elsewhere, with the most thorough account being in the Financial Times (subscription) which usually treats organised labour seriously and with respect.
No grounds for McCluskey to complain about how they reported his walk across the press gallery "tightrope". In his speech, and in subsequent answers, he took the opportunity to warn Ed Miliband that if the Labour leader offers voters "a pale shade of austerity" at the 2015 general election – it's just 13 months away – by playing it safe, rather than being radical, voters may decide to stick with the devil they know.
As the Guardian's Nick Watt records, he put it this way: "Ed's challenge is to simply demonstrate that he's on the side of ordinary people. Miliband has got to give hope to the poor, he's got to demonstrate that we're going to do something different in power. If he does that with some passion, if he does that with some conviction then in my view the polls will begin to alter and he will begin to be seen as a genuine alternative."
Fair enough, that's what McCluskey did say, though he also claimed that work is underway in the Labour leader's office to give the coming manifesto more coherence and fizz. That may be whistling in the dark, but either way Miliband is in a bind with the rightwing papers.
When they taunt him with the prospect of losing on 7 May 7 2015 because he's too "timid" in his policy prescriptions – as they did today – they don't really want him to be radical in the way "Red Len" wants (how about copying the Germans in having local ballots to nationalise energy firms, he asked?). If Miliband did that, the rightwing media would abuse him even harder than they already do. They did on that energy price freeze until one of the "big six" energy firms – SSE – actually promised one until 2016. They'll blame him if it snows.
So what did McCluskey say about the government? That it has patsied Bruce Carr, the QC it is getting to "review" trade union legislation, because the real purpose of the review is to allow Australian campaign strategist Lynton "dog whistle" Crosby to keep Miliband on the back foot. Britain already has the most draconian labour laws in Europe – far worse than we bequeathed to the Germans after the second world war, he noted, and should hang its head in shame.
Not just the coalition either. Britain had been "a car boot sale" for a generation: "Come in and buy what you want." One million manufacturing jobs had been lost under the Labour government too. The Unite leader made passing reference to globalisation and deplored – rightly so – ignorant misreporting of the Grangemouth refinery dispute.
Ministers should stop privatising the NHS (230 Tory MPs have health interests, several Labour ones too, he said) and do something about the "investment strike" at the big banks whose past abuses had been "recklessly indulged" at the taxpayer's expense. If unions had done as much damage, I'd be in jail, McCluskey told political reporters. He praised the 13 Labour rebels who refused to back George Osborne's phoney welfare cap.
You don't have to agree with all these points, I don't myself, to recognise they are serious and uncomfortably valid in several ways. There is a huge amount of idle capital lying around looking for investments. Timid would be a good way of putting it, Len. A UK investment bank, as you suggest, might be one way of freeing up some of it to the small businesses who need it.
But the most poignant theme of McCluskey's speech came in his description of our unhealthy democracy. Low and falling voter turnout and a lack of real choice. Parliament, once so extensively reported every day, marginalised and shut out. Not content with capturing one main party, greedy corporations and the City seem to have captured them all in a secretive way, so opaque compared with union influence. How often does he meet Ed, Len was asked? "Five of six times a week. We have breakfast and lunch. We go walking on Sundays," he joked.
But his message was earnest. Worcester woman and Mondeo man are targeted by pollsters, but who is interested in "Wakefield woman or man on a bus?" he wondered. Actually, Alex Salmond's SNP and Nigel Farage's Ukip are both doing well at pursuing working-class and leftwing votes in the absence of something better, McCluskey conceded.
Unite has to be neutral on the Scottish independence referendum he told a questioner, because otherwise the union would split. About 40% of union members in Scotland are voting SNP now, when once it would have been 80% Labour. Who says unions don't make pragmatic compromises – just like politicians – in the face of harsh realities? Yesterday McCluskey warned the No campaign ( too negative for his taste) that their Canadian equivalents in Quebec won by only 0.5% in 1995.
The Ukip challenge? McCluskey's answer is to confront myths and lies with facts, as Labour did when hammering a BNP challenge in Barking council and beyond. I sensed he is uneasy about the slightly more subtle tug of Ukip's appeal to his members and reluctant to attack it. Housing shortage? Build more homes. Immigrants taking jobs? Don't blame them, blame greedy companies. It wouldn't happen in Germany where 90% of companies are covered by collective bargaining and unions sit on supervisory boards.
I asked him about that (and about phantom union votes claims which he says are untrue) when my turn came. Easy to blame politicians, but unions too had made strategic errors in his lifetime and mine. What for example, about Labour's 1977 Bullock report on industrial democracy, proposing among other reforms German-style supervisory boards? As a young shop stewards "we were opposed to Bullock." Sigh. "If only we could have it back," he ruefully admitted. Legally binding agreements? The shop stewards movement had opposed them too, but times change: Unite has just signed one with General Motors to protect British jobs.
Mistakes or not, it is a sad story of decline for organised labour, even when told by a happy warrior like McCluskey who – as reported – really would consider backing electoral reform and a leftwing workers party if Labour loses next year. Unions still matter, they provide ballast, stability and organisational solidarity for millions in our fragmented society.
And 6.5 million trade unionists and their families – 10 million of them in all – are still Britain's largest voluntary organisation, despite being written off and abused for decades. Fleet Street's elite corps of labour and industrial correspondents used to call us "dinosaurs", McCluskey recalled. But we're still here and industrial correspondents as a species has all but disappeared along with much of the regional press. "I'll make no oligarch jokes, less my friends at the [Murdoch] Times get upset," the old bruiser quipped.
A bleak picture but one at least as recognisable as the sunnier one we will be invited to admire between now and polling day.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140402ea43000rx
