{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"1056"}
____
  
Ukip candidate for Newark defends remarks about rape victims
Rowena Mason   
theguardian.com
821 words
8 May 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
'Women concerned about rape should take reasonable care,' says Roger Helmer after furore over comments in 2011 blog
Ukip's candidate in the Newark byelection, Roger Helmer, has attempted to clarify his controversial comments on rape, saying no blame should be attached to the victim but women should take reasonable care not to put themselves in danger of the crime – in the same way that people going on holiday should lock their front door.
The 70-year-old politician was cheered by members of the public as he launched Ukip's campaign in the Nottinghamshire seat, which was vacated when former Tory Patrick Mercer resigned due to a lobbying scandal.
The furore about some of Helmer's previous remarks on rape and homosexuality appeared to have had little effect on the electorate, as the MEP was approached in the town's marketplace by wellwishers and people wanting to have their photo taken with him.
Speaking to the Guardian, Helmer said some of his views, including a blogpost from 2011 suggesting women should bear some responsibility for date rape in some circumstances, have been "outrageously misrepresented".
Asked how he would appeal to women voters who might have been offended, he said: "Can I just make a clear statement about this? I take the view that every rapist should be apprehended and tried and convicted and go to jail. There is absolutely no question about that. I do not suggest for a moment that victims carry any blame for the offence.
"I'd like to give you an illustration that is less emotive. If you go on holiday and you get burgled, there is absolutely no question the guilt lies with the burglar. But if it so happens that you left your front door unlocked, then your insurer will probably advise you that was unwise.
"Everyone who is a potential victim of any crime would be well advised to take reasonable care. I am not at all saying a rape victim is responsible for being raped but I would advise people who might consider themselves at risk to be careful. It doesn't seem to me that's bad advice. It seems to be the advice that any parent would give to a daughter."
Asked if he thinks voters agree with some of his controversial comments from the past, he said: "I hope people would agree with the view that women concerned about rape should take reasonable care. If a girl goes and gets drunk in a clubbing area and incapable at two o'clock in the morning and lies on the pavement, it's not her fault, the guilt lies with the rapist.
"But the fact that she was there and drunk and incapable made the offence more likely. It seems to me if you say that quietly to somebody and they think about it, they say: 'It's obvious,' so why is it contentious'?"
Helmer said one of the things people like about Ukip is "authenticity" and that its politicians say what they think. But he stressed: "As a party, and I as an individual, absolutely condemn prejudice, discrimination, hostility and especially violence against minority groups."
Helmer said he regretted some of his past comments because of the "media storm and the misrepresentation" that made them "an albatross round your neck" during an election campaign.
He still has a personal – though not party – belief that there was a case for the death penalty. But he said he has updated his views on many issues and now accepts homosexuality.
"The world has changed; we're in the 21st century," he said. "Many of us are much more relaxed about things we would have been concerned about years ago. As views change, I guess I catch the zeitgeist. People do.
"Put it this way, our lead candidate in Scotland is David Coburn, who is openly gay. I've been up to work with him. I am very confident he will be down in Newark and I will welcome him and be extremely grateful for his assistance."
Helmer, who was selected on Tuesday, suggested he was unlikely to move to the constituency from his Leicestershire home in the first year as he probably would not have time to buy a new house but he would have an address and somewhere to stay in the town.
However, he would resign as an MEP immediately if he were to be elected to both roles. The politician said opposing wind turbines, fighting for local NHS services and the national issue of immigration would be major topics on which he would base his campaign.
"I have simply never seen such a positive reaction on the streets, on the doorstep, in the marketplace. People are fed up with the legacy parties. They really want a change," he said.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140507ea58000e9
