{"newspaper":"theguardian.com","id:"3117"}
____
  
Falling overall crime levels are no one-year wonder
Alan Travis   
theguardian.com
874 words
25 April 2014
Guardian.co.uk
GRULTD
English
(c) 2014 Guardian News & Media Limited. All rights reserved   
Crime rate in England and Wales fell 15% in 2013, the largest annual drop on record, but will the public accept it?
For once the much-derided official figures tell a clear and unambiguous story, overall crime levels in England and Wales are not only down but fell in 2013 by the largest annual drop on record – 15%.
The authoritative Crime Survey for England and Wales published by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) also makes clear that this was no one-year wonder but part of an accelerating trend that has seen the biggest sustained fall in crime since the second world war.
The level of incidents in 2013 at an estimated 7.5m crimes is 25% lower than that seen five years ago. The ONS says this is 60% lower than the 19m crimes that were officially estimated to have taken place in 1995 when the post-war crime rate peaked when Michael "prison works" Howard was home secretary.
Perhaps the story is most clearly told by looking at what has happened to the murder rate in England and Wales. In the "bad old days" of the early 1960s when gangs such as the Krays and the Richardsons terrorised London's East End the number of homicides stood at about 300 a year.
But then murder rate rose steadily through the 1980s and 1990s to a peak of 1,047 deaths in 2002/03 when 172 victims of the killer GP, Dr Harold Shipman, were included in the total. In the early years of the 21st century there was an annual homicide toll in England and Wales of about 800 murders a year but that has since tumbled year on year down to the 551 recorded by the police in 2013 – nearly 50% below the peak.
The statisticians say the murder rate has fallen despite the growth in the population from 15 homicides per million people to only 10 per million. The chance of being murdered whether in or out of your bed in England and Wales has actually fallen by 50%.
This dramatic fall has been repeated across nearly every category of crime, including the big "volume" crimes such as burglary and car break-ins and thefts where better security and alarms have brought about even deeper falls in the crime levels. Who now remembers the days when motorists would take their radio/cassette players out of their cars every time they parked? Younger motorists might even be surprised to learn that you could even remove them from the dashboard of a car at all.
But despite this sustained and historic fall in crime, the pollsters tell us that the public refuses to believe it has happened or that their chances of becoming a victim of crime are at a 33-year low.
This is partly because that with an estimated 7.5m crimes each year there are still plenty of victims of crime about, but that does not explain the persistent poll findings that nearly two-thirds of the public believe national crime rates in England and Wales are going up, despite the official figures. This may partly be due to large swathes of national media coverage of the crime figures that seem incapable of highlighting the simple story that crime is falling and instead seize on the most minor sub-set of offences to claim that the country remains in the grip of a massive crime wave. It certainly remains in the grip of a media which finds it impossible to live without a diet of murder, mayhem and soaring crime headlines.
Interestingly, the public gives a far more accurate account when asked about crime in their own neighbourhoods. Then only 28% report that it is going up. But the widespread public belief that national crime rates continue to soar means people often have a far more punitive attitude towards crime, and it is fuelled by their misinformed belief that their chances of becoming a victim of burglary, car crime or violent crime are far higher than the actual rates.
Does it matter? The last ONS national well-being survey showed that only 56% of women feel "fairly or very" safe walking alone after dark – the same proportion as five years ago – despite the fall in crime rate. New forms of crime – whether it is online fraud or official recognition of different kinds of domestic abuse – will continue to emerge that the official stats do not necessary capture but that does not negate the fundamental underlying trend.
Curiously the one area that the falling crime rate seems to have had an impact is on its political saliency. The long-term Ipsos Mori index of the most important issues facing the country shows that when crime peaked in 1995, 25% of voters named law and order and violent crime as of most concern to them. This rose to above 40% in 2007 when Gordon Brown was prime minister but has since fallen to only 12% of voters replaced by such issues as immigration as their main worry. Perhaps instinctively they do recognise that the country is a safer place.
guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media 2014
Document GRULTD0020140424ea4p000mb
