{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"299"}
____
Home Scotland
Generation Jihad
By MARTIN DAUBNEY   
1,550 words
10 May 2014
11:42
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Sun investigates the young Brit Muslims who've gone into battle against Syrian leader
AS many as 400 young British Muslims have left the UK to fight alongside al-Qaeda terrorists in a bloody “holy war" against President Assad’s regime in Syria.
Poisoned by radical internet preachers and Twitter, these naive young men — born, raised and educated in Britain — leave behind respectable lives and devastated families, lured by the promise of eternal life through martyrdom.
In Syria, they attend terrorist boot camps, funded by al-Qaeda, where they are schooled in armed combat and making explosive devices. They then go to war on the front line, dreaming of heroism.
At least 20 Brits have been killed in battle — a number that rose on Thursday when the Foreign and Commonwealth Office announced it was investigating claims two Britons — Abu Abdullah al-Biritani and Abu Jibril al-Biritani — had died during bitter in-fighting between terrorist factions.
But with martyrdom seen as a “fast track to heaven" by radicalised fighters, death is no deterrent.
Worringly, those British fighters who survive can return to the UK on an open passport.
These “terrorism tourists" are security chiefs’ worst nightmare — radicalised, combat-trained jihadists who will come back to our shores brimming with hate.
And in a chilling interview with The Sun, a top anti-terror cop says this is a “very grave threat to national security" that could lead to attacks on British soil.
Three of Abubaker Deghayes’ four sons have joined the jihad in Syria — and in April, one was killed.
Amer, now 20, was the first to go, in October last year. He was joined there by brothers Jaffar, 16, and Abdullah, 18 when he died.
Their father Abubaker, 45, who lives in Saltdean near Brighton, says: “I don’t know what we could have done to stop them going. They went of their own free will and without our consent.
“I travelled to Turkey to meet Abdullah and Jaffar, to try to stop them... but they were stubborn about travelling to Syria after seeing videos of atrocities online.
“We believe Amer has been injured. We are all grieving.
“My sons are not terrorists but travelled to Syria to defend those who are weak. Of course I think that my son is a martyr. Anyone who dies for a just cause is."
Abdullah’s mother Einas Abulsaye claims her son was an ordinary boy with a bright future until the dark cloud of extremism came over him.
She told the BBC: “My son was a very naive, very helpful, brave boy.
“He did not tell me before he left for Syria. His brother Jaffar said they needed their passports for ID at school. You can’t say my sons are terrorists. When he left home, he asked for a cuddle. I had no idea it would be his last."
Abdullah’s sister Aisha, 21, adds: “I spoke to all three after they left, telling them to come back. It’s hard to sleep knowing your brothers are in the middle of a war zone."
So many young Muslims from around the world are joining the “holy war" in Syria that they have been dubbed “Generation Jihad".
All too often, these “terrorism tourists" end up dead.
Last December Ifthekar Jaman, 23, died in a clash in Syria. Born and educated in Portsmouth, he fell under the spell of Anwar al-Awlaki, an al-Qaeda recruiter described as “the Bin Laden of the internet".
Last May, Jaman slipped into Syria and joined terrorist group ISIS, which has links to al-Qaeda.
Via Tumblr and Twitter, Jaman bragged that he was ready to die “a martyr" and urged others to join his quest for “eternal paradise".
On Tumblr, he wrote: “What is it like to hold a gun? Ha, ha, honestly? It feels so cool!" He was killed soon after. Last summer, Akram Sebah, 24, a north London estate agent, and his brother Mohamed, 28, a maths tutor, were also killed in Syria.
Radical internet preachers made them poster-boys for the jihad, dubbing them “the British Lions".
Both went to Syria without their father’s knowledge.
Their dad Abdulrahman Sebah, 62, says: “No father or mother wishes their children to go to hell or to whatever you call Syria. If someone goes, they don’t come back."
Scores of young British Muslims are in the now warzone, and using Twitter to convince other Brits to follow.
One — calling himself @GuiltyMuslim — uses images of maimed children and stomach-churning videos of men being beaten to death, allegedly by Assad loyalists, to hawk for donations that go straight into al-Qaeda coffers.
Another, Abu Maryam Englizee, shows off piles of guns and grenades while bragging: “Jihad is my happiness. How can I thank Allah for what he has given me."
Scandalously, he tries to provoke other British Muslims into action by saying: “Those who stay back because of their family are a thousand times wrong."
The biggest fear is that these battle-hardened, brainwashed jihadists will return to wreak havoc in the UK — something one top anti-terror cop calls a “very grave threat".
Deputy Assistant Commissioner Helen Ball, the Met’s senior national coordinator for counter terrorism, says: “We are taking this extremely seriously.
“There is definitely an increase in young British people going to Syria. Some arrive with the best of intentions but they can end up fighting for a terrorist organisation very easily.
“We fear some will return — they may have been radicalised and persuaded to carry out attacks.
“An enormous amount of police and intelligence agency resource is going into preventing anything that would be a risk to public safety.
“We have units that can monitor anything that is extremist.
“We are alert to radicalisation as well. If we believe individuals who have been trained to fight are returning to the UK, then they will be arrested."
But Shaista Gohir, of the Muslim Women’s Network, thinks the problem is far bigger than police admit.
She says: “Police officially say a few hundred young men and a handful of women from the UK have joined the fighting in Syria, but in my experience of talking to the families, there are many more.
“Many of these young men live their lives online and are watching videos of people being beheaded and children killed.
“They are told, ‘If you are a man, you would join us and help this holy war’.
“When they come back they will be dangerous, with extreme views they may try to spread, inciting violence here in the UK."
When Birmingham mother Mukhtar Nazir, 42, learned that her sons, aged 18 and 16, were being targeted by British jihadists in Syria via Twitter, she intervened — and she is urging other British Muslim mums to do the same.
She says: “I looked at my elder son’s phone and he is getting regular Twitter messages from young men from the UK in Syria. It has become an underground cult.
“These messages and pictures horrify me. They glorify death and martyrdom. I think most of the young men who go are looking to die — they do not expect to return.
“It is a brotherhood. We are keen to live in peace but I sense a restlessness, especially in my older boy. He is becoming more remote."
Mukhtar joined women’s group Jihad Against Violence, which aims to reclaim Islam from extremists.
She says: “I talk to my sons and hope they listen. I can only pray that one morning I will not find their beds empty and they have gone to die in Syria."
'We're as appalled as you' “OUR moderate community is horrified at what is happening and we are very worried," says Dr Basharat Nazir, a spokesman for the moderate Ahmadiyya Muslim Association.
Based at the Baitul Futuh Mosque in Morden, south London, the group aims its teachings at young Muslims.
Dr Nazir says: “It does not make sense to go to Syria and fight someone else’s fight in the name of Islam.
“I have watched some of the videos posted by British youths in Syria and they are spreading like a virus.
“They get into the mindset of young people.
“In the old days, hate and radicalism were spread by preachers in mosques – now they are spread on the internet.
“My group of Muslims are dedicated to peace – but there are many other vulnerable young minds out there.
“Then, when these men return, they will spread these seeds of violence and it could take a generation to heal.
“They are glamorising this life of violence, inciting others to fight. The trouble is that a lot of Muslim youngsters in Britain today are not in active or satisfying jobs.
“They live lives of idleness and this is seen as a chance to prove themselves.
“The radicalism stems from a misunderstanding of Islam. In Britain we now have large immigration from Pakistan and they bring with them a misunderstanding about jihad.
“The same thing is happening in Nigeria.
“Sometimes the message of hate is spread through imams at the mosques or scholars from other countries coming here to speak at conferences and workshops, inciting young people to go to Syria."
Document THESCOT020140510ea5a000xe
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	06/04/2014 to 22/05/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard Online Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,886
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 17:20
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
