{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"186"}
____
Katie Hopkins
Grandad aged 27 shames Britain
By KATIE HOPKINS, SUN Columnist   
1,542 words
4 April 2014
01:24
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
BRITAIN’S youngest grandfather is aged only 27.
Well that’s just marvellous, isn’t it.
Some little scrote half my age is not only a dad but a grandad as well.
What gems of wisdom can we expect him to pass down to his grandchild?
None too many given his visitation restrictions.
He has spent 11 years inside for stabbing to death a good Samaritan who intervened in a burglary and is spending a bit more time at Her Majesty’s pleasure after trying a bungled escape last year.
His daughter fell pregnant at 13 with a boy of her own age. I wonder about that expression. Did she slip? Was there a wet floor without one of those irritating yellow signs warning you not to fall over?
I have been pregnant three times and I can confirm falling was not to blame.
These young fatherless kids are part of a tragic cycle.
Brainless and spineless, they serve no purpose other than to destroy stuff.
Our grandfather-to-be says he is very angry with her. Who cares? He could be dayglo pink and dressed as a sausage and no one would pay the slightest bit of notice to what he has to say.
I often reprimand my children in a stern voice to “do what your father says". This pregnant teen has hardly seen her father outside of prison. Telling her to listen to a knife-wielding murderer feels wrong.
Meanwhile, she has been keeping herself busy posting baby scans on Facebook for her mates to see. Advertised idiocy is big in these families.
In most civilised countries there is a huge amount of shame attached to being an underage mum.
But Britain has failed to convey this shame. Hence we still have one of the highest rates of teen pregnancy in Western Europe.
Instead of shaming them, we support them with free schools, free housing and free health care.
Her mates have said she will make a brilliant mum.
Presumably they know this because she is good at looking after her drunken mates on nights out.
There will be those who admire their pregnant friends and want in on the attention and the freebies that come with it.
Brilliant is not a word I would use.
She is no longer in school because of her condition — namely being pregnant and stupid.
Taxpayers are paying a £30 taxi fare each day so she can attend a special school for pregnant kids.
I fail to see why such an irresponsible attitude should be a problem for taxpayers to deal with.
Many families cannot afford a baby, but they are paying their taxes for a 27-year-old lad to become a grandad.
A grandad is a man of the world, passing on the benefit of hindsight learned over decades of life.
They have time to spend — showing tiny tots how to plant potatoes or towing your daughters up and down the road on a ride-on tractor.
He is not a 27-year-old convict with no knowledge of the world.
I hope they call the kid Destiny — one thing is for sure, her tragic future is all mapped out.
Her just desserts
NIGELLA LAWSON has been stopped from getting on a plane to the States because of her reputation for snorting cocaine and smoking cannabis in front of her kids.
God bless America.
Nigella flounced into court, chest on high alert – and admitted taking drugs without anyone raising an eyebrow.
She has been gushing and crying on chat shows, winning over the nation with her talk of eating chocolate late at night. Most women have every sympathy for the self-styled domestic goddess.
I have none. The Americans have the sort of strict immigration and passport controls we need to adopt here. If you aren’t good enough, you aren’t coming in.
Nigella has lived a blessed life yet took drugs in front of her kids. If she was a single mum living on an estate do we really think anyone would be quite so sympathetic?
Kick in the teeth LOW-LIFE Josie Cunningham is best known for having a £4,800 boob job on the NHS so she could get work as a glamour model.
This was a surprising choice of career given she has a face that a mother would find difficult to love.
And mates who must have shaved off her eyebrows when she was lying drunk in an alley. Now she is pregnant.
Working as an escort, I guess this was always going to be a hazard of the job.
Not one to miss out on an opportunity, Josie is using her pregnancy to get an expensive round of dental work done at the taxpayers’ expense.
Cunning by name, cunning by nature.
- APRIL Fool’s Day puts me on alert.
Any requests from TV producers wanting to film a piece about the plight of rabbits laying massive eggs and it’s a no from me.
However, I do love a good April Fool’s gag and Firebox nailed it this year with the Katie Hopkins Talking Head at £59.99. Advertised as “reassuringly offensive" it promised 5,000 of my sharpest quotes.
Now they have planted the idea in my mind I want one really badly – and so do many others.
I have an order list as long as my arm.
If placed on my husband’s desk I would be able to nag him remotely through the day.
I have asked Firebox whether the real version could have eyebrows that move so I could raise one disapprovingly whenever someone larger than a size ten walks by.
Someone took April Fool’s a little bit far and announced my death on Facebook. I have been disappointing people all over the UK (mainly in Scotland) by reassuring them I am very much alive and kicking.
- NICK CLEGG and Nigel Farage have come to blows again over Europe.
This time Nick walked away with a miserable 27 per cent of support from viewers.
Cameron must be rubbing his hands with glee. Not only has he managed to avoid an awkward debate with Nigel, but Nick has happily agreed to be the sacrificial lamb.
Now the whole country is pointing and laughing at him bleating in the corner.
Nigel wants us to “come and join the people’s army" to topple the establishment. Fifty nine per cent of Ukip are over 65. I worry his people’s army might look a bit like the last ever series of Dad’s Army.
Captain Mainwaring would be installed in his local pub – the George & Dragon. “Bongo bongo" Godfrey Bloom would be hitting journalists over the head as Private Godfrey.
And Neil Hamilton would have his hand in the till as the spivvy Private Walker.
- PRINCE ANDREW has become the first member of the royal household to take a selfie at the Palace.
He has done many stupid things in his time – marrying Fergie for one.
The Spitting Image centrefold on TV depicting him with 2lbs of Cumberland sausage as a prop in the Eighties summed up Randy Andy at his best.
Now he is at it again.
I can’t see the Queen being too happy.
Not only has he broken royal protocol – royals simply don’t do this sort of thing – but he has managed to make himself look a complete pillock. His huge face looms large over the screen with his little fan club laughing in the background.
For goodness sake man, you are not Ellen DeGeneres – you are the Duke of York.
Leave selfies to the kids and start acting your age.
- A STUDY has found that more than half of women have been bullied at work.
Bullied is a strong word and I can’t help but feel these ladies are being a little bit over dramatic.
If your manager lynches you in the car park to nick your sandwiches then yes, I agree – that’s not on, you are being bullied and should tell someone from HR. They love this sort of thing.
One in four of these bullied women say they are overloaded with work and criticised for what they do.
Being given a lot of work is part of the deal you made when you accepted your pay cheque.
If your manager takes the time to tell you what they think, be grateful.
You might not like it, but at least they are interested in you – and you now have a point to prove.
- I AM looking forward to joining the panel on ITV2’s Celebrity Juice next week.
I say that with some trepidation. When Ant McPartlin was on the show, the panel had to guess the size of his forehead. They even measured it.
I fear my nose may suffer the same indignity.
If you would like to see my nose measured and my attempts to frighten Keith Lemon join us at 10pm next Thursday.
- I WOULD like to confirm I am not running in the Grand National tomorrow.
Yes, I look a bit like a horse. Yes, you are very funny. Now – can we move on please?
Document THESUK0020140404ea4400004
