{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2481"}
____
Politics
Don't panic! Lib Dems sent dossier on how to deal with UKIP in run-up to elections; LIB Dems in meltdown over UKIP have been issued with a Dads Army-style message: Don't panic!
By EMILY ASHTON, Whitehall Correspondent   
369 words
5 March 2014
00:34
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Campaigners have been sent a five-page dossier on how to deal with the anti-EU party in May's council and Euro elections.
It urges them "not to panic" and gives them advice on how to spot a UKIP voter - such as those who "spontaneously mention immigration".
The document emerged as Europhile Nick Clegg lashed out at Nigel Farage - warning that he does NOT stand up for British interests.
The pair are set to face each other in a live TV debate over Europe within weeks.
The Lib Dems are expected to take a hammering in the European elections on May 22 - while UKIP is tipped to win.
Meanwhile Mr Clegg's party is defending some 700 council seats in England against the rising threat from local UKIP activists.
The leaked campaign dossier, issued to grassroot Lib Dems across England, warned that UKIP supporters would seek to paint the Lib Dems as "part of the establishment".
It said: "Understanding where UKIP's voters are coming from and how we should approach it are important.
"It's important however not to panic."
Under the heading "Spotting UKIP in Voter ID", the memo said: "Two ways of identifying potential UKIP voters are: Those who are ambivalent about their voting intention, but spontaneously mention immigration and those who often dismiss all parties of government ('a plague on all their houses')."
A UKIP spokesman said: "The mere fact that the Lib Dems have written this lengthy dossier should tell people they are in fact panicking.
"They have lost the British people and whatever techniques they deploy are not going to save them on May 22."
But in a speech today, Mr Clegg will say: "UKIP MEPs don't stand up for British interests.
"They regularly vote against EU laws that will create British jobs, put money back in the pocket of British consumers and protect the UK from cross-border crime and terrorism."
e.ashton@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140305ea35000sb
