{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3811"}
____
Louise Mensch
Clown prince Nigel to blame for Ukip falling on its face
By LOUISE MENSCH, Sun Columnist   
1,394 words
27 April 2014
04:03
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
NO matter where Nigel Farage goes, hypocrisy follows him.
He says Ukip will account for every penny spent — they don’t have expenses scandals. Yet he can’t explain where the £60k spent running his free office went.
Not much of a fuss is being made. The Tories are holding off until after the Euros.
Yes, of course Ukip will do well there. The Euros are a meaningless election none of us cares about and only a handful vote in.
Those passionate about giving the establishment a kicking will head to the polls.
But will it help Ukip get a single seat in Westminster? Absolutely not.
Farage’s anti-EU immigrant posters said they were “taking our jobs" — yet he窶冱 given a fat salary to his German wife as his secretary.
Asked when this job was advertised to Brits, Nige said that no Brit could do the job as it involved late-night typing.
On EU money, though? I bet a lot of folk would be willing to try.
Nige’s secretary also “works" from his taxpayer-funded “home office" that he says is very expensive to run. Seeing a pattern here?
Ever feel like you’ve been cheated? Hypocrisy is why Nasty Nigel will never get close to being an MP.
He’s tried — and flopped — FIVE times. Bromley 2006? Third. High- profile attempt on John Bercow’s seat, 2010? Third.
All that chuntering from the MEP and nationwide publicity earned him a massive eight per cent of the votes.
Farage not only can’t win, he can’t organise a p***-up in a brewery. Well, judging by his thirsty reputation, perhaps he could organise that — but politics, no way.
When Boris was elected Mayor of London, Farage “forgot" to even put a Ukip candidate on the ballot.
If you dropped the racist posters and trousering of voters’ money, Ukip could maybe form an alliance with the Tories but not with this clown leading them.
Nobody can name a single Kipper other than Farage — they’re invisible.
This minority party needs a credible face. When it gets one, Ukip could join the mainstream of British politics — and enact change where it counts, at Westminster. Farage and his German secretary are what’s holding Ukip back. Will anyone have the guts to mount a challenge?
If my friend Dan Hannan MEP, our most Eurosceptic Tory, were to defect, he’d be a brilliant Ukip leader — and someone the Tories could do business with.
Obesity's the real growing problem POOR Charity Pierce. The star of yesterday窶冱 Sun front page is the fattest woman in the world – and it’s no surprise she’s from America.
The Yanks laugh at the state of Brits’ teeth – and we think of them as fat slobs.
The trouble with this lazy stereotype is Britain is getting fatter too – at an ALARMING rate. Some feminists are up in arms about “confidence" and “body image".
The fact is, fat is terrible for you. It shortens life, makes you depressed and puts a huge burden on the health service.
A new study in America showed that people get EVEN FATTER when the well-meaning message of “love your curves" is sent to the obese.
“Confidence went up, but higher-calorie choices were the consequence," boffins said.
In other words, tell kids it’s OK to be fat and they’re on the crisps and sweets before you know it.
The stuffy report concluded obesity should not be called a “disease". You can’t help getting a disease like cancer – but you CAN help stuffing your face and never leaving the couch.
While people scramble for food in the developing world we’re turning into complacent, over-fed lardar*es.
We need to start telling ourselves – and our kids – the truth. Lard has killed more people than Bin Laden and the biggest threat to Western lives isn’t terrorism, but the junk we stuff down our own throats.
EARTHQUAKE in the Catholic Church – Pope Francis apparently rang a divorced and remarried woman to tell her she could receive Communion.
So what? I hear you say.
Isn’t he the hip new Pope and all that jazz? Well, I’m a divorced and remarried Catholic – and I haven’t presented myself for Communion since my divorce. It’s against basic Catholic teaching.
The Vatican is now twisting in the wind saying the conversation was private.
But if Francis did anything of the kind, he undermined the Catholic faith – and you can expect to see the Church that loved him splitting top to toe. Why not allow gays to marry, contraception, abortion, and women priests?
If Francis alters teaching in one area, it can change in all the others.
Watch out for an almighty row in one of the world’s biggest faiths.
The royal future is orange EVEN before he can walk, darling Prince George is proving his value to The Firm.
Effortlessly adorable, the littlest royal has been winning hearts and minds Down Under.
George really does have something special. He’s great-looking and seems a very good-tempered infant – at least when the cameras are on.
But there’s something else I couldn’t help but notice: George is a gorgeous ginger.
As Prince Harry grew up, there were slurs against Diana.
Harry looked nothing like Charles – and his bold mop of red hair was said to look just like Di’s lover James Hewitt’s.
Sensible voices pointed out that red hair runs in the Spencer family and now we see the next generation and it’s ginger again.
As much as it might gall Charles, it seems Diana’s genes will dominate history.
And the People’s Princeling certainly has Granny’s touch.
Suspension? Pat deserves a medal ONE American teen got a three-day suspension from school – but it was definitely worth it.
When Miss America gave a speech there, 18-year-old Patrick Farves defied his teachers and asked her to be his date for the prom.
Pals egged him on and administrators caught wind of the assembly stunt and issued dire warnings.
But bold Patrick made the beauty queen smile as he rushed up to the podium and got out his request.
I say, let the kid off. He taught his peers a lesson about guts. After all, America’s meant to be the land of the free – and the home of the brave.
Big beast Boris has his uses INSIDERS tell me Boris Johnson has decided to stand as an MP – and with large numbers of Tories in safe seats retiring, constituencies can’t wait to offer the Blond Bombshell a seat.
This is great news for Cameron. Mayor Boris was outside his control – but candidate Boris will have to give his all to the party to build up goodwill in the election.
MPs in marginal seats will expect to see Bozza on the doorstep making a difference. Nothing will endear him more to them than getting them back into the Commons.
A big beast deserves a big job. Cameron should fire deeply underwhelming Grant Shapps and put Boris in the Party Chairman job.
He may be from Eton and privileged, but Boris’s great asset is unique in British politics – a sense of humour.
It’s the one thing the Tories lack – and Labour are terrified of. A good laugh at their expense will be deadly.
But don’t look for Boris to win the Tory leadership. His dirty political secret is that he LOVES the EU.
Boris is the joker in the political pack to succeed Cameron – but George Osborne is the ace.
AMERICAN scientists have invented a laser that can control the weather. April Fool’s? No – look at the date.
Boffins at the University of Arizona are developing a beam that can harness static in the atmosphere and make it rain when pointed at a cloud.
I dare say flood-sodden Somerset isn’t too excited by this news, but it was only 2012 when we had a hosepipe ban.
This is great news as weather gets more unpredictable. But if they invent a laser to STOP the rain, we’ll be laughing.
Follow me on Twitter @louisemensch
Document THESUK0020140427ea4r000bg
