{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"787"}
____
News
Barmaid stalked soldier with Christmas bum pic; A BARMAID stalked a soldier after becoming obsessed with him - even sending him a picture of her bare bum on Christmas Day, a court heard.
By HARRY HAWKINS   
465 words
25 February 2014
13:42
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Besotted Marta Guskiewicz, 29, bombarded Craig Outhwaite with text messages, phone calls, visits to his house and pestered him on Facebook.
She even changed her surname to his on the social networking site and sent him messages saying: "I love you. I want to have your babies!"
Guskiewicz, of Skipton, North Yorkshire, also targeted Mr Outhwaite's girlfriend Hollie Waddington, branding her a prostitute.
Skipton Magistrates’ Court heard Polish immigrant Guskiewicz met Mr Outhwaite when she worked as a barmaid at a pub.
Prosecutor Caroline Midgley said a moorland surveyor and Army reservist, Mr Outhwaite was posted to Afghanistan in October 2012 and used Facebook to communicate with friends - one of whom was Guskiewicz.
But on his return from active service Guskiewicz bombarded Mr Outhwaite with texts and phone calls until he blocked her number.
Outhwaite and girlfriend Hollie Ben Lack Photography
Mrs Midgley said she then left messages on his Facebook page asking about his Army medals.
"Mr Outhwaite was at home with his girlfriend when Guskiewicz turned up on his doorstep. He was angry and told her to go.
"He was not polite to her and told her to leave him alone and her advances where not welcome...though not quite in those words," said Mrs Midgley.
Between August 22 and August 28 2013, Guskiewicz left 21 voicemail messages and Outhwaite reported her to the police because he felt harassed and distressed.
She was served with a Harassment Act Warning on September 4 but she continued to stalk him.
"On Christmas Day 2013 he received a Facebook image of her semi-clothed and showing her bottom to the camera," Mrs Midgley told the bench.
The court heard Guskiewicz changed her surname to Outhwaite on Facebook and posted his mobile number on the site.
She also created a Facebook page with Miss Waddington’s photo on and advertised 'prostitutes, all you want, anything £20, dirty ugly skanks’.
She was arrested and admitted to loving Mr Outhwaite.
Guskiewicz pleaded guilty to stalking Mr Outhwaite between May 1 2013 and 13 January 2014.
Defending, Jill Darrington said: “She realises now that it was wrong."
JPs sentenced Guskiewicz to a 12-month community order, with supervision from a probation officer and ordered her to complete 40 hours unpaid work.
She was ordered to pay £85 costs and a £60 victim surcharge.
She is subject to a restraining order prohibiting her from approaching Mr Outhwaite, contacting him on Facebook or posting anything about him on the social media site and she is banned from going within 500 metres of his home address.
Document THESUK0020140225ea2p0043e
