{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3812"}
____
Politics
Rattled Ukip branded ‘BNP in blazers’
By CRAIG WOODHOUSE, Political Correspondent   
478 words
27 April 2014
03:42
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
exclusive . Copycat posters and new 'racist' tweets
RATTLED Ukip was branded the “BNP in blazers" yesterday as The Sun on Sunday revealed its new posters copy those of the right-wing racist party.
Nigel Farage’s £1.5million drive — unveiled in a week of gaffes — repeats a BNP image of a Union Jack burning to show an EU flag.
It also uses a pointing finger with the slogan “Take back control of our country".
The BNP has used a finger-pointing poster with the words “Taking our country back".
Its hated leader Nick Griffin — who used the burning flag four years ago — accused Ukip of a “shameless rip-off".
The row comes as Ukip was engulfed in a new racism storm over vile jibes made by its candidates on social media.
Most shocking were made by William Henwood, a Ukip candidate in Enfield, North London, who compared Islam to Nazi Germany and said comedian Lenny Henry should “emigrate to a black country".
Magnus Nielsen, a local party chairman standing in Camden, North London, branded Islam “organised crime under religious camouflage".
Greenwich candidate Gary Port “liked" the BNP on Facebook, while South Tyneside candidate and Ukip press officer Joe Quirk shared a post which read: “Islam — contributing not one damn thing to humanity for 1,400 years."
Last night, Lib Dem peer Lord Oakeshott said: “The mask is off — Ukip are the BNP in blazers.
“Britain deserves better than these extremists stirring up fear and hatred."
And Simon Cressy, from anti-extremist group HOPE not Hate said he was “surprised and alarmed" that Mr Farage had used a far-right slogan.
Ukip accused opponents of “behaving like secret police" by trawling social media. It insisted: “Ukip is a non-racist, non-sectarian party whose members are expected to uphold these values.
Any breach of our rules will be duly investigated and, where appropriate, action will be taken."
I've beggared up
THE Irish actor who posed as a “jobless’ Brit in a Ukip poster said last night: “This could have ruined my career."
David O’Rourke was paid to pose as a beggar in a hard hat and high-vis jacket.
A headline read: “EU policy at work: British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour".
The 31-year-old, who lives in Edinburgh but is originally from Dublin, said: “I am worried this could stick with me as a poster boy for racism.
"I don’t share their views. To me it was a job.
"I just saw this as an opportunity to pay bills and advance my career."
Other parties have accused Ukip of hypocrisy for giving an immigrant work over a UK-born model or actor.
Ukip has said using actors for posters is usual practice.
craig.woodhouse@the-sun.co.uk 
Document THESUK0020140427ea4r000xf
