{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"212"}
____
Politics
PM: We've flopped on migrants
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
466 words
13 May 2014
22:53
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
DAVID Cameron has admitted he has not got immigration down by "as much as I'd like" - as Brits rated it their new top concern.
The Premier conceded for the first time that his government is failing to reduce the tidal wave of newcomers - which is on the up again at a net 212,000 a year - saying numbers are "still too high".
He also suggested for the first time that he will FAIL to meet his solemn 2010 election promise to slash annual arrivals to below 100,000.
Mr Cameron repeatedly refused to answer MPs' questions on whether he would achieve it as pledged by next May, only saying: "The figures will be what the figures are".
The major concession - just eight days before Euro elections polling day - came as an exclusive YouGov poll for The Sun reveals immigration is now the most important issue facing the country for Brits.
For the first time, it was rated equal top with the economy.
Both scored 52% when voters in the survey were asked to pick up to three that most concerned them.
Despite the major setback of spiralling numbers of new immigrants from inside the EU, Mr Cameron still refused to abandon the tens of thousands target.
He insisted instead that "progress" is being made and it was still eventually "achievable".
During a grilling from powerful backbench MPs on the Liaison Committee, the PM said: "Net migration is down by a fifth under this government - not as much as I'd like.
"The target remains, the commitment remains.
"My commitment is to do everything I can to make progress towards that target and that's what we should do."
The concession also came on the eve of the first official indicator of how many Romanians and Bulgarians had come to Britain since their ban was lifted in January.
Experts predict as many as 30,000 more people from the two poor Eastern European countries are now working here in the first three months of the year.
The Premier also told of his irritation in the government's failure to deport more foreign prisoners, which cost taxpayers a fortune languishing in British jails.
He told MPs: "I find it very frustrating. We are making progress, but it is extremely hard work".
But he rejected a call from some Tory MPs to strip students out of immigration statistics, dubbing it as just "playing with the numbers".
As The Sun revealed last week, the next quarterly immigration statistics - released on May 22 - are expected to confirm the soaring number of EU immigrants has now overtaken the number of arrivals from outside of the EU for the first time.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140513ea5d005mu
