{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1987"}
____
Sun City
The vultures are SERCLING
By SIMON ENGLISH, City Editor   
983 words
30 April 2014
01:01
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Shares dive at giant's profit warning
TROUBLED SERCO yesterday had another disaster — as its shares dived by 15 per cent.
Furious investors bailed out after the bungling company issued an unexpected and vague profit warning that suggests it may ask shareholders for cash to stay afloat.
The out-sourcing giant said: “It has now become evident in the light of recent performance that we may need to reassess the level of risk implicit in the assumptions underlying our forecasts.
“This may, in turn, require a material downward revision to expectations, and for us to review the appropriateness of our financing position."
Shares collapsed, closing down 60.7p at 343.8p, after £303million was removed from the value of the company.
Investment bank LIBERUM said the profit warning was a “shock" and labelled it “deliberately vague".
The disaster underlies the scale of the task facing incoming chief executive Rupert Soames, who takes over on Thursday.
Wags say his job is just as difficult as any attempted by his grandfather — Sir Winston Churchill.
Serco is currently under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office and City of London Police over accusations it defrauded the Ministry of Justice through its prisoner escort and electronic tagging contracts.
The scandal cost Chris Hyman his job as chief executive last autumn.
Last month, Serco said costs relating to the police investigation were £90.5million.
The admission helped send its pre-tax profits for 2013 plunging by 62 per cent to £107million.
The company has already slashed 400 jobs and issued two earlier profit warnings in November and January.
Serco’s operations include administering US President Barack Obama’s healthcare reforms in America and operating immigration detention centres in Australia.
But its biggest customer is the British Government. Its UK responsibilities include managing London’s DOCKLANDS LIGHT RAILWAY and cycle hire scheme and our missile early warning system.
Serco might have to go cap-in-hand to shareholders for cash to stay afloat.
Tags for dead lags and other gaffes - BUNGLING Serco’s recent disasters include:
SEPT 2012: Patients are given infected blood by a Serco-run lab in London.
JAN 2013: Accused of falsifying NHS reports.
SEPT 2013: Claims emerge of a cover-up on alleged sex abuse of detainees at Yarl’s Wood Immigration Removal Centre in Milton Ernest, Beds, DEC 2013: Serco repays £68million to the Government for charging for tagging criminals. Some were dead or in jail.
Brit chip maker in takeover
ANOTHER British success story has fallen into foreign hands.
Edinburgh’s WOLFSON MICROELECTRONICS is to be taken over by US rival CIRRUS LOGIC in a £291million deal.
Both firms supply APPLE with microchips for iPhones.
Although Wolfson recently lost out on a deal to make chips for SAMSUNG , it is still seen as strong.
And the offer of 235p a share — 70 per cent higher than when the deal emerged — should lure investors.
Wolfson joins the list of UK technology takeovers, which include HEWLETT-PACKARD ’S purchase of AUTONOMY and US private equity firm VISTA buying MISYS .
It comes a day after US-based PFIZER offered £60billion for UK drug giant ASTRAZENECA .
Troubled Co-op in exec axe A TOP executive at the troubled CO-OPERATIVE GROUP has been forced out following an internal investigation.
Stuart Ramsay, who is said to have clashed with previous chief executive Euan Sutherland, left last night.
A brief statement from the embattled mutual group read: “Following an independent report, and at the request of the board, Stuart Ramsay has left the board of the Co-operative Group with immediate effect."
It is thought that a dispute arose concerning the leaking of company sensitive information.
Sutherland left in March after branding the group “ungovernable".
Ramsay could not be reached for comment.
A separate report by Sir Christopher Kelly into the collapse of the Co-op Bank is out today.
Camelot chief off THE boss of the National Lottery is to quit after 14 years at the helm.
Dianne Thompson, chief executive at operator CAMELOT , is leaving her £2 million-a-year post following its decision to split into two companies.
Andy Duncan, the boss of its UK unit since 2011, will head Camelot UK Lotteries.
Nigel Railton, the group chief financial officer, will head Camelot Global Services, its international business.
Ms Thompson, who goes in October, said: “Running Camelot has been my dream job. I’ll look back with great fondness and pride."
E-Car fast track
MOTOR industry experts claim most cars in Britain will be electric by 2040 after the Government unveiled a £500million subsidy yesterday.
They say the money means a “tipping" point has been reached and petrol cars will be history in decades.
Sales of electric cars — like the new BMW i3, — were up by 20 per cent in the UK last year. They can go up to 100 miles for just £2.
Debbie Klein of car marketing firm ENGINE said: “Electric cars are no longer a quirky choice bought for ideological reasons.
“The latest generation offer every bit as good a driving experience as a petrol car."
Fuel price nudges up PETROL is above 130p a litre for the first time since January.
The average price yesterday was 130.17p, with diesel 136.39p.
Intense competition at supermarkets has lately kept fuel costs low — and helped keep inflation down.
The pound’s higher value also put a brake on prices at the pumps, as oil is bought in dollars.
Supermarkets and other garages may now be forced to put petrol prices up as wholesale costs rise.
SANCTIONS against Russia have hit BP. Profits from the Russian arm crashed due to sanctions imposed by the US, it emerged yesterday. Overall, BP’s profit in the first three months fell by £595million to £1.9billion.
THE FTSE 100 ROSE 69.75 TO 6,769.91
Document THESUK0020140429ea4u004kc
