{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2527"}
____
Politics
Coalition policy on verge of collapse over EU migrants; COALITION policy on immigration will be pushed to the verge of complete collapse today in a blazing row over EU migrants.
By STEVE HAWKES, Deputy Political Editor   
450 words
6 March 2014
00:00
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Lib Dem business secretary Vince Cable will tear into the Tories - claiming they are being “medieval" in tackling immigrants.
And in a key speech he will insist that cutting EU arrivals to the UK could threaten the entire economic recovery.
But just hours earlier he will be ridiculed by Government colleague immigration minister James Brokenshire.
The Tory minister will rubbish Vince Cable’s claims that rising migration is “good news" for the economy.
And he will tell delegates at a think tank conference: “In the past year net migration from the EU has doubled - and this figure is frankly just too high."
“Some have tried to claim that this rapid increase is somehow ‘good’ for the country.
“Well just like the Home Secretary, I disagree."
Mr Brokenshire will also signal he wants a further crackdown on bogus students at Britain’s universities.
In comments likely to infuriate the Lib Dems, he will insist universities and colleges have no excuse for failing to check whether students were genuine.
He will say: “Is that really so unreasonable?
“After all universities would hardly admit a British student without checking their A-Level results."
The row follows claims on Tuesday night that Downing Street has suppressed a report which claims the effects of immigration on British workers have been overstated.
The claims were fiercely denied by No.10 yesterday - with suggestions the report could be published by May’s European Elections.
Figures last week revealed a huge increase in EU migrants pushed 窶從et" migration up nearly 40 per cent to 212,000 in the past year. 
The Tories pledged in 2010 to cut net migration to the “tens of thousands".
Vince Cable last week insisted the rise was good news for Brits - as it showed the economy was on the rise.
Today he said it was untrue to say migrants “come here to sponge off our wonderfully generous welfare system".
And he will insist a marked reduction in EU migrants risked pushing up debts as they represent cheap labour for public services.
He will add: “Bearing down on economic migration is a clear example of a restriction on trade.
“In medieval times, guilds used to prevent travelling artisans from plying their trade outside their native area, with a deadening effect on competition and innovation.
“What was true then is true now.
“Bear down on immigrants and you lose some of the most dynamic, innovative and imaginative workers in your economy."
steve.hawkes@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140306ea360010v
