{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2888"}
____
Guido Fawkes
Number 10 has another baby on way (...for Cameron’s nanny)
By GUIDO FAWKES, SUN Columnist   
708 words
30 March 2014
00:00
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
CONGRATULATIONS to Gita Lima, the Cameron children’s nanny, who Guido can reveal is expecting a baby in early summer.
Usually Gita keeps in the background, hitting the front pages only when blundering Tory immigration minister James Brokenshire claimed the rich paid less for their children’s nannies because of mass immigration and it came out that Gita had only been granted British citizenship after Samantha Cameron was named on the application as her employer.
Critics nevertheless will not be pleased to learn that Nepal-born Gita, having only got her passport in 2010, will soon be in receipt of maternity and child benefits.
The happy news means that the Downing Street nanny employment crisis is now becoming critical – George Osborne’s nanny is having her leaving party next week.
Taxi for Watson SINCE he was forced out of the Shadow Cabinet, Labour’s Tom Watson has had more time to spend on his personal vendettas, so why should we have to get the tab for his grandstanding campaigns?
He recently claimed £56.80 for a taxi ride to pick up archive boxes from the BBC for “research". Yet according to his expenses claim, he had them delivered to the Guardian rather than his own office.
Is this an appropriate use of taxpayers’ cash? The fearless seeker of truth has declined the opportunity to provide Guido with an innocent explanation on five separate occasions.
Umunna Amour THE French government has been showing Chuka Umunna some love, whisking the Shadow Business Secretary across the Channel for an all-expenses-paid, three-day visit.
The £4,348 cost of the trip included the services of a translator, which is odd given Chuka boasts on his CV about his degree in English and French law.
With all those weekends spent at his family villa in Ibiza, his French will of course be rustier than his Spanish.
Clearly the year Chuka spent at the University of Burgundy in Dijon did not cut the mustard.
“WELLI’m not off to church," quipped Nigel Farage when asked if he was going to the pub after beating Nick Clegg in their EU debate.
Guido can reveal that he actually retired to the much more plush surroundings of the Reform Club, on London’s Pall Mall, for a celebratory party with Ukip supporters. Unfortunately, the patiently waiting older crowd had not been able to see their victorious hero’s debate performance despite it being broadcast live on Sky News.
The Reform Club was founded in 1836, long before the television age, so instead they had all crowded round an old wireless to listen to the radio broadcast.
When that party ended Nigel together with his wife Kirsten and some party workers, went to the East India Club (established 1849) for a late nightcap, where fortunately the club has, since last year, allowed women into the bar. Where do people get the idea that Ukip is living in a bygone age?
WOUNDED from his defeat, Nick Clegg is using every trick in the book to try to draw blood at his next EU debate on Wednesday.
His taxpayer-funded special adviser, Adam Pritchard, is secretly approaching bosses from household-name firms to try to get them to sign a pre-drafted letter supporting Clegg’s stance to be placed in the papers the morning before the showdown.
Clegg will then brandish the letter from the podium as if he had nothing to do with it. Well, that was the plan...
COMMENTATORScriticised Farage for appering sweaty under the telly lights in comparison to the cool-looking Clegg.
Nigel confessed to Guido that this was despite him having spent a long session in the steam room to combat the ravages of fags and beer on his skin.
Farage accepts he might, like Clegg, have to wear make-up for Wednesday’s rematch. Well he’s not going to cut out the beer and fags, is he?
ON CHANNEL 4tomorrow in Nigel Farage: Who Are You?, he admits: “I am so contemptuous of what the establishment has done that if it takes a revolution then so be it." To the barricades ’kippers!
Document THESUK0020140330ea3u0003k
