{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2134"}
____
Politics
Brown's nemesis blasts Ed Miliband for being 'no different'
By EMILY ASHTON, Whitehall Correspondent   
938 words
17 May 2014
11:33
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
THE pensioner who brought down Gordon Brown has branded Ed Miliband just another privileged suit in Westminster - in a damning verdict on the Labour leader.
Gillian Duffy, a lifelong Labour voter, said he was no different from posh David Cameron and Nick Clegg who had never experienced real life.
And she said beer-swilling Nigel Farage was the only party leader who seemed to connect with hard-working Brits.
The Sun went to Rochdale for a few pints with the 69-year-old gran - four years after Mr Brown was overheard calling her a “bigoted woman" for daring to ask about immigration.
That chance encounter happened just one week before the 2010 election - and proved the final nail in the coffin for Labour’s bid to stay in office.
Now Mrs Duffy has issued a stark warning to Mr Miliband ahead of vital local and European elections this Thursday.
She said Labour should be “miles ahead" in the polls - days after the Tories took their first poll lead over the Opposition for two years.
Over a pint of lager in the Roebuck pub, she told The Sun: “At the moment you’ve got David Cameron, you’ve got Nick Clegg, you’ve got Ed Miliband and they’re all privileged.
“They’ve got a life which revolves around Westminster.
“Ed Miliband was in with Gordon Brown, he was his helper, you’ve got Cameron who was helper to Norman Lamont, Nick Clegg in Europe.
“How it’s turned out at the moment with the three of them, they’re all on a par."
She said Ukip leader Mr Farage was a “character", adding: “I think you’ve got to have characters in politics.
“He likes a good pint and a smoke, and people think that’s what we want, yeah let’s go along with that."
Mrs Duffy, who has met Ed Miliband, warned that political leaders needed charisma to win over voters.
“Tony Blair had it, he had the looks, he had everything," she said.
Rochdale's Labour MP Simon Danczuk, who joined Mrs Duffy in the pub, has repeatedly warned that Mr Miliband is failing to attract ordinary voters.
He has attacked his party leader for forcing MPs to “parrot vacuous political mantras" like One Nation.
Mrs Duffy told The Sun: “I think up north more than anything you’ve got to be straight talking."
She said no-one knew what One Nation Labour meant - and many people in the Lancs town barely knew who Mr Miliband was.
Moving on for a fresh round of drinks in the Baum pub - crowned the best boozer in Britain by the Campaign for Real Ale last year - Mrs Duffy said no-one seemed to care about the upcoming European elections.
She said it was time to give people a say on whether Britain should stay in the EU.
Mr Cameron has promised an in-out referendum in 2017 if he wins power - but Mr Miliband will only hold one if there is a transfer of power to Brussels, which he admits is “unlikely".
Mrs Duffy said: “I think there should. Let the country go to a vote, just go for it."
But she said she would vote for Britain to stay in.
“We’re so tied to Europe," she said.
“There’s so much business being brought in and out of Europe, we’ve got to stick with it."
She revealed how she had been unimpressed with Mr Brown’s reaction to her concerns about EU immigration.
“I told Brown ‘where are they flocking from?’" she said.
“When he came back to me he said ‘Do you realise there’s so many million going out of the country?’.
“After he went, I thought ‘Why are you so pleased there’s so many million going out of our country, the top end of our people who had a full education here?’"
Mrs Duffy, whose husband Richard died eight years ago, also laid bare her hurt at Mr Brown’s “bigot" jibe, which was caught on microphone in his car after their meeting.
“As soon as I walk in the pub, people say oh here she is now, the bigoted woman," she said.
“People say oh you can take anything they throw at you, but not always."
The ex-PM was trying to drum up votes on the campaign trail when he bumped into Mrs Duffy in Rochdale.
She said she was shocked by what he had said.
“When he came out with that, at first I thought is it my fault that I asked a question?" she said.
“Then I thought what, it weren’t me it were him, he insulted me.
“I just felt why did he do that."
In a swipe at the Westminster elite, she said: “A politician will never answer you direct. They’ll come back with a question to you.
“They’ll go all the way round the houses."
Mrs Duffy - who has three grandchildren aged one, 14 and 16 - said she had already sent off her postal votes for the local and Euro elections - and had voted Labour.
She told how her family had always supported the party, and how her dad had even taken her mum to sing the Red Flag at a Labour gathering in Manchester on their very first date.
But her worries over the current leadership will hit home with many Labour MPs struggling to convince fed-up voters that the party is on their side.
emily.ashton@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140517ea5h0005n
