{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2293"}
____
Politics
David Cameron: 2015 win will be tough
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
534 words
21 May 2014
03:32
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
WINNING next year's general election will be "very tough" for the Tories - but "not impossible", David Cameron has admitted for the first time.
The PM revealed the uphill challenge he faces to stay in power in an interview with Sun Cabbie Grant Davis ahead of tomorrow's euro and council elections.
He also offered up a major concession to say he "understands" why so many people will vote Ukip tomorrow.
Mr Cameron issued his biggest plea yet for ex-Tory voters defecting to the anti-EU party to return to his fold.
Trying to coax them back, the PM said: "There are a lots of decent, hard working people who do not have a racist bone in their body who are thinking of voting Ukip.
"They are frustrated by Europe. They want to see action on welfare.
"I totally understand that".
He insisted: "I am trying to communicate in this campaign I am on your side and I can deliver those things for you."
Grilled on whether he can stay in No10 in 2015, the PM admitted: "It is going to be a tough election, you are right, it is going to be very tough. I totally accept that. My argument is that it is doable.
"It will be tough but it is not impossible.
"I have got 350 days to prove to people that you can change things".
The Premier also publicly admitted he will "have not finished the job" on immigration by then - a signal that he will break his pledge to slash new arrivals to under 100,000 a year.
Mr Cameron also said he will succeed in his EU renegotiation because he will "get another treaty".
And he revealed he even withholds toilet breaks during long EU summits for fear of Britain being attacked.
The PM said: "Sometimes I don't even go out of the room for a pee because you are worried the rebate will have gone by the time you get back".
Our latest exclusive YouGov poll last night on how Brits plan to vote in the euro elections tomorrow revealed Ukip are now neck and neck again with Labour for first place.
The two parties are tied on 27% each, with the Tories on 23% and the Lib Dems on 10%.
But of those who say they are certain to vote, Ukip have a clear five point lead, on 30% - with Labour on 25%, the Tories on 21%, and the Lib Dems on 11%.
- GEORGE Osborne will open up a new attack on Ukip today, as well as Ed Miliband's Labour party, by branding them both "the forces of pessimism".
The Chancellor will say: "Political parties on the left and the populist right have this in common: they want to pull up the drawbridge and shut Britain off from the world.
"Whether from the left or the populist right, we now see a deeply pessimistic, depressing, anti-business agenda."
But in a speech to the CBI, Mr Osborne will also insist: "We will overcome the forces of pessimism and see it through".
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140521ea5l000p1
