{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2812"}
____
Politics
Net immigration increase casts shadow over reform talks; A FRESH tidal wave of EU immigrants from crisis-crippled countries was revealed yesterday - casting a long shadow over David Cameron's reform talks with Angela Merkel.
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
439 words
28 February 2014
00:35
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Net immigration from the continent DOUBLED in the last year to a record 131,000, shock new figures revealed.
It took the total number of arriving Europeans to a massive 209,000 - up from 149,000 in 2012 - while only 78,000 left.
The highest increases were from troubled Spain, Italy, Portugal and Poland, as well as Romania and Bulgaria - before controls had even been swept away from the final two last month.
The grim stats only deepened the huge scale of the PM's task to win back powers from Brussels for Britain to control its own borders again.
As The Sun has revealed, Brits see the return of the power as key to his pledged renegotiation - or they will vote out in his EU referendum in 2017.
But on a day-long red carpet visit to London yesterday, the powerful German Chancellor snuffed out Mr Cameron's hopes of "fundamental reform".
On hopeful Tories wanting that from her, Mrs Merkel told a special gathering of MPs and peers: "I'm afraid they are in for a disappointment".
She was given the rare honour of addressing Parliamentarians in the House of Lords' stately Royal Gallery.
Offering a small ray of hope on benefits tourism, Mrs Merkel did admit there had been "mistakes" over freedom of movement around the EU, adding: "We need to acknowledge and tackle them".
And later after drinks with Mr Cameron in his family flat above No10 before lunch, Mrs Merkel said a compromise deal to keep Britain in the EU was possible.
She added: "Where there's a will, there's a way.
"It is not a piece of cake. It is going to be hard work."
In a bid to brush off the setback, Mr Cameron insisted changes to the EU were still "possible, achievable and doable".
Home Office officials admitted they were powerless to stop the new influx of EU immigrants, amid fears of what it will do to already overcrowded public services and housing.
But they insisted that success was continuing with tougher controls on non-EU new arrivals, who were down by 25,000 last year.
Veteran immigration campaigners Labour MP Frank Field and Tory MP Nicholas Soames MP said: "These figures confirm that government policy is working where it can.
"But the increase in EU migration clearly poses new issues."
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140228ea2s001bf
