{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"167"}
____
Politics
Osborne admits to migration failure
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
342 words
3 April 2014
21:00
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
GEORGE Osborne has been forced to admit there will be "around a hundred thousand" more immigrants to Britain every year - destroying a cherished Tory target.
In a grilling from MPs on the Budget, the Chancellor conceded official predictions have new arrivals running at a net influx of 150,000 a year.
And that has been projected to last FOUR years, until 2018.
The projection has been formally accepted by the Treasury, the small print in his annual economic blueprint two weeks ago revealed.
It is a bitter blow for David Cameron's 2010 election pledge to slash immigration to below 100,000 a year.
But with barely a year to go until the next election, Mr Osborne still insisted to the Treasury Committee: "The government's stated policy is to reduce it to the tens of thousands".
One member, Labour MP John Mann, blasted the Chancellor for evading his questions, saying: "You're going to get in the England cricket team you're ducking so much".
Budget measure to boost Britian's lapsed savings habit will take time to have an effect, he also admitted.
Mr Osborne said: "It's not a quick-fix job, you have to turn around a supertanker".
And he said he was keeping "a close eye" on house prices after warnings of a new property bubble.
Meanwhile, Labour challenged the effects of another £100 income tax cut that comes in on Sunday with the start of a new tax year.
Households will be £974 a year worse off by the time of the next general election because of all the tax and benefit changes since 2010, new figures calculated by the Institute for Fiscal Studies reveal.
Families with children have been the hardest hit, losing £2,073 a year on average where both parents work.
Shadow chancellor Ed Balls said: "David Cameron is trying to tell working people they are better off, but he's not fooling anybody".
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140403ea430040k
