{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"377"}
____
Politics
Voters' protest
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
401 words
1 May 2014
10:44
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE . More than a quarter of Ukip voters in Euro elections backing party to send angry protest to Westminster
MORE than a quarter of all Ukip voters in this month's Euro elections are backing the party to send an angry protest to Westminster.
An exclusive new YouGov poll for The Sun lifts the lid on the size of the ballot box "earthquake" predicted by leader Nigel Farage.
Hundreds of thousands of normally loyal Tories, Labour and Lib Dems are so livid with Westminster's big three parties that they will abandon them in punishment.
A total of 26 per cent give protest as their reason for voting Ukip.
The biggest reason - given by 43 per cent of Ukip voters - is because they're unhappy with Europe.
A further 17 per cent cite immigration.
Far fewer give positive reasons.
Only nine per cent say they will vote for the EU party because they "like it and what they stand for".
Fewer, eight per cent, give the reason that Ukip "stand up for Britain/ordinary people".
And just one per cent say it's because they like Mr Farage.
Just under a quarter - 24 per cent - of all voters who back the Tories in Westminster elections plan to defect to Ukip in the euro elections, the poll also reveals.
Just under a tenth - eight per cent - back Labour and six per cent back the Lib Dems.
Labour and Ukip are still fighting it out for first place in the May 22 poll to elect a new European Parliament.
Ed Miliband's party is just in the lead on 29 per cent, with Ukip second on 28 per cent.
The Conservatives are still in a distant third on 22 per cent.
And there is only one point between the Lib Dems on nine per cent and the Greens on eight per cent in fifth place.
The survey was of 1,282 people this week who say they will vote Ukip next month.
After a series of Ukip local election candidates were exposed as racist, a ComRes poll for ITV News also revealed that a third of the British public - 32 per cent - think Ukip is a racist party.
A third also think Ukip is more honest than other parties, but a slightly larger 38 per cent disagree.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140501ea51000gt
