{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2117"}
____
Louise Mensch
Lib Dem loser knows he’s on his last Cleggs
By LOUISE MENSCH, Sun Columnist   
1,093 words
18 May 2014
02:11
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
APPARENTLY, there IS such a thing as a free lunch. A free school lunch, that is, for every young child.
No matter what it costs the taxpayer, or the economy, or how useful it is. Education Secretary Michael Gove’s outriders have leaked mercilessly on his behalf. The idea is “back of a fag packet" stuff — and Nick Clegg has lied to taxpayers about the cost.
Nick then had a sense of humour failure, even allegedly trying to have the probable leaker, former Gove adviser Dominic Cummings, arrested.
Why did he react so badly?
Clegg is facing the end of Parliament — and probably the end of his career. The Lib Dems face a horrible 12 months. They deserve it.
They are likely to be utterly humiliated in the Euro elections. Ukip are a one-trick pony — the real story will be the near-wipeout of our supposedly national third party.
They then face disaster in the Newark by-election — along with Nigel Farage. The Tories will win, bursting Ukip’s bubble. But look for the Lib Dems to do so poorly they might lose their deposit.
One election disaster might be forgettable — two, and Clegg will start to look very vulnerable indeed.
As the Tories move ahead in national polls, the economy is improving at a rate of knots — due to policies Vince Cable has shrieked against for years.
What do the Lib Dems have to show for their years in office? Every policy they’ve been allowed to enact has been a total disaster.
AV referendum — LOST . Lords reform — DEFEATED . Tuition fees — IMPOSED . Leveson Press censorship — DITCHED .
Gove makes no secret of his contempt for Cable and Clegg and he speaks for most Tories, who are sick of the yellows and their soft-Labour attitude.
It’s Clegg who wants to stop us renegotiating with Brussels. It’s Clegg who protects the Human Rights Act. It’s Clegg who’s been exposed as soft on knife crime — BANNING harsher sentences for thugs who carry them.
Meanwhile, Gove-ites note that all “I agree with Nick" policies are worthless gimmicks. I couldn’t think of a single one, so I had a Google. It seems Gove’s bang-on.
Try these Clegg clangers: £500million to power electric cars. The nonsense of Green Cities. The Regional Growth Fund that’s paid out only a third of its cash to local projects, £4billion that’s so far created just 18,000 jobs.
Bloody hell, Nick, just write everybody a cheque for fifty grand a year. It’ll be cheaper!
In short, everything major Clegg wanted to do has been a failure. In the 2015 election it will be a two-horse race — and the Lib Dems will be nowhere in it. Coalition? It’s possible — but Clegg won’t be involved.
Anybody would be better. Danny Alexander now has the most clout, he’s worked like a serious partner to Osborne.
So that’s why Clegg threw his lunch tray across Gove’s cafeteria. He’s finished in politics, and he knows it.
- FLOODY hell, barmy Labour luvvie Chris Smith is at it again. The disastrous chief of the Environment Agency says houses should be built so they can “float away", which will save him having to dredge rivers. Can we put him out to sea instead?
Daft Ed's forging ahead YOU have to hand it to Ed Miliband.
Despite plunging polls and all the evidence he’s wrong, he just ploughs right ahead.
Miliband is a conviction politician. He stands up for what he believes in.
And what he believes in is open borders – and more immigration.
Amazingly, Ed told Sun cabbie Grant Davis that immigration was not a problem. He wouldn’t do ANYTHING to close our borders.
You’ve got to give it to Ed. Tony Blair and Gordon Brown only came out with this stuff AFTER the General Election.
Where in the UK do people not think immigration is a problem, Ed? Your Islington dining room? The Balls/Cooper kitchen? The bloody moon?
Vote Labour, get unlimited Bulgarian, Romanian, Albanian and Russian immigration. That’s clear enough.
Is installing Ed as Labour leader the Tory trick of the century?
He really is Cam’s secret weapon.
Be joyful like brave Stephen LAST week I called Stephen Sutton the Briton Of The Year. Now the teenager has died and left a hole in the nation.
It really wasn’t about all the money he raised, great though that was. It was about his brave cheerfulness in the face of certain death. That is everything that, as a nation, we wish we could be.
Tomorrow is Monday morning. Maybe, just once, we could give over whining about our commute.
Stephen showed up every moaning Minnie in this world, and I include myself in that.
Let’s be joyful and grateful. Stephen reminded us all just how wonderful life is.
Show happy Muslims BRITAIN’S Muslims could be forgiven for feeling under siege lately. With the rows about sharia courts and halal slaughter, and Boko Haram all over the news, the moderate majority surely feel they’ve had enough.
Muslims complain to me on Twitter that lazy TV producers invite rentagobs on the telly as Muslim “community leaders", like fat fraud Mo Ansar.
Ansar was exposed this week as having totally invented a background as a lawyer.
The hashtag #MoCV trended as hundreds started to mock Ansar’s fantasy biography. But for moderate Muslims it was no joke. “As a practising Muslim he does not represent me," said one. “The media aren’t interested in hearing from the majority," said another.
We should change that. Forget the rentagobs – what about the Muslim Snow Patrol that shovelled their neighbours’ driveways for free in January?
Or the blisteringly popular video of young British Muslims as they took the the streets to dance to Pharrell’s Happy and show what REAL British Islam is like.
It’s time the BBC showed the loving face of our patriotic neighbours.
RIHANNA has all the fame and fortune a lass could want. So why was she bullying a fan?
Yes, it was a stupid catsuit, but bitchy RiRi tweeted a picture of the girl and hashtagged it “#prombat".
Let’s hope Alexis Carter grows up realising celebrity is no match for class – and Rihanna has none of the latter.
louise.mensch@the-sun.co.uk
Follow me on Twitter: @louisemensch
Document THESUK0020140518ea5i000bc
