{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1706"}
____
Deidre
Love boiled over when rich woman made tea
1,202 words
18 April 2014
05:10
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Dear Deidre
I’M having amazing sex with a woman I first met back in school.
She’s mega-rich and says I’ll never have to work again but I don’t know if it will last.
I’m 20. I quit college so Dad suggested I go into our family garden-landscaping business.
I was sent to draw up a plan when we had an order to redesign the garden for a posh house in our town.
I rang the doorbell and noticed a BMW and Merc in the driveway and was amazed when this girl I knew from school opened the door — and she was clearly the owner, not the maid.
She’s a few years older than me and I used to fantasise about her back at school.
I did the measuring up and she offered me a cup of tea.
She suddenly turned round while the kettle boiled and started kissing me.
She had recognised me and we ended up having sex there and then and carried on right through the night, into the early hours.
I asked how she ended up living in such a lovely house. It turns out she’s with a 50-year-old guy with loads of money.
He works away for months at a time and she said she is only with him for the lavish lifestyle.
I’ve seen her a few times since and she wants us to be lovers and says she’d set me up in a flat in the centre of town so we can party day and night.
I have a girlfriend and would finish with her but I don’t know if this fling will last.
DEIDRE SAYS: I doubt it. Maybe the sex seems special because she’s glamorous and rich but if she wasn’t, would you still be attracted to her?
If you think you really do like her, say you’d think about a relationship if she were free.
Meanwhile look at your relationship with your girlfriend. Either put some energy into it so you feel more committed or call it a day and free her to find someone else.
He looks at girls online Dear Deidre
MY boyfriend won’t stop looking at girls on Facebook.
We’ve been together for 15 months. He’s 34, I’m 43. I went online and found a girl’s profile page he’d been checking.
It was someone he was interested in before we got together. I know he has girls on Facebook as friends but this girl was special to him.
I asked him later if he was happy with me and he said yes, so I asked why he’d been checking this girl’s profile. He said it wouldn’t happen again.
A week later I found he’d been looking at a photo on Facebook of a scantily dressed girl from a town he visits regularly.
He said it was from before we met but it had only just been put on Facebook. Can I trust him?
DEIDRE SAYS: Tell him it’s hurtful for you and that part of being in a relationship is making choices – giving up flirting on Facebook, for example, for the sake of real love.
Be clear this is his last chance and mean it. If he does it again, my leaflet Moving On will help you.
Monthly sex Dear Deidre
WHAT started out as no-strings sex has become strings and no sex with my fella.
I’m 22 and he’s 24. We’ve been together for a year after first meeting up just for sex. I need an active sex life but ours has gone from daily to once a month if I’m lucky.
I need sex to feel close to him but it’s causing lots of arguments between us.
DEIDRE SAYS: He could be finding it hard to sustain intimacy in a lasting relationship.
Or he might be stressed or depressed, which both tend to knock out sex drive.
Tell him you love him and miss the physical closeness. Be loving and tactile without rushing to make sexual demands.
That may warm him up. If nothing improves suggest he have a check with his GP. Plus an advice line today explains practical help.
Gay – and dead if I go back home Dear Deidre
I’M scared I’ll be killed for being gay if I go back to my country.
I’m a 22-year-old guy and I came to London as a student from Africa because of the gay scene here. I thought I could marry a gay guy or enter into a civil partnership and then I wouldn’t have to leave the UK.
I found a man but then suddenly we split up. If I go back to my country I will be murdered. Should I try to find another guy or apply for asylum based on my sexuality?
DEIDRE SAYS: A relationship you’ve rushed into for the sake of staying in the UK isn’t likely to work. Being married or in a civil partnership doesn’t give you automatic rights.
To get asylum you will need to prove you are genuinely gay and at risk of persecution in your country.
You need a solicitor who understands this area of law. See UK Lesbian And Gay Immigration Group (uklgig.org.uk, 020 7922 7811).
His tot rules roost Dear Deidre
MY boyfriend expects me to ignore his daughter when she throws her toys around, hits me, has tantrums and doesn’t eat. It’s so annoying.
I’m 21 and he’s 30. He has a three-year-old girl from a previous relationship. She is very fond of me but I get wound up with the way my partner treats her when she stays over. There’s no discipline and she rules the roost.
I’ve tried talking to him about his daughter’s behaviour but he gets very defensive because his ex constantly questions his parenting skills. He says he doesn’t need criticism from me too.
We plan to marry and have kids one day. How am I expected to live with them if I can’t tell his daughter off? I’m also concerned that when we have our own kids there will be different treatment for her and mine.
I will discipline my own kids how I see fit, but I won’t, it seems, be able to set the same rules for her.
DEIDRE SAYS: It’s true that all children need firm boundaries but you have to remember she is only three.
Children that age need steering and managing rather than telling off. Make sure you reward her with lots of attention when she’s being good and not just round on her when she acts up.
Divas And Dictators by Charlie Taylor is a top guide to raising under-fives, £9.89 including postage from sunbooks.co.uk/deidre (0845 2712136).
Tell me what you think on my Facebook page today .
You can follow my life and sex tips on Twitter@deardeidre 
Document THESUK0020140418ea4i000ul
