{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2563"}
____
Louise Mensch
Mystery is why jet’s tracker can be turned off
By LOUISE MENSCH, SUN Columnist   
1,339 words
16 March 2014
00:00
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
IT’S pure agony for the families – and has spawned the next generation of conspiracy theorists.
Did the Malaysia Airlines flight crash? Was it hijacked? How could one of the world’s newest airliners just disappear?
It looks likely now that BOTH things happened to this plane — it was diverted and flown off course by terrorists, heading toward Pakistan or Kazakhstan, but it also may have crashed into the sea.
The pilots’ last transmission was calm, then the plane disappeared from radar — a sign that somebody switched off its transponder.
When I hear two Iranians with fake passports have boarded a missing jet, I tend to go for Occam’s Razor — that old theory that the simplest solution is probably right. Pictures of the captain messing around in his cabin on an earlier flight didn’t change my mind.
If the plane crashed unintentionally, we would have heard the captain screaming for help. One theory being advanced here is that it is the PILOTS who took the plane — because the secondary transmitters were also shut down.
And who would know about such a system other than airline experts?
The fact is that air travel is still a favourite weapon of terrorists — and there really shouldn’t be any mystery at all. Malaysian PM Najib Razak confirmed that “mechanical" reports indicated the plane flew on for more than six hours after it “disappeared" — ie, had its radar switched off.
But why is there so little information about the plane’s course? There should be more than one way for authorities to “see" a plane on its journey. A Boeing 777 costs a whopping £156million — and that’s for the bargain-basement version.
Terrorists should not be able to “shut down" an airplane’s location simply by making the pilot flip a switch.
We must put trackers into multiple parts of airliners, trackers that can run on secondary systems and be accessed by air traffic control when ordinary radar shuts down.
To improve safety, the transmitters that broadcast when a plane hits water should link to maritime communication networks — so ships in an area could send relief.
The “black box" system was great for its time. Now it’s a dinosaur.
The relatives of those on board this nightmarish flight deserve to know. And airlines must send terrorists a message — that they will be tracked wherever they go.
Whether it was hijackers or rogue pilots, somebody shut down BOTH transmitting systems — yet nobody, pilot or otherwise, should be able to do so.
This must be the last plane that ever “disappears".
I'm sick of Oscar's tears
SO Oscar Pistorius vomits and weeps in the dock.
He threw up TWICE last week when faced with evidence of what he did to model Reeva Steenkamp.
Forgive me if I’m not swayed by these crocodile tears. If Pistorius really cared about Reeva, he wouldn’t refuse to look her parents in the face – as he’s been doing on his way into the dock.
And guilty or innocent, he killed her – with one of many guns the arms fanatic kept around the house. The best-case scenario is that he didn’t bother to check – adopting a “shoot first and ask questions later" policy.
The worst is simply cold-blooded murder.
In either case, a young woman lost her life – and Oscar’s histrionics make all of us feel sick.
Why so blue over tax row?
SO there’s a Tory debate on how to cut taxes? Good.
What a turnaround for an economy down the drain under Brown and Balls.
Osborne wants to keep raising the personal allowance threshold – taking the lower-paid out of tax – while some Blues are arguing for a cut in the top rates.
Treasury insiders tell me George is standing firm.
They point out that, to win in 2015, Tories desperately need to be on the side of working-class strivers – who are fed up with Ed Miliband’s love of the EU and immigration. Furthermore, the personal allowance rise actually benefits the middle classes – anyone earning up to £100K gains. Add up National Insurance and threshold rises, and by April, when the personal allowance hits £10,000, a higher-rate payer will save £500+ a year.
So why the whining? Tory MPs need to remember that George Osborne ALWAYS wears two hats – Iron Chancellor and election guru.
Winning seats like my old town of Corby means the Tories must prioritise putting money in the pockets of factory workers, bus drivers, school dinner ladies and traffic wardens – hard workers who control all those marginal seats. He’s been proved right on the economy again and again – and George is in no mood to argue.
- DAVID CAMERON was in Israel this week working towards the peace process as the country was attacked by rockets from Gaza. The PM’s made at least ten major foreign visits in the past six months, while Ed Miliband messed up so badly on Syria, he seems afraid of stepping outside SW1.
When Cam was opposition leader, he travelled widely for policy, including trips to Georgia, South Africa and Washington.
Can you think of a SINGLE foreign policy of Ed’s?
Now Cann it Rachel
REMEMBER last week’s terrible teen, the spoiled American cheerleader Rachel Canning?
After suing her parents for child support, she’s now slunk back home with her tail between her legs, as the world’s sanest judge threw out her request for a court-appointed guardian.
In a surprising twist, New Jersey residents speculated in their local paper that Rachel returned home because the powerful attorney John Inglesino, father of Rachel’s best pal, has caught too much heat.
Rachel was staying with the Inglesinos and John was funding her lawsuit. But he didn’t count on the global attention towards the case – and the scorn he’s got for interfering.
It turns out Inglesino is best buddies with Republican presidential hopeful and New Jersey governor Chris Christie, whose name is mud in America right now and who wouldn’t want the lawsuit dragging on.
As for Rachel, I suspect she’ll have to do those awful chores, stop drinking and dump the boyfriend – or go and get a job.
Her dad’s not made a statement to the Press – but I expect he has to Rachel.
My house, my rules.
Benn one of a kind TWO deaths this week – and one anniversary.
Tony Benn and Bob Crow died and Pope Francis is celebrating his first year.
Tony is a loss not only to his family and to Labour but the nation. Almost alone among modern politicians, he was authentic. No hypocrite he – no railer against upper-class privilege, only to leap at a knighthood or a Lords seat.
Instead, Tony walked away from a noble title to serve the people he loved as an MP.
He also understood you can oppose somebody’s politics but respect them as a person of principle. He said of Mrs Thatcher: “I liked her. She said what she meant and meant what she said."
Compare that with Bob Crow’s reaction to Thatcher’s death: “As far as I’m concerned, she can rot in hell." But then Crow was very different to Tony Benn. He did not walk it like he talked it.
He took luxury holidays, squatted in a council house while earning six figures and dined at the finest restaurants in London, while portraying himself as a champion of the working class. It’s sad indeed his family have lost a loved one at just 52 but Crow’s politics and style, unlike Benn’s, won’t be missed.
Pope Francis is cut from Tony’s cloth. In one year he’s revitalised the Catholic Church by eschewing the trappings of the papacy to live in humble simplicity. He doesn’t just preach Jesus – he acts on it.
Document THESUK0020140324ea3g00466
