{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"767"}
____
Ally Ross
Kavana makes this show The B g Reunion; THE members of ITV2’s new cut ’n’ shut pop band, 5th Story, appeared like the Never Mind The Buzzcocks ID parade from hell, this week.
By ALLY ROSS, SUN Columnist   
1,618 words
25 February 2014
00:13
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
There was 5th Story... Likely Story... Sob Story... A Bit Snorey... and Stiff Tory.
Otherwise known as Gareth Gates, Dane Bowers, Kavana, Kenzie from Blazin’ Squad and Adam Rickitt. The supposed saviours of The Big Reunion 2014, which has been underwhelming viewers for three weeks now.
Last year, of course, it was a runaway hit and a triumph for all concerned, despite being a total production mess.
You forgave The Big Reunion nearly all these many faults, however, because the groups and songs were all familiar and the rise and fall stories, of 5IVE and 911, were funny, touching and brilliant.
The smart thing for ITV2 to do then, would’ve been to vanish the show until it had signed up the likes of S Club 7, Another Level, Hear’Say and a line-up worthy of its good name.
This is a channel that has neither patience nor brains, though. So here it is, back already, with nothing like the line-up it deserves.
There’s: Damage, Girl Thing, 3T and three-quarters of both Eternal and A1, who spent most of last week’s show talking about missing tambourine player Paul Marazzi like he was Roger Waters and they were the rest of Pink Floyd.
Result? Nearly all you notice now is the total mess.
The Big Reunion hops around all over the place, 3T seem to have been eliminated entirely and it's had to ignore winning details, like A1’s abortive attempt to become Norway’s 2010 Song For Europe, because it would reveal the band hadn’t actually split up and the show wasn’t reuniting anyone.
Kavana, pictured in Feb 1996 Empics
Script duties also appear to have been handed to a work experience Bonobo ape, who punched away at his keyboard, haphazardly, until it read: “Damage’s second single was Wonderful Tonight. But behind the scenes it was less Eric Clapton, more wrecked and clapped out."
Ker-flippin-lunk.
There’s no way back for a show once it’s included that line. But, I’ll say this for ITV2, it did at least realise TBR 2014 lacked credibility and so created 5th Story.
“A five-sided pop pentagon", apparently, who were meant to come with their own Noughties magic and built-in feuds.
Trouble is, four of them seem to be reasonably content, well-adjusted and forgiving souls. The other is Kavana. Poor, poor Kavana, who has somehow gone from “living in Clark Gable’s old Hollywood house", to grating cheese in his mate’s cafe, without the scriptwriter typing: “Frankly my dear, I don’t give Edam."
At various points in between he’s had to wrestle with drugs, drink, bereavement, his sexuality and homelessness.
It’s an unremittingly bleak story, made more so by the fact Kavana re-told it in a Great Yarmouth pub, signposted as “THE KI GFISHER ", where he hoped to scratch some sort of comeback living.
Depressi g isn’t the word.
Just as he probably thought things couldn’t get any worse, though, Kavana got the call from ITV2 and pinned his hopes on The Big Reunion, just at the point it all became a bit of a shambles.
A hell of a shame for him and the viewers. Because the really frustrating thing is, underneath all those production glitches, you still get glimpses of something truly wonderful and also the diary of Eternal’s Kéllé Bryan for the day she met ITV2, which read: “Just to ask, what are future plans? The aims?"
... Anyone?
- TIME Traveller Of The Week? ITN’s Natasha Kaplinsky: “Coming up, a night of drama at Highbury, in the Champions League."
Plus a score and 20 dead in the Soviet Union and a mighty conflagration of the oceans in Wessex.
The Sun's TV critic Ally Ross
Foreign object
Celebrity thrasher Nancy Dell’Olio Fame Flynet
TWO groups of equally hateful people, with opposing political opinions, shout “LET ME FINISH " at each other in a studio.
An hour or two later, no one’s changed their mind. In fact, both views have become even more angry, entrenched and obnoxious.
And this, apparently, is a TV show. BBC1 calls it Question Time. On Channel 4 it’s Benefits Britain: The Live Debate.
But on Channel 5 last week it was The Big British Immigration Row, hosted by Nick Ferrari and Anne Diamond, which was prompted by an opinion poll that revealed “65 per cent of our population is worried about immigration".
If you thought the stat would be reflected in the studio audience or believed the channel’s claim “this show’s open to everyone", though, then you clearly don’t understand what drives TV.
Katie Hopkins is their dancing bear and everyone else pokes her with a stick. The more famous the better.
So, as well as the usual professional hecklers from the lunatic fringe, and Katie, we had Adam Rickitt, the dance coach from Fame Academy, Paula Hamilton, someone captioned as “Kelvin McKenzie" (spelling klaxon) and star political turn Nancy Dell’Olio, who began thrashing around wildly, in fractured English.
“Zis country much better whizz all zee immigrants. You see the heffer they make. Why you feel fear? Dey don’t take anything."
Apart from Ulrika Jonsson, obviously. That heffer take everything.
Corden blur
Brits host James Corden
THERE was no hint of bad language, from The Brits host, on Wednesday night.
At least, not until one minute after the watershed kicked in, at 9pm, when for no good reason, he very deliberately swore twice.
“Beyonce, oh s***. Beyonce, s***."
A strange outburst, at such a flat occasion, and one that should tell you everything you need to know about James Corden’s time in charge of The Brits, which will forever be defined by the Adele incident.
Part of him, of course, is still mortified by that moment, because he clearly wants celebrity approval. But the more significant side would, in the heat of the moment, probably do the same thing again.
That’s why ITV kept booking him. He goes for the easy targets and is very, very safe.
Sadly, that means there was never any chance he’d put that arrogant little berk from the Arctic Monkeys in his place, and even less hope he’d give One Direction’s toilet break the punctuation it deserved.
“Harry Styles there. Just checking out where his career will be in 2017."
- A TRIP to the glue factory beckons, on Loose Women, and Janet Street-Porter puts it out to tender as she admits: “I’m selling advertising space on my coffin. I wonder what brands want to be considered?"
Oakley horseboxes?
- WINTER Olympic Filth Corner. Women’s ski half-pipe.
Tim Warwood: “Virginie Favre, from Montreux. Freddie Mercury lived there. A nice alley-oop and always ready to explode in the half-pipe."
He sure was.
- AND The Brit award for best TV research goes to... ITV2’s Red Carpet show.
Laura Whitmore: “Kyle (from Bastille), I heard your life was made complete ’cos you held a tiger cub, is that true?"
“No."
Laura Whitmore: “Pharrell, have you got rid of your hat ’cos it was getting its own personality and getting too much?"
“No."
Laura Whitmore: “Ellie (Goulding), there was rumour you asked for a girthy cucumber on your rider?"
“Errr... "
I’ll take that as a no.
- TV Gold: Sky Atlantic’s True Detective, Line Of Duty (the best British drama on TV), Eamonn Holmes’ and Ruth Langsford’s brilliant hidden camera stunt on Ant & Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway.
Nile Rodgers’ and Pharrell Williams’ Brits performance. And ITV2’s Red Carpet gonk Jordan Stephens, of Rizzle Kicks, inadvertently asking Lily Allen exactly the right question, after discovering she’d once sat on a zebra. “Was the zebra all right?"
- RANDOM TV irritations: Steve Cram replacing the great Dougie Donnelly at the Olympic curling. Big Immigration Row panellist Luisa Zissman accusing British people of laziness fresh from her month-long Big Brother holiday.
ITV filling its old Saturday kids’ slot with Jeremy Kyle’s US show. All those morons, with ridiculous tattoos and piercings, who are suddenly demanding our sympathy.
The Voice overdosing on time-wasters and sob stories. And contestant Teresa Vasiliou putting the fear of God into one of those revolving chairs with the announcement: “I just wanted to say, I’ve written a song for Tom Jones."
Great! Let’s not hear it.
- GREAT Sporting Insights. Jackie Lockhart: “The bronze may not be the comfort medal but it will be a comfort."
Kevin Ratcliffe: “Like a game of chess, this game is stalemate."
Roberto Martinez: “If Barcelona score it will be an uphill mountain to climb."
And Gus Poyet: “It was either that the opposition was better than us or we were second best."
(Compiled by Graham Wray).
- RE: Big Ballet’s “Next project". Suggest Tchaikovsky, The Fat Knacker Suite.
- THE Big British Immigration Row, Nancy Dell’ Olio: “I just like to say, can you imagine Britain without me?" Hello. Border patrol? Yeah, I’ve got a female illegal. About 70.
Lookalike
Emmerdale’s Bob Hope and Butthead
THIS week’s winner is Emmerdale’s Bob Hope and Butthead.
Sent in by Shaun McGonigale, via email. Picture research Marta Ovod.
Lookalike Of The Week wins £100, but involves a lot of form filling.
So don’t whinge when it turns up late. I’m not the ruddy Tooth Fairy.
Document THESCOT020140225ea2p000rw
