{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"615"}
____
Home Scotland
Judge and fury; IT has always been a disgrace that so many foreign criminals dodge deportation because of their “right to a family life".
396 words
9 March 2014
23:40
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
We now know that a judge who let 11 of them stay was privately helping support a Nigerian woman 26 years his junior who was here illegally.
We can only speculate whether Richard McKee’s view of the immigration cases on which he ruled was skewed by his personal life.
What’s equally troubling is that he has been allowed quietly to retire on a full £50,000-a-year pension.
That’s it. It’s just chalked up to experience. One of those things.
Well, that’s not good enough.
Britain deserves answers over this judge’s conduct.
And the Home Office should demand those 11 recent cases be re-examined.
Ofgem spree
IT’S bad enough that Ofgem is useless without it also mugging the consumers it is meant to protect.
The watchdog fails spectacularly to rein in the Big Six energy suppliers.
But while bills soar and a fifth of us live in fuel poverty, Ofgem’s well-heeled executives dine in Michelin-starred restaurants and run up a £1.2million credit card debt.
Ofgem is funded by the energy industry. This means they are dining out on the proceeds of your exorbitant bills, which they are sworn to keep in check.
Yet when you ask them to investigate the energy firms’ finances they can’t because there isn’t “enough transparency".
How long can this outrage go on?
Slow off mark
THE world is on the brink of a new industrial revolution, says David Cameron — and he wants Britain to lead it with a relentless drive for web-based ideas.
OK. Here’s one.
Why not pump more money into the countless rural areas with flaky, slow or non-existent broadband?
Or ensure that, for example, all trains have free wifi? These are basic requirements in the web era.
The pace of change has been incredible in the last decade.
Yet parts of Britain are in the dark ages.
Dirty work
HOMER Simpson once became Springfield’s sanitation chief with the slogan “Can’t someone else do it?"
Sounds like the motto at Trafford Council’s maintenance department.
Who did they imagine would tackle the playground dog mess they refused to clean up?
Someone else, presumably.
Document THESCOT020140310ea39000rt
