{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3077"}
____
Politics
‘Jobless’ Brit worker on Ukip poster is foreign actor
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
493 words
25 April 2014
19:48
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A 'JOBLESS' British worker in a controversial Ukip immigration poster is actually a foreign actor, it has emerged.
Irishman David O'Rourke was paid to pose up for the street begging image that sparked a furious row earlier this week.
Above a snap of cross-legged and miserable looking Mr O'Rourke in a builder's hard hat, the poster's headline reads: "EU policy at work: British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour".
Critics slammed the image as the trouble-hit party's latest gaffe.
Ukip was accused of "extraordinary hypocrisy" for giving immigrant EU citizen Mr O'Rourke work over a UK-born model or actor.
The row is the third PR disaster for the anti-EU party's euro election campaign, launched on Tuesday.
Tory MP and former Communities Minister Bob Neill dubbed the poster "another example of Ukip being cynical and not being straight with the British voters."
Labour MP Mike Gapes added: "The level of hypocrisy with this poster would beggar belief from most political parties, but nothing surprises me with Ukip.
"It is part of an attempt to conceal their real politics, which is anti-foreigner."
Nigel Farage's party hit back to brand the attacks as "nonsense".
A Ukip spokesman said: "The vast majority of people used in political poster campaigns are actors. It is totally standard practice.
"It is nonsense for the Conservative Party to try and depict this as anything out of the ordinary."
It has previously emerged that a pretty female 'voter' pictured prominently in Ukip's manifesto was actually Mr Farage's Events Manager, 27-year-old Lizzy Vaid.
And a star of its TV election broadcast on Wednesday night Andre Lampitt - also a party council candidate - was suspended after it emerged he had tweeted a series of vile racist and anti-Islam messages, including urging all Africans "to kill themselves off".
Questions were also asked about another Ukip party official's suspect views.
West Country activist David Challice mocked Islamic law and attacked "the lunacy of multiculturalism" in an advert placed in his local paper.
In what was claimed as a joke, Mr Chalice also described the Greeks as "vile" and said women should not go out to work.
But Ukip refused to suspend him, insisting it is "not a party that believes in public debate and
conversation being stifled by an obsession with political correctness".
A Ukip spokesman said: "Ukip believes the threshold for which the mere expression of opinion merits disciplinary action should be set high.
Mr Farage also appeared to withdraw his offer to have his European Parliament expenses independently audited yesterday after claims that thousands he has claimed could not be accounted for.
The Ukip boss said he would only open up all his books if "every other British MEP wants to".
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140425ea4p0038q
