{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3370"}
____
Deidre
I’m 36 and bedding my neighbour’s brother, 19
2,605 words
17 May 2014
02:46
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Dear Deidre
I WAS so desperate for sex and affection that I started an affair with my neighbour’s brother, who is half my age.
She will totally flip if she finds out. I’m 36 and divorced since my husband left me for another woman two years ago.
Another single mum moved in next door late last year. She’s fun and outgoing and we quickly became friends.
She had a house-warming party and invited me. My son went to stay with my parents so I felt free to enjoy myself.
Her 19-year-old brother was there. I’d seen him before but never met him properly.
I thought he was cute but only in a baby-brother kind of way until that night.
The party was great and the drinks flowed. I got talking to him and told him my troubles.
I mentioned how unattractive I had been feeling as I’ve no confidence since my husband went, and he started complimenting me.
He told me I was beautiful and any man should be proud to be with me.
After a few more drinks he told me he was still a virgin and I told him it would happen when the time was right.
We were chatting for a while afterwards but he didn’t make any move on me. We didn’t even hold hands.
Later in the evening I went upstairs to the loo and saw he was in his bedroom. I drunkenly offered to be his first.
The party was still in full swing and there was a lot of noise from downstairs. Nobody seemed to notice that neither of us were there.
I was turned on at the thought that he was a virgin. The sex was very quick but it felt good to be with a man again.
My life usually consists of working full-time and looking after my ten-year-old son. I have no social life at all.
The next day I regretted what I’d done but he kept texting me, saying how beautiful I am.
That is all it takes and I give in. We now meet up for sex whenever I have the opportunity.
I know there’s no future in it but he’s becoming infatuated with me.
I shouldn’t keep leading him on like this and the longer I wait to end it, the worse it will hurt him, but I just can’t help myself.
DEIDRE SAYS: He isn’t the only one who will be hurt. Your head says there’s no future in it but your heart wants to carry on seeing him.
Sooner or later he’s going to meet a girl his own age and want to be with her.
Then you will be hurt again and your confidence will take another knock.
It would be much better for you to look around and find someone who is at the same stage in life and who will give you a stable, loving relationship.
Then you will feel able to tell everyone and your confidence will soar again.
Tell this young man that you both need to be free to find someone who is ready for the kind of relationship you each need, in your different ways.
Be kind about it. Tell him he will be a great catch for the right girl but you are not the one for him. Stop seeing him and delete his number from your phone.
Then get out and find a man who is going to be the one for you. My e-leaflet about social life for single parents will help get you started.
Sun, sea and no texts Dear Deidre
MY boyfriend’s going on holiday with five single male friends. It’s driving me insane.
I’m 26, he’s 25. At first it was us with two other couples but they have since separated and the girls’ places were taken by more male mates.
I didn’t want to be the only girl so I dropped out. I thought my boyfriend would too but he insists on going.
I trust him totally but I’m worried the others will lead him astray.
And he never texts me when he’s out with his mates so I know I won’t hear from him. How am I going to cope?
DEIDRE SAYS: Don’t try to boss him around but explain to him that you are really worried he’ll get caught up in what the others do.
It’s not hard to stay in touch these days. A quick chat/text/message before he goes to bed could help reassure you – but be realistic. Don’t expect texts every hour on the hour.
If you have a generally strong relationship it should survive his break. If not, the writing is on the wall anyway.
She keeps mum on dad Dear Deidre
MY mum is very evasive about who my real dad is.
I’m a guy of 24 but last time I asked she said she’d tell me when I’m older.
Every time I’ve asked before, she has said that she doesn’t remember or hasn’t got time to explain at that moment.
I have asked other family members but they all say that I must speak to my mum.
I don’t know why everyone has always avoided talking about it.
I have a loving stepdad, who has been my real father since before I can remember.
I’m not trying to replace him but I’m desperate to know who my biological father is.
It is the missing part of my personal jigsaw. It is at the back of my mind every day.
I don’t want anything from him. I’m not after money or hoping for a wonderful reunion.
I just want peace of mind. I’m worried that my mum has some dark underlying reason for not telling me and that makes it worse.
DEIDRE SAYS: Of course you are old enough to know about your biological father and it’s natural you would want to, but we don’t know what difficult memory this is linked with for your mum.
Ask to talk to her on her own, preferably somewhere neutral out of the house, and tell her how much this matters to you, not because you want a different father but to complete your picture of yourself.
Promise you won’t criticise her over it.
My e-leaflet on Tracing Birth Parents will help you get started and you can find understanding support through After Adoption (afteradoption.org.uk, 0800 0568 578).
Fiance has left our wedding bill to me Dear Deidre
I AM getting married in four months and my fiancé has left it to me to pay for everything.
I even paid for my own engagement and wedding rings.
I’m 29, he is 34. We’ve been together for five years.
He was unemployed for two months and I paid for everything, even birthday presents for his children from his previous relationship.
He’s now working again but I’m still paying for the wedding.
My credit card is maxed out and there are still things to pay for.
My fiancé said he’d pay me back but hasn’t. His only contribution is £15 towards the flowers.
He’s started contributing towards our living costs but only when I ask.
He doesn’t have lots of spare cash, as he pays for his children.
But even when he has money, he doesn’t like sharing it.
I taxi him about as he won’t learn to drive. I don’t want to end up with a man who relies on me for everything.
Am I making a mistake to wed him?
DEIDRE SAYS: He won’t change unless you insist on a total rethink.
You will become bitter and resentful if he doesn’t make major changes.
My e-leaflet Family Finances will help him understand how costs can be shared.
It would be better at least to postpone the wedding and sort things out than to go ahead, become even unhappier and then have to worry about divorce.
Father too proud Dear Deidre
MY dad’s business is heading for ruin but he’s too proud to admit it.
I’m a man of 22 and my brother is 21. My dad’s business used to do really well.
We have a lovely big house and a nice lifestyle but work has dried up.
My parents have huge debts and big money worries.
My mum, my brother and I think we should downsize but my dad won’t even consider it.
He refuses to talk and starts arguments.
Things are very strained at home and it won’t be long before my brother, who’s more hot-headed than me, tells my dad some home truths and walks out, which would tear the family apart.
DEIDRE SAYS: Your dad is seeing his life’s dream crash in ruins. It’s really tough for him.
Start your next discussion by saying you understand that, but believe the time to tackle the money worries has arrived.
Stay calm but don’t budge from that message.
You can all get advice from Business Debtline (bdl.org.uk, 0800 197 6026), and I’m sending my e-leaflet How To Be Assertive.
Ex waits for me in Egypt Dear Deidre
I WISH I could love my wife the way she loves me, but I can’t.
I’m 32 and my wife is 46. I am from Egypt and met her when she was in my country on holiday. I used to work in the tourist business.
She is kind and caring and came to Egypt to stay with me several times.
Then there was all the trouble in my country, so she paid for me to visit her here in the UK.
There was nothing for me back home so we agreed I’d stay and we’d get married.
I didn’t love her but I thought love would grow.
The trouble is, I still love a woman I used to work with in Egypt. We Skype and she says she loves me and is waiting for me to go back to her.
My wife is a good woman but I avoid sex because it’s boring. I always imagine I’m with my ex.
I know I should leave but I don’t want to hurt her.
I don’t want to go back to Egypt either – there’s nothing for me there except the woman I love.
DEIDRE SAYS: At the moment you feel compassion, even if you do not love her.
Stay on in this sham marriage and you’ll probably become bitter and spiteful. Your wife doesn’t deserve that.
Tell her you’ve realised this isn’t the right relationship.
You can get advice on whether and how you can stay on to work in the UK from the Joint Council For The Welfare of Immigrants (jcwi.org.uk, 020 7251 8708).
Sort out this situation before giving any hope to your other love, or you could end up causing two broken hearts.
Son is a dropout on dope Dear Deidre
OUR son used to be focused and had ambition but now all he does is smoke weed at his mate’s place.
He’s 19 and dropped out of university, saying the work was too hard.
He has a weekend job in a supermarket but what little he earns goes on cannabis.
We’ve asked him to get a full-time job but he’s just not interested.
My husband and I are at the end of our tether. What can we do to make him see sense?
DEIDRE SAYS: I do feel for you – and him. He’s probably feeling he’s let everyone down by dropping out of uni, and drugs can seem like a prop when your self-esteem is at rock bottom.
Keep talking to him and emphasising how much you love and appreciate him, even though you hate his drug use.
Encourage him to talk to Frank National Drugs Helpline (talktofrank.com, 0300 123 66 00).
I’m sending you my e-leaflet Looking For Work to give him some contacts and ideas.
Encourage him to start with some voluntary work to help him feel he has a worthwhile contribution to make, even if it doesn’t bring in any income.
Dear Deidre
MY wife and I get our sexual timing all wrong. It is so frustrating for both of us.
We had an arranged marriage but are very happy with one another – except for our sex life.
I climax quickly but my wife takes far longer, so often isn’t satisfied, which makes me feel ashamed.
How can I make her climax faster?
DEIDRE SAYS: Trying to hurry her would just put pressure on you both and make things worse.
You can learn self-help tactics to delay your climax but more women orgasm through stimulation other than intercourse anyway.
Advice lines today Orgasm For Women (09067 577 162) and How Men Can Last Longer (09067 577 161) will help.
Teen troubles Dear Deidre
MY friend has been sending naked pics of herself to at least six different guys. I’m very worried about her.
She’s 15 like me, and the boys are between 14 and 17.
She has a lot of history with guys and I know she has done plenty of sexual stuff with them. She doesn’t care that all her friends know what she is doing.
Should I talk to our head of year or let her carry on?
DEIDRE SAYS: Your friend may appear quite happy but deep down she is probably a very troubled girl. It is very likely something has happened or is happening to make her seek attention.
You should talk to your head of year. You could always open the topic without naming her – just say how worried you are for one of your friends, then ask what action the school would take.
You can find guidance through Get Connected, who help under 25s (getconnected.org.uk, 0808 808 4994).
Dear Deidre
I WENT out with a girl twice and now she won’t leave me alone.
I split up with my girlfriend of two years five months ago. I met a girl who is perfect for me in February.
Before that I went out briefly with a girl who was 17 like me. I could tell she was smitten so I backed off, as I wasn’t really into her.
Since then she’s bombarded me with texts and calls. She claimed she was pregnant, which was a lie.
Then I discovered her sister had tried to add my new girlfriend as a friend on Facebook. I’m terrified she’s going to make up lies to get what she wants.
DEIDRE SAYS: Tell the other girl there is never going to be any you and her.
Say you are sorry but that is the way it is.
Then honesty is your best defence. Tell your new girlfriend the whole story.
Explain there may be some repercussions and ask her not to be influenced by them, as she means the world to you.
Tell me what you think on my Facebook page today .
You can follow my life and sex tips on Twitter@deardeidre 
Document THESUK0020140517ea5h00039
