{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3114"}
____
Politics
Ukip candidate urges all Africans to 'kill themselves off'
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
506 words
25 April 2014
03:09
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
UKIP was engulfed in a fresh racism storm when it emerged a star of its TV election film urged all Africans to "kill themselves off".
Builder Andre Lampitt was one of five supporters handpicked to appear in its first broadcast for the euro polls next month, aired on Wednesday evening.
But the anti-EU party was forced to suspend the wannabe councillor for expressing "repellent views" after his vile views surfaced.
In a series of hate-filled messages on Twitter posted over the last few months, Lampitt also branded Islam as "evil" and called its founding prophet Mohammed "a pedo" with "an underage wife".
He labelled most Nigerians "bad people" and backed slavery as "an act of war".
And he said Labour leader Ed Miliband - the son of a Jewish refugee - was "not a real Brit", adding: "He was only born here".
Ukip chiefs were also desperately trying to withdraw Lampitt as a candidate for South West London's Merton Council in local polls on May 22, but may have missed the 4pm deadline to change ballot paper names.
The scandal is the latest in a long series of candidate disasters to hit the chaotic party.
Embarrassed leader Nigel Farage last year vowed to significantly tighten up selection procedures to stop oddballs and extremists running for public office for them.
But questions were being asked as to how someone with Lampitt's abhorrent views could have been given such a high profile unchecked.
In the Ukip broadcast, Lampitt talks about problems with EU immigration, saying: "Since the lads from Eastern Europe are prepared to work for a lot less than anybody else, I've found it a real struggle".
Controversial Ukip official Lizzy Vaid - who was exposed as posing as a normal voter in its euro elections manifesto on Tuesday - also appeared in the five minute film aired on all main TV channels.
A Ukip spokesman said: "We are deeply shocked that Mr Lampitt has expressed such repellent views. His membership of the party has been suspended immediately pending a full disciplinary process."
A senior Ukip source added: "We try hard to spot extremist views, but we clearly haven't here, so we have to put our hands up.
"It is a blow to morale."
Lampitt, from Morden, south London, describes himself as 'Born British in Rhodesia' and has now deleted his Twitter account.
Mr Farage has promised to weed out "Walter Mittys" to make sure only "reliable, steady, solid people" stand as candidates for them.
His former flatmate, the independent MEP Godfrey Bloom, left Ukip last year after making a series of outbursts describing foreign countries as "Bongo Bongo Land" and women as "sluts".
UKIP leader Nigel Farage promised to find out what went wrong with the party’s checks.
But Mr Farage added: “I don’t think we have the monopoly on stupid and extreme people.
“It happens in all parties."
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140425ea4p000jh
