{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3310"}
____
News
Hitler’s birthplace to be used as centre for immigrants
By FELIX ALLEN   
349 words
14 May 2014
18:30
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
THE house where Adolf Hitler was born could be turned into a language school for immigrants.
Plans being considered by the Austrian government could see the building used as an integration centre for new arrivals into the country.
It is hoped the idea will end a political row over the future of the former guesthouse where Hitler spent the first three years of his life.
Interior ministry spokesman Alexander Marakovits said: "For us, given the meaning this building has, it's important to use it in a way that benefits people."
Only a small stone plaque outside recognises that the future Nazi dictator was born in 1889 at 15 Salzburger Vorstadt, in the small town of Braunau am Inn on the German border.
In 1938 Hitler's private secretary Martin Bormann bought the building intending to turn it into a shrine.
After the war it was used as a library and a bank.
Recently officials have been locked in discussions with the current owner, a retired local woman who insists on remaining anonymous.
She has refused to let it become an anti-Nazi memorial, and even denied town authorities permission to put a plaque on the building for fear it could provoke attacks from neo-Nazis or anti-fascists, according to reports.
Town mayor Hannes Waidbacher has also sparked controversy by declaring the local community had already done enough to remember the past.
He said: “There are already quite enough memorials in the region," adding that the Fuhrer had “only lived there for three years anyway".
Until two years ago, the building was used as a day centre for people with learning difficulties but it is now empty.
The interior ministry carefully vets all prospective tenants to ensure it does not become a shrine to the Nazi leader.
Officials also blocked the possibility of residential use in case it attracted Hitler fans.
Now after talks in Vienna dubbed the "Birthplace Summit" by Austrian newspapers, ministers believe they have found a fitting use for the building.
Document THESUK0020140514ea5e003jv
