{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"531"}
____
Politics
New immigrants to UK banned from claiming child benefits
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
415 words
8 April 2014
23:31
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
NEW immigrants will be banned from claiming handouts for their children for their first three months here, ministers have announced.
Child Benefit and Child Tax Credit will no longer be open to newcomers from July.
The move is a fresh bid to deter scroungers from coming to the UK.
Under an earlier clamp down last year, new immigrants are already banned from getting the dole for their first three months.
But the reform also stops well short of David Cameron's pledge in January to halt ALL child benefit payments for foreign workers whose kids live abroad - a scandal that costs taxpayers £55m a year.
In an admission of defeat for now, Downing Street admitted it needs EU countries to agree that first.
In another toughening up of the system, interpreters in job centres to help new arrivals are also being withdrawn as of now.
Instead, new claimers will be expected to speak enough English to apply for their own handouts.
And they also face dole payout suspensions if they are found not to have improved their English within six months.
Halting translation services will save £3m a year, with officials currently having to handle 400,000 interpretation requests a year for more than 140 languages - with Slovak, Polish and Czech being the most common languages.
But in a loophole, they will stay in place for current claimers.
Startling new figures recently revealed 1.7% of the population either speak poor English or none at all.
And in some London boroughs, that rises to 9%.
Treasury Economic Secretary Nicky Morgan said: "The Government is building a system that is fair and consistent, one that supports those who want to work hard.
"These changes send a strong message that our welfare system is not open to abuse and will deter those who think that they can move to the UK primarily to claim benefits.
"Making work pay is part of our long term plan to ensure that Britain's growing economy and dynamic jobs market deliver for those who work hard and play by the rules."
Work and Pensions Iain Duncan Smith said on Sunday that three month dole ban for new immigrants wasn't long enough and he wants to extend it to up to a year.
But the government fears the threat of legal action by Brussels chiefs if he does.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140408ea48005bx
