{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3438"}
____
Politics
Brits pay millions to keep foreign lags in jail after sentences end
By EMILY ASHTON, Whitehall Correspondent   
510 words
15 May 2014
17:08
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
BRITAIN is being forced to pay tens of millions of pounds to keep more than 850 foreign lags in jail AFTER their sentences have ended, new stats show.
Foreign prisoners now spend an average 234 days behind bars beyond the end of their jail term because the Government struggles to kick them out of the country.
Shockingly, some 145 foreign lags have been locked up for more than a year more than they should have been.
And ten of those have been in jail for more than FIVE YEARS beyond the end of their sentence.
The figures were laid bare by the Home Office in a Commons written answer to Shadow Justice Secretary Sadiq Khan.
With the average annual cost of a prison place estimated at £40,000, it means overstaying foreign lags are costing taxpayers the equivalent of £34million a year.
Mr Khan said: “British jails are seriously overcrowded and rammed to overflowing on this Government’s watch.
“Yet 850 foreign criminals who could be deported are clogging up prisons because of this Government’s incompetence.
“That’s the equivalent of two decent sized prisons just to hold criminals who should have been deported.
“It’s costing hard-pressed British taxpayers £35million a year to keep foreign criminals in jail when they should have been sent back to their home countries.
“The Government are offering words where there should be action and appear to have thrown the towel in on this."
Home Office Minister James Brokenshire insisted that the Government made “every effort" to deport foreign lags at the end of their sentence.
He said: “Where a detainee refuses to co-operate with the removal or deportation process, detention may be prolonged."
The Immigration Bill, which was sent for Royal Assent this week, aims to “simplify the appeals system" and speed up deportations, he added.
It comes after the Commons Public Accounts Committee warned last month that foreign inmates are not being deported quick enough.
It found that some 1,000 foreign offenders are deported every three months - roughly the same as those convicted in the same period.
This means the overall number of foreign prisoners in UK prisons remains around 11,000 - or 13 per cent of the total prison population.
Meanwhile, shock figures have revealed how drugs and weapons are smuggled into jails on a daily basis.
A written Parliamentary answer showed that in 2013, there were 80 seizures of cocaine, 210 of heroin and at least 62 of knives.
Mr Khan said: "The amount of drugs and knives getting into our prison revealed by this data is alarming.
"How can we possibly punish and reform criminals if contraband and weapons are circulating so freely in our jails?"
Justice minister Jeremy Wright said: "Prisoners found with prohibited items face swift and robust punishment.
"This can include having days added to their custody, being transferred to a different prison and losing privileges."
emily.ashton@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140515ea5f003ux
