{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1216"}
____
Politics
Sorry Dave, but we don’t trust EU to get Britain better deal
By DAVID WOODING, Sunday Political Editor   
869 words
23 March 2014
04:00
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Exclusive . 72% give a poll warning to Cameron
FED-UP voters don’t trust David Cameron to win a better deal for Britain from the EU, a poll reveals today.
Three out of four have little faith in the PM delivering his promise to claw back power from Brussels.
More than half of the doubters think his efforts will be blocked by other member states.
The rest either think he lacks clout as a negotiator — or that he wants to keep Britain in Europe even if the talks fail.
The poll, by Tory peer Lord Ashcroft, is a blow to Mr Cameron’s bid to secure seven major changes as a price for staying in the EU.
And it shows the challenge he faces in turning his pledge of an in-out referendum into a vote-winner.
The wide-ranging poll shows Mr Cameron IS targeting the right areas — immigration and red tape — in his battle with Brussels.
But barely one in five voters is confident that he has what it takes to negotiate a better deal.
Even Tory supporters are not convinced, with almost half of them fearing he’s doomed to fail.
Lord Ashcroft says today: “Many like David Cameron’s plan to negotiate better terms for Britain.
“The trouble is, three-quarters of them doubt that it will work.
“That’s why Cameron’s ‘negotiate and decide’ policy will please some voters, but won’t win the election all by itself."
The wide-ranging poll of 20,000 voters confirms the PM’s belief that support for the EU is “wafer thin". Nearly two-thirds think other countries get more out of the EU than Britain. And about half think the cost of being a member outweighs the benefits.
Europe’s power base is so remote from this country that only one in ten can name an MEP in their area.
British people have a more positive view of war-mongering Russia than of the EU, the poll shows.
The European Parliament comes fourth from bottom in a league table of 27 “liked" countries and institutions. Only SAUDI ARABIA and the rogue states of IRAN and NORTH KOREA were placed below it.
But Britain is still split on whether or not to quit the EU — with one in five undecided.
It casts doubt on whether Mr Cameron’s offer of a 2017 referendum is enough on its own to clinch victory in next year’s General Election.
Three in four people say fixing the broken economy and creating jobs should be the PM’s top priority. Immigration controls are the second most important issue, deemed important by half of voters.
Cutting the deficit and debt, the NHS and welfare reforms are the next most important issues.
The scale of immigration from other European countries is named as the biggest problem of our EU membership, according to nearly half of voters.
Other problems are having to pay for other countries’ economic problems, rules and regulations imposed from Brussels and loss of sovereignty with laws made by unelected EU officials.
Benefits of membership are free trade with other EU members, say 44 per cent of voters.
Being able to travel freely across the continent, cutting the likelihood of war and being able to live and work abroad are other top reasons for staying in.
Mr Cameron has named seven specific changes he wants to secure as a price for keeping Britain in the EU. They are: New controls to stop “vast migrations" across the continent when new countries join the EU;
Tighter immigration rules to halt benefit tourism;
New powers for groups of national parliaments to work together to block unwanted European laws;
Businesses to be freed from red tape and “excessive interference" of Brussels;
British police and courts freed from “unnecessary interference" from the European Court of Human Rights;
More power “flowing away" from Brussels to Britain rather than increasingly centralising laws in Brussels;
And scrapping the principle of “ever closer union" among EU member states, which Mr Cameron says is “not right for Britain".
There is a crumb of comfort for the PM in the “Europe on Trial" poll.
The fact that three-quarters of people say fixing the economy is a top concern shows he has got his priorities right.
The poll’s findings show the Government is tackling most of people’s top concerns — controlling immigration, cutting the deficit, creating jobs and capping welfare.
Last night Downing Street insisted Mr Cameron CAN and WILL deliver a better deal when he goes in to bat.
A Number 10 source said: “The Prime Minister has already proved he can get a better deal for Britain in Europe.
“He vetoed a damaging EU treaty, pulled the UK out of a costly EU bank bailout and cut the Brussels budget for the first time in history.
“He can and will deliver a better deal for Britain in Europe — and the Conservatives are the only party that can deliver a referendum and give the British people the final say on whether to stay in a reformed EU or leave."
Document THESUK0020140322ea3m003pe
