{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"188"}
____
Sun Money
Card times
By SIMON ENGLISH, City Editor   
794 words
4 April 2014
02:48
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Plastic probe as families drown in debt
CITY watchdogs are to investigate the £150billion credit-card sector after dubbing the industry “payday loans with plastic".
In the latest attack on the big banks, the FINANCIAL CONDUCT AUTHORITY claims some credit cards are designed simply to lure people into debt.
Chief executive Martin Wheatley said: “Why are card issuers providing the means, in some cases, for the most indebted consumers to escalate their way into further debt?"
The watchdog says millions of Britons rely on credit cards to pay for essentials such as food and heat.
Nine million Brits are considered to be in serious debt, with so-called “survival-borrowers" using cards or payday loans to pay bills.
Mr Wheatley said that around one million of the UK’s 30 million cardholders only made minimum payments, racking up more debt every month through interest payments.
Consumer group WHICH? said: “Too many credit cards appear to be designed to catch customers out.
"The FCA should put consumers in control by stopping excessive penalties and encouraging people to shop around."
Debt charity STEP CHANGE has said that many of those who come to them for advice own five or more credit cards. On average such people have debts of £27,000 each.
£1.5bn home delivery
THE boss of takeaway order business JUST EAT is taking away £7.2million from its flotation.
Chief executive David Buttress is cashing in some of his stake when the company joins the stock market. But he still retains a holding worth another £5.8million.
The shares began unofficial trading yesterday at 260p — valuing the firm at £1.5billion — and the public will be able to buy them from next Tuesday.
Just Eat, which takes orders for 36,415 takeaway restaurants is raising £100million from the float.
Another £260million raised from selling shares to City investors will go to founding shareholders and top staff.
Scotland split vote ‘bad for business’ SCOTTISH independence would be bad for business, says one of the country’s biggest companies.
Engineering giant WEIR GROUP — which employs 15,000 and has annual revenues of £2.5billion — says splitting from the UK would “guarantee highest costs and higher taxes".
Chief executive Keith Cochrane said these uncertainties and question marks over the future of Scotland’s currency arrangements mean his firm would be very cautious about investing in new projects in the UK.
He added: “To those who say that means I am doing Scotland down, my reply is simple — we need more facts and less emotion in this debate."
Cochrane called on voters to study the facts before September’s referendum, adding: “And when you do that the outcome is clear — the costs of independence are guaranteed but the benefits are uncertain.
“That risks making Scotland less competitive, not more, and must be a concern for all of us who want to see our country continue to succeed."
- TOUGHER laws on immigration would hurt the UK economy, say top businessmen.
A survey of FTSE 100 chairmen found 56 are opposed to a crackdown and only one in ten feel new laws would help.
One said: “Bolting the stable door now makes little sense — the UK will lose out on attracting world talent."
Anger as RBS cuts 44 bank branches ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND sparked fury yesterday — by announcing it is shutting 44 “under-used" branches.
The embattled lender is even closing 14 classed as the “last bank in town" — despite promises in 2010 to keep them.
Customers in areas such as Repton, Derbys, Bollington, Cheshire, and Patthead, East Lothian, will now be served by a mobile bank van.
Charlotte Webster, of campaign group Move Your Money, blasted: “It’s no surprise to see the bank let down customers by leaving town — even when it promised not to."
Union UNITE claimed taxpayer bailed-out RBS was turning its back on communities in a “stealth attack" on branches.
But the bank said a 30 per cent fall in counter transactions since 2010 due to internet and phone banking had “significantly changed the industry".
DIY King of France THE company behind B&Q is making a £229million bid to dominate the DIY market in France.
KINGFISHER already owns CASTORAMA and BRICO DEPOT and wants to buy MR BRICOLAGE .
The deal may raise competition concerns, but Kingfisher says Castorama and Brico Depot stores are large and out of town while Mr Bricolage outlets tend to be small and in urban areas.
Boss Ian Cheshire said it would add a “third, complementary, strong business".
The firm trades from nine countries in Europe and Asia, and makes about 50 per cent of profit in France.
THE FTSE 100 FELL 9.90 TO 6649.14
Document THESCOT020140404ea44000jh
