{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1514"}
____
Sun Says
Beeb in tatters; TEARFUL single mum Carly Vickers seemed perfect for the BBC as it set out to highlight the plight of hungry families in “breadline Britain".
425 words
15 March 2014
00:39
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The worthy aim of its Sport Relief show Famous, Rich and Hungry was to improve the lot of those having to use food banks.
Of course, Beeb producers will also have been gleeful at another chance to imply that the Tory-led Coalition is casually cruel to benefit claimants as it battles to fix Britain’s finances.
It is unfortunate then that Carly, while claiming she has just £30 a week to feed her kids from her £266 handouts, has somehow managed to cover herself in tatts from a parlour charging £80 an hour.
Whatever the truth of who paid for it, her story proves two things.
First, that food banks, while feeding many in genuine need, are wide open to abuse and a hopelessly inaccurate measure of poverty levels.
Second, that the BBC won’t let the facts stand in the way of its blind pursuit of a Left-wing agenda.
Migrant grafters
THE number of immigrants arriving in Britain puts a huge strain on housing, schools, hospitals and transport systems.
But to blame that influx for the 2.34million people on the dole is to miss a vital point.
As Martin Daubney discovers, migrants get many minimum-wage jobs because they’re simply more willing to do them — and with a smile on their face.
They know it’s better than claiming benefits, and could be a stepping stone to far greater things.
Many Brits ARE trying tirelessly to get work and good luck to them.
Others point the finger at migrants as a smokescreen for their own reluctance to start at the bottom of the career ladder.
So long, Tony
DO you know what David Cameron believes or stands for? Or Ed Miliband for that matter? Or Nick Clegg? No, nor do we.
Which is why, despite all The Sun said about Tony Benn over the decades, we are sorry he is gone.
He was wrong on everything except Europe. His far-Left policies would have proved catastrophic.
But he held his views sincerely and consistently and did not budge for popularity’s sake.
We now live in an era of identikit career politicians of flexible principle and remorseless hunger for power — and for whom politics is just a game of strategy.
MPs of unwavering conviction will always win our greater admiration, even if we disagree with them.
Pity so few are left.
Document THESUK0020140315ea3f0015p
