{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2256"}
____
Politics
Cameron: I totally get why people vote Ukip
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
1,119 words
21 May 2014
10:21
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Prime Minister interviewed by Sun Cabbie
STRAIGHT talking Sun Cabbie Grant Davis has grilled the four main party leaders ahead of tomorrow's euro elections.
TRICK QUESTIONS
GRANT'S VERDICT
Today, in the last of the series, he speaks to Tory leader David Cameron.
The floating voter and real-life London taxi driver confronted the PM in a green cabbie's shelter in Temple, central London.
GRANT: Ukip are going to win big time on Thursday, aren't they?
DAVID: I am going to fight right up to the last day. Labour and the Liberals think there is nothing wrong with Europe. Ukip thinks there is nothing right with Europe. Where most British people are is we should get in there, get a better deal for Britain and then give the British people the decision in a referendum.
GRANT: So do you think Ukip is just a protest vote?
DAVID: It is a mixture of things. It has been a tough few years in Britain with the recession. People are frustrated. I totally understand people's frustration, of course they want things to move farther and faster. What I am offering is answers, not just anger and rhetoric.
GRANT: If Ukip do well they are going to be more vocal, They will be in everyone's face. How are you going to combat that Dave?
DAVID: I think by saying to people...
GRANT: Sorry, I meant Prime Minister.
DAVID: Dave is fine, Dave is fine. Look, I recognise it is tough to convince people about the significance of these elections. But when it comes to the General Election, are we going to stick to our economic plan or are we going to risk it all?
GRANT: How many EU immigrants is enough? 150,000, half a million, a million?
DAVID: Of course say you are right that there is the freedom to move and work in Europe. That is true.
GRANT: ...which we can't stop. We can't. What I am saying to you David is next year we could have half a million migrants come over to work in here legally. Not on benefit but working...
DAVID: That is what Farage said.
GRANT: No but you can't though David.
DAVID: Hang on a second, he said that the entire population of Romania would come and work in Britain. Right? And he got the population wrong. He said 29 million.
GRANT: He said they could, he is right. They could.
DAVID: If you actually have sensible controls on benefit tourism, if you have an education policy and a welfare policy that works, that will help you to get net migration to this country down.
GRANT: It is going to be close next year. The last election, Labour was a complete disaster - but you still only managed to get in with a coalition. Next year it is going to be even harder.
DAVID: Yes it will be tough but it is not impossible. It is going to be a tough election, you are right, it is going to be very tough. I totally accept that. My argument is that it is doable.
GRANT: You said in the past that Ukip are all fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists. Do you think you was right in the first place?
DAVID: I don't want to go over that ground. I said that in 2006. What I am very clear about is there are a lots of decent hard working people who do not have a racist bone in their body who are thinking of voting Ukip because they are frustrated by Europe. They want to see action on welfare. They want us to sort out immigration. I totally understand that. I am trying to communicate in this campaign I am on your side and I can deliver those things for you.
GRANT: Why haven't you brought in exit checks yet? You've been here four years.
DAVID: They are coming in in April next year. If the argument at the next election is you have not finished the job, I agree. We need more time to finish the job but we are making good progress. Immigration, all these things are part of my plan. That will be our pitch at the next election. We are on the right track, don't turn back.
GRANT: I spoke to Nick Clegg about your negotiations with the EU and he said to me, 'they are so small fry even I would vote them'.
DAVID: A year ago he said it is impossible and it would be the end of the world. Now he says it is easy. Clegg can't have it both ways, he can't say it is simple and it is impossible. I'm going to get another treaty.
GRANT: Not by the next parliament.
DAVID: They need the treaty change. The Germans and others need a banking union and a fiscal union, so just as they need some changes I am perfectly at liberty to say, 'All right guys, you can have some changes.' But I need some changes too.
GRANT: Michael Fallon said that if you don't get the answers you are looking for you will advocate a no vote. Is that right?
DAVID: I am an optimist. I think I will get this.
GRANT: Is he speaking for the Conservative party?
DAVID: I am speaking for the Conservative party and my view is very clearly I will achieve what I want to achieve.
GRANT: How much in Euros would a glass of your favourite red wine be in Brussels?
DAVID: That is not what I do in Brussels. Sometimes I don't even go out of the room for a pee because you are worried the rebate will have gone by the time you get back.
GRANT: How much would you pay for a pint of milk in Brussels if you were making a cup of tea for the fellas?
DAVID: I would reckon you would pay about 49 pence in Britain so if you do that in Euros I think you are probably looking at about 75 cents.
I expected more from David Cameron. It felt like spin, spin and more spin. Are the negotiations he's looking for going to make any difference? I don't think so.
None of the leaders have jumped off the page at me to be honest. Even now I don't know who I'm going to vote for, but I'm veering towards Ukip as a protest.
Join the debate on Twitter @ #SunCab t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140521ea5l00002
