{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2221"}
____
Louise Mensch
Schoolgirl Rachel says folks owe her... but it’s the other way round; LOTS of tweets on last week’s column about feckless, entitled British kids – but we’re not the only ones.
By LOUISE MENSCH, Sun Columnist   
1,347 words
9 March 2014
00:47
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
America is spellbound by the story of Rachel Canning, a New Jersey teen who stormed out of her parents’ home and is now suing them, demanding they pay her private school fees AND college tuition.
Rachel wouldn’t follow her parents’ rules, such as doing chores, respecting her mother and dumping a boyfriend they felt was a bad influence.
The honour student had suffered from an eating disorder and reportedly despised her mother for confronting her about it.
Her boyfriend and a close pal introduced her to booze — several years under America’s drinking age of 21. But Rachel wasn’t interested in doing as her parents told her.
She stormed from their home and then she SUED them, demanding $650 (£390) in weekly child support.
Talk about entitled. This is one of today’s generation of teens who think their parents owe them — and not the other way around.
The Catholic school regrettably supported Rachel. Despite the fact she had several recorded instances of drinking, had been stripped of her cheerleading captaincy and fired from school ministry, they called Children’s Services, the US welfare department.
Yet the professionals weren’t so easily fooled — a social worker visited the Cannings’ home and concluded Rachel was “spoiled". You think?
Shortly after that the teen stormed out to the home of attorney John Inglesino — a connected lawyer and dad of her school friend.
Amazingly, Inglesino and his wife then funded Rachel’s lawsuit against her devastated parents.
Turning up to court in her school uniform, heavy make-up and a smug smile, Rachel was shocked when Judge Peter Bogaard slammed her as a brat, reading out a voicemail to her mum where she said she wanted to “s*** on her face".
“Have you ever seen a young adult show such gross disrespect to a parent in a voicemail?" he asked.
As Rachel’s parents wept, their eldest daughter wouldn’t even make eye contact. They have offered her a welcome home whenever she can agree to rules.
It has been revealed that John Inglesino threw alcoholic parties for Rachel and her friends from the age of 15.
“Rachel’s first time drinking alcohol was at the Inglesino house," said her parents in a court document. “She was angry because we would not host an alcoholic party... the Inglesinos have been a tremendous hindrance in family healing."
Rachel’s use of her school uniform fooled no one — and America, where parents break the bank to send their kids to college, is now gripped in a debate over how far teens should go. She has more court dates but the judge’s comments don’t leave her with much hope.
The 18-year-old later bitched on Facebook that if her parents don’t stump up the six figures they’ve saved, she may have to join the US Army to qualify for free college tuition.
Rachel, it would be great if you joined the military.
A Sgt Major could do you a power of good.
Now drop and give me 50.
Dee rap taking the mick
Deidre Kelly, aka White Dee
I HATE to return to White Dee yet again but the “depressed" Benefits Street star won’t leave us alone, either.
She has now made a rap single.
Real name Deidre Kelly, she is just taking the mick.
Her “agents" protest she should still get her benefits because she hasn’t cashed any money – and her frequent TV appearances are unpaid.
That’s not the point.
The point is, paid or unpaid, Dee’s proving herself capable of work – and plenty of it.
Channel 4’s Benefits Street was more than just the spectacle of a bunch of chancers ripping off the rest of us. It exposed the evils of a welfare system that subsidises the lazy.
I can’t say if White Dee is genuinely depressed or not – this is the basis of her benefits claim. But I can definitely say she isn’t too depressed to work. That’s what she’s doing, right now, right this minute – working for her own PR.
Dee’s rap effort is called Your To Blame – bad English and all.
But she’s right.
If we don’t stop her benefits, we’re condoning this.
Time for her local Job Centre to take a hard look. Dee’s benefited from the rest of us quite enough.
Hillary’s painful poll exit Former First Lady Hillary Clinton
READY for Hillary in 2016? Yes, so was I. The former First Lady has more than proved she deserves the top spot herself.
After all, she’s been a Senator from my home state of New York and a highly effective Secretary of State.
Compare her performance to election loser John Kerry – Russia’s double triumph in Syria and Crimea comes on Kerry’s watch.
Governor Chris Christie, of New Jersey, was regarded as the Republican’s only hope of winning the next presidential contest. But after his Bridgegate scandal, party insiders have concluded he’s damaged goods.
Normally after eight years of Democrat rule, you’d expect a change at the top. This is even more true now president Barack Obama is deeply unpopular.
But Hillary has a trump card – she’s a woman. And American women are desperate to see one of their own in the White House. Her nomination seems so certain that nobody else is even talking about running – except national joke VP Joe Biden.
The 2016 story seemed to have already been written – Hillary Clinton cruises to the Democratic nomination and then back to the Oval Office – becoming the most powerful woman in history.
But bombshell news this week might be about to rip that narrative to pieces.
Multiple Washington sources are leaking to blogs and websites the rumour that Hillary isn’t going to run after all. They say she has a brain tumour – or some other brain-related injury that will stop her.
This week political website the Daily Caller claimed Clinton’s health was much worse than disclosed and respected GOP political consultant Roger Stone tweeted “Hillary. Not running. Not well."
Hilary fainted on camera in 2012 after overworking herself and the resulting concussion led to a blood clot on her brain.
Her office admitted in December she’d undergone an operation and the latest whispers suggest the brain problems have returned.
If Hillary doesn’t run, the 2016 election will be wide open.
But losing America’s Maggie Thatcher from politics at the pinnacle of her career would be far too heavy a price for women all over the world.
Check ‘em, Nicki
Wet and wild Nicki Minaj
NEVER knowingly overdressed, Nicki Minaj has done it again.
Not content with posting pictures of herself in miniature bikinis and skin-tight leggings, the rap superstar has now put up a series of soapy snaps of herself in the shower – wearing not a stitch.
You can’t actually see any nipples, Minaj prefers to tease her “fans". But it’s an incredible shame the Super Bass star can’t let her talent do the talking.
If she wants to put those curves to some good use, Nicki could Instagram a few pics of herself Checking ’em for cancer – like The Sun is urging us all to do.
For once she’d be behaving in the BREAST possible taste.
– SO the BBC was biased? You DO surprise me.
Turns out that a “suppressed" report Newsnight talked about was released IN FULL – and it backs Tory claims that immigration affects the working poor.
James Brokenshire, the new immigration minister, is taking on Vince Cable on the issue. The Lib Dem Conference is about to start and Tories can’t wait to hear Calamity Cable tell voters why we should have that open-door policy the yellows love so much.
Document THESUK0020140309ea390015u
