{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2439"}
____
Features
Southampton locals swamped by 25k influx say 'too many people'
By ANTONELLA LAZZERI   
1,277 words
14 April 2014
02:12
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Brit city where one in ten are Eastern European
A CHANT echoes round the terraces of away fans at Southampton’s football ground: “You’re just a town full of Poles, you’re just a town full of Poles."
It is sung over and over at St Mary’s Stadium in a jibe at the fact the city has one of the largest Polish communities in Britain — and many are crammed into the home supporters’ end.
There are around 25,000 now living in Southampton, which has a population estimated at 239,400 — meaning more than one in ten is Polish.
Many have settled in the suburbs of Portswood, St Mary’s and Shirley — which holds so many that locals have dubbed it “Shirlinski". In Shirley High Street around one in four shops is Polish.
There are native hairdressers, travel agencies, solicitors, restaurants — they even have their own nightclub.
Horticultural teacher Gavin Wright, 38, says: “There’s way too many people here.
“Immigrants get the houses, jobs and we have enough homeless people already to look out for — we can’t take any more coming in."
One reviewer on website Tripadvisor said: “I felt I was in Poland with the amount of them in the city."
In the Pig and Whistle pub Chris Marlow, 54, told us: “I was born and bred in this area but now the English are the minority here. If you go up and down Shirley High Street you’d be hard pushed to find anyone speaking English, even in the Co-op."
Full-time mum Miranda Wright, 41, adds: “There’s not enough jobs or accommodation and because they take all the low-paid jobs, our young people have no hope.
“It’s definitely putting a strain on services — particularly hospitals as it takes a lot longer now to even get an appointment."
Ice cream parlour worker Maddi Fraser, 19, who lives on the outskirts of Southampton, says: “I’m not overly against immigration, but we really can’t take any more.
“Everyone is struggling to get jobs and Southampton is just bursting with people." Next month it will be ten years since the UK granted free movement to Polish workers after their country joined the EU.
At the time there were around 75,000 Poles resident in Britain. It is now believed there are more than one million. And Polish is now the second most spoken language in Britain.
This mass migration into Southampton is hailed as the reason why UKIP won the neighbouring Eastleigh by-election last year.
The constituency of Southampton Test has been Labour since 1997 but there are now signs that UKIP are making inroads here too.
Last year the Southampton Woolston by-election saw Labour lose half its vote with UKIP coming second, with just 133 votes fewer than the Labour candidate.
The UKIP runner had concentrated on the issues of jobs and immigration.
Southampton local Shaun Knapp, 53, says he may vote UKIP if he gets the chance. He told us: “I feel in the minority now. We might as well be called Little Poland."
The think-tank MigrationWatch UK recently reported that if Britain was to accommodate all the EU migrants who want to come here over the next four years, they will need an extra city the size of Manchester.
A sizeable proportion will no doubt head for Southampton, attracted by the already huge population of East Europeans.
There are now 1,000 more babies being born in Southampton each year than a decade before.
The pressure on public services is evident. The local council is warning that more schools may have to be built. And the amount of people on the social housing list has increased from 4,000 to 14,000 in the past eight years.
Barbara Storey, 64 — founder of local charity SOS Polonia, which helps migrant workers — is not surprised by the influx to the city.
She says: “When I first read in 2004 the estimates of the government at the time that the amount of Polish migrants expected was just 15,000, I laughed and laughed.
“I knew they would flood in. Life here is so much better and easier."
Barbara came here 40 years ago to marry an Englishman. She says: “In the past Polish people were thankful for any job like picking fruit and veg, cleaning, stacking shelves.
"Now they want a good job. They want to improve themselves, not just do a job no English person wants to do."
Her staff offer legal advice and deal with numerous problems — but do not offer any help with migrants wanting to claim benefits. Barbara says firmly: “That is not the way to go. If you come here you must be prepared to work hard and contribute."
In 2007 the British Polish Chamber of Commerce launched the Wracaj do Polski — Come Back To Poland — campaign to urge people to return home.
Although there are reports of rising numbers going back, it was hard to find anyone who wanted to in Southampton.
Dance instructor Marzena Bober, 32, teaches pole dancing and agrees, saying: “My daughter was six when I came here. She feels totally English now. There’s no way I’d take her back to live. She has English friends, she goes to English school."
Marzena is soon to open her own dancing school teaching all types of dance. She adds: “That is my total dream and in Poland I would never have been able to achieve it.
“There I earned around £200 a month as a sales assistant."
In Shirley High Street hairdresser Agnieskza Szewozyki, 34, tells how coming to England has also helped her achieve her dream, saying: “I have my own salon, back home I could never do that."
It is the new generation of Poles growing up in Southampton who believe themselves to be English that perhaps pose the most visible evidence of what mass migration can do.
At St Mark’s CofE Primary School they hold Polish coffee mornings to guide parents through the curriculum.
The school is well versed in catering for children whose parents are non-UK born as there are 36 home languages represented in the pupil population.
A decade ago the school was classified as 86 per cent white English, now that figure is 41 per cent. The changing face of the population is here to stay.
Barbara believes the Polish migrants have improved Southampton. She says: “The other day I got into a taxi and the driver said, ‘Look at all these Polish people!’.
“I thought he was about to launch into a racist rant but instead he told me, ‘They’ve done such wonderful things for this city. They work so hard, they’ve revived areas like Shirley — they’ve been brilliant for Southampton."
Bungles saw UK missing 350,000 OUR investigation comes just days after bungling immigration inspectors admitted missing 350,000 Eastern Europeans who entered the UK.
A report found the Office for National Statistics added up only figures for those coming into big airports like Gatwick and Manchester — as others poured into smaller airports and ports uncounted.
The failures between 2001 and 2011 mean the staggering number will have to be added to the UK’s already booming population.
MigrationWatch UK, said: “It’s no surprise and precisely what we have been pointing to in terms of scale and speed of migration.
“If you have it happening at this sort of rate then you are bound to get what has occurred in Southampton."
a.lazzeri@the-sun.co.uk 
Document THESUK0020140413ea4d000mb
