{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3775"}
____
Articles
Leigh won’t give us any more Griff!
By KENNY MILLAR   
469 words
28 April 2014
03:32
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Lennon backing his top Bhoy
NEIL LENNON insists bad Bhoy Leigh Griffiths now knows what is expected of him on AND off the pitch at Celtic.
Griffiths lit up Celtic’s thrashing of Inverness Caley Thistle, with two assists for hat-trick hero Anthony Stokes, a wonderful first-time finish of his own and a selfless defensive shift.
However he was reminded he has a long way to go to win over the fans after the Green Brigade unfurled a banner directed at him pre-match in reference to his recent video antics.
One quoted Willie Maley reading ‘A man must be a Celt on and off the pitch, otherwise he is of no value to this club’, while another stated ‘Refugees welcome. Created by immigrants’ in relation to his alleged taunts of former Hearts star Rudi Skacel.
With the club and police in the middle of their own investigations, Lennon chose his words carefully and said: “I can’t comment on the banner. I wasn’t sure what it was aimed at.
“We’re going through a process at the minute and we’ll be able to speak more about it when that finishes, but we’ve all made mistakes. I think he’ll come good and he’ll learn. I think he’ll have a good career here.
“I don’t know if he knew the banner was aimed at him. You expect those kind of performances from him anyway.
“That’s seven goals in 11 appearances, so he’s doing exactly what we brought him in to do."
Lennon hailed his side’s impressive, high-tempo, performance and their ruthlessness in front of goal, which blew away the Highlanders.
He added: “That’s up there with our best performances of the season, like Hearts away in the Cup and at Fir Park.
“The attitude and appetite of the players was fantastic. The quality of football, pace, movement, everything, was there.
“My goalkeeper made a brilliant save from a penalty so they were all at it, and the subs made a great contribution."
The Hoops were also boosted by the return of fit-again right-back Mikael Lustig, after the Swede battled back from a long-term hip injury to make an appearance as a sub.
Lennon said: “It was great to see Mikael back after he had his four-month lay-off. I think he’s a great player.
“When you lose a player of that calibre it weakens you, but we’re lucky in that department with Adam Matthews and Darnell Fisher.
“We’ve had to shift it around a bit with those three missing, but having Mikael, Adam and Charlie Mulgrew back was great.
“There was a freshness and quality about us."
Document THESUK0020140428ea4s000ry
