{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3216"}
____
Politics
Counted them all in, counted them all out
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
448 words
10 April 2014
01:48
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE . Labour's new foreign arrivals plan
EVERY new foreign arrival to Britain will be counted in and counted out for the very first time, Labour will pledge today.
Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper will promise to impose the strict new entry and exit checks if her party wins power back next year.
The ambitious move will allow officials to track down and expel tens of thousands of illegal immigrants who overstay their visas.
And it is Labour's biggest bid yet to win back credibility on immigration.
The party's reputation on the key electoral issue was left in tatters after the party lost control of the UK's borders when it was in power.
In a major speech today, Ms Cooper will again concede that the last government "got things wrong".
And she will say: "We need to know how many people are arriving and leaving and what the impact will be.
"And we need to make sure the rules are enforced and not abused.
"The next Labour government will introduce exit checks so that visas can be enforced and action can be swiftly taken to make sure people leave when their time runs out.
"And we will draw up a plan to bring in proper controls to count people in and out, and deal with the hundreds of thousands of people overstaying their visas in Britain."
A strict new count goes further than the Coalition Government's plan to reintroduce exit checks, promised four years ago but still not delivered.
But critics insist the policy would be tough to implement and is likely to cost many millions.
Labour has commissioned an independent review on how to bring it in by former top cop and security expert Peter Neyroud.
The ex-Thames Valley Chief Constable has also agreed to probe more effective ways of finding people currently overstaying their visas.
Promising another tough new control, Ms Cooper will also today vow to bring back finger printing for all illegal migrants caught stowing away at Calais so repeat offenders can be dealt with.
A Home Office spokesman said: "We have already committed to introducing exit checks by 2015.
"The Immigration Bill will introduce powers to enable carrier and port operator staff to play a role in carrying out these checks.
"This will help improve our already robust security at the border, while causing as little disruption to passengers as possible. Our aim is to make it much harder for offenders to flee British justice and to better identify those who are in the UK illegally."
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140410ea4a00030
