{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"1450"}
____
Home Scotland
Immigration has cost Britain £148billion in last two decades; THE true cost of the immigration tidal wave to hit Britain in the last two decades is a massive £148billion, it has been claimed.
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
382 words
13 March 2014
05:15
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
More than four million foreigners arriving since 1995 have set the country back a net £22million a DAY .
Taxpayers' cash that has had to be spent on public services, housing and benefits vastly outweighs the extra tax they pay, according to fresh calculations by pressure group MigrationWatchUK.
The revised figures blow a huge hole in previous claims that immigrants are now a financial benefit to the country.
Migration Watch UK Chairman Sir Andrew Green said: "Our report finally disposes of the immigration lobby's oft repeated claims that immigration reduces our tax burden.
"The total cost is high and increased dramatically between 1995 and 2011, providing no compensation for the overcrowding of this island which we are experiencing, largely as a result of immigration."
An earlier estimate by the Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration put recent immigration at a net cash benefit to the UK at £25bn.
But those figures are flawed, the new study claims, because it seriously over-estimated how much income and council tax newcomers paid by presuming they earned much more than most do.
And handout payouts, especially in housing benefit, were also underestimated in the earlier research.
Under the new findings, the cost to the country will continue with the latest immigration figures last week revealing a major set back for the government in the battle to get control of our borders.
A net influx of 212,000 migrants poured into Britain last year, destroying the PM's hopes of reducing the figure to 1990s levels of tens of thousands.
In another embarrassing blow to ministers, officials were forced to admit they have "terminated" the troubled E-borders scheme.
The plan - first devised by the Labour government in 2003 - was designed to count everyone in and out of the UK by collecting passenger information.
But it has been dogged by problems and UK Border Force head Sir Charles Montgomery told MPs it has now been abandoned.
Home Affairs committee chairman Keith Vaz MP called it a "shambles".
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESCOT020140313ea3d002bd
