{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3420"}
____
Politics
Ed Miliband: I'm not a revolutionary like dad
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
461 words
16 May 2014
06:10
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
ED Miliband has promised to slash taxes for working Brits if he becomes PM - to prove he is not a revolutionary like his father.
In a euro elections interview, the Labour leader was quizzed by Sun Cabbie Grant Davis on whether he will hike levies if he takes power next year.
Mr Miliband insisted he would do the opposite, laying out a new principle to reduce the tax burden on the less well-off and only squeeze the rich.
In an attempt to soften his 'Red Ed' image, Mr Miliband said: "I want to cut taxes for working families".
Giving one example how, the Opposition Leader added: "We want to have the 10p tax. Now I'm afraid Labour got that abolished when we should not have done.
"We want to bring back a 10p tax rate to make life easier for people.
"And we want to go back to the 50 pence tax rate."
Grilled on whether his radical policy agenda is very left wing, he insisted: "It is not revolutionary. I am trying to propose sensible solutions.
"My Dad was a bit of a socialist right and he would have love the idea of Red Ed, but I think he would think it was not really very true".
But Mr Miliband ducked a demand to reveal if he is a Socialist, saying instead: "It was actually Tony Blair who put on our card Democratic Socialist Party. And as New Labour".
It is "unlikely" Britain will have an EU referendum under a Labour government, Mr Miliband also admitted, dubbing it not one of his priorities as PM.
He said: "I have said there will be a referendum if there is any transfer of power from Britain to the European Union.
"I am being open with you that is unlikely to happen."
The Labour chief took a ride in The Sun Cab as part of our series on all four of the major party leaders ahead of next week's euro elections.
ED Balls will today lay out Labour's agenda for reform in Europe.
The Shadow Chancellor will call for the creation of a new EU Growth Commissioner to turbo charge the union's flatlining recovery.
He will also say Labour will double the time new migrants have to wait before being able to claim the dole.
And he will also back existing Tory plans to extend transitional controls on new members of the EU to stem new immigration.
Mr Balls will say: "The EU must be made to work better for Britain - and that is why Labour is setting out a clear agenda for reform".
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140516ea5g0015p
