{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3443"}
____
Scotland
If Downing Street is serious about border controls, let's see the plans
CHRIS MUSSON   
711 words
15 May 2014
12:23
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
YOU'LL have heard the story about border controls under Scottish independence.
Guards at Gretna, blockades at Berwick... that kind of thing.
Every time this subject crops up, the same thing happens.
Westminster politicians put on their best scary voices and warn it might happen if there's a Yes vote on September 18.
The SNP scoff, smile smugly, shake their heads and accuse the No camp of scaremongering.
It's an issue close to my heart, as I grew up near the border and have family who go between England and Scotland daily for work, shopping, and to see friends.
Just after the launch of the Yes and No campaigns two years ago, I drove along the English-Scottish border for a story on this issue.
The patience of my photographer was sorely tested as we stopped and documented every border crossing - on railways, roads, and forest tracks.
The headline of the article - 'Bordering on the Impossible' - made the point that it would be a struggle to police the boundary effectively.
Driving beside Hadrian's Wall this week - on a day off, this time - it got me thinking about the issue again.
And I just can't see border controls happening.
Firstly, the idea that the frontier would be a back door into England doesn't make much sense.
A migrant coming into Scotland on a plane or ferry would still be subject to stringent visa and passport checks.
There's no reason to think Scotland's standards would slip. Yep, there will be the same infuriating queues at passport control.
Even if a person slipped the net, or overstayed, why would they want to skip Scotland and head south, with living standards broadly the same?
It's not as if Scotland's a war zone. Not unless the referendum campaign gets bloody.
One of the few points that can be nailed down in the SNP's vague immigration policy is they plan to give "incentives" to people who come to "live and work in more remote geographical areas".
If 50 immigrants who've studiously completed their paperwork and passed their point-based tests fail to turn up in Thurso, alarm bells would obviously start to ring.
Besides, there's nothing to suggest SNP immigration policy will be radically different to down south - regardless of whether we're in the EU - despite being slightly more relaxed to counter skills shortages and re-populate some rural areas.
I've yet to hear a convincing argument for why border controls will be needed.
But for sake of the argument, let's pretend independence means a steady trickle of people sneaking in through Scotland and heading for the promised land of England and Wales.
Under this scenario, there could be a need for a border.
And if so, it would be a very costly exercise.
Dozens of roads span the 108-mile frontier, many of them in secluded spots, as we found that day.
Sure, Westminster could stick up border controls on the M74 at Gretna and the A1.
They could even have some token checks on the east and west coast rail lines.
But what would be the point, when there are some 25 other ways to drive across?
Anyone with half a brain, seeking to evade authorities, would take the alternative routes.
Scary-looking border checks on trunk roads would be little more than a show of strength and a barrier to trade.
Short of building another Hadrian's Wall, there would be no way of securing the border.
While it's not a perfect comparison, the UK already has a common travel area with the Republic of Ireland.
We've not seen a flood of illegal immigrants coming to Britain via Dublin.
So, if Westminster leaders are serious, let's see the plans for border controls.
Downing Street has been accused by the SNP of "bluffing" over their threat to veto a formal currency union with Scotland.
I disagree with the Nats on that one, as there appear to be good reasons against a Pound zone.
But this threat of border controls looks like a bluff that can't be backed up by logic.
Document THESUK0020140515ea5f001e1
