{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2231"}
____
Fabulous
Fabulous report: The stolen children; On average, two youngsters a day in the UK and Ireland are snatched by a parent – and it’s on the increase. Louise travelled to Syria to find her daughter, May, who had been abducted by her father
BY BEN GELBLUM & CLAIE WILSON   
2,116 words
9 March 2014
04:00
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Sweating in the dusty heat, Louise Monaghan stared at the ragged refugees pouring across the border. They were desperate to escape war-torn Syria for a new life in Turkey – but she was about to go in. She handed her passport to the border guard, who warned her that Syria was filled with bandits and she’d probably be killed as she travelled the three miles to her destination.
But it was a risk Dublin-born Louise was willing to take – because her former husband had abducted their six-year-old daughter, May, and taken her to a small village near the Syrian city of Idlib.
“May was stolen from her mother, her home," says Louise. “I’d have done anything to get my little girl back."
It’s a nightmare scenario for any parent – and, worryingly, one that’s on the rise. Figures recently released by the Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO) found parental child abduction and custody cases have more than doubled in the last decade.
“In 2010, there were 394 UK cases reported to us, but in 2013 this rose to 520," says Alison Shalaby, Chief Executive of Reunite, a charity that helps parents in such cases. She attributes this rise to the ease of travelling around the globe and an increase in relationships between different nationalities.
According to the FCO, many parents are never reunited with their abducted children. And even if cases are resolved, the process can often take up to 10 years.
For Louise, 39, her ordeal started when she filed for divorce from her Syrian husband, Mostafa Assad, in 2008.
They’d met five years earlier when Louise was living in Cyprus, working as a hairdresser. She instantly fell for Mostafa’s charm and good looks, and their daughter, May, was born in April 2005. Two years later, the couple married – but after their wedding, Mostafa, 38, a construction worker, became violent and controlling.
“He would fly into jealous rages," remembers Louise. “It was utterly terrifying, so I told him I wanted a divorce."
When the divorce was finalised in November 2010, Mostafa was granted access to May for a few hours, three times a week, but Louise was wary.
“There was a tiny part of me that worried he might steal May, so I took precautions by putting her on a ‘stop list’, preventing either of us from taking her out of Cyprus without the other’s permission," she remembers.
In September 2011, the day before May, then six, was due to start school, Mostafa arranged to take her to the beach. When he didn’t return with her a few hours later, Louise instinctively knew something was wrong.
She started frantically searching the streets for her daughter and repeatedly calling Mostafa. At first, his phone was switched off but when she did get through a few hours later, it had an international ringing tone. Mostafa answered, boasting he’d flown May to northern Cyprus, then driven her to Syria, 316 miles away, so she could have a proper Muslim upbringing.
“I knew I might never see May again, so I had to think on my feet," remembers Louise. “Although I felt sick saying it, I told Mostafa I loved him and wanted to be with him, too. I said everything I could to persuade him, because I knew May would disappear forever if I didn’t."
Louise then spoke to her bewildered daughter, desperately trying to reassure her that everything would be OK.
“May wasn’t that close to her dad so I knew she would be terrified," she explains. “It was a completely alien environment for her, and so scary as there was a war raging all around them. She was tearful and frightened – I had to stay calm for her sake, but inside I was distraught."
Mostafa told Louise that unless she came back to him as an obedient wife, she’d never see her child again. In desperation, she agreed.
Once off the phone, she contacted Irish and Cypriot authorities. They issued a warrant for Mostafa’s arrest and advised her not to go to Syria – but Louise was determined.
Three days after the phone call, she flew into Turkey, then crossed the border and walked the three miles to the town of Idlib in north-west Syria, where Mostafa picked her up. Taking Louise’s passport away, he threw a black hijab and long dress at her, telling her it was the only thing she would be wearing from now on.
“Then he drove us to the house he was staying in, and I was reunited with May," recalls Louise. “It was just four days since I’d last seen her, but she looked so different. Her hair was tightly plaited and she was wearing long-sleeved Arab village clothing. She also had bruises all over her arms, from where her father had forced her on to the plane."
Suspecting that Louise would attempt to flee with May, Mostafa kept them both locked in the house as the conflict raged around them.
“It was terrifying, hearing bombs and shooting nearby," recalls Louise. “We had barely any food, and as a woman I had no rights. At any stage, Mostafa could have beaten me to death and claimed I’d been unfaithful."
Nearly three weeks later, Louise was allowed to call her sister Mandy in Dublin, who was arranging a money transfer for her. “I desperately hoped she’d sorted our rescue, but my heart broke when she told me no one was coming for us," Louise remembers. “Apparently, the Irish government couldn’t do anything as it was just too dangerous. We were on our own."
Mostafa, May and Louise
Later that day, Mostafa drove the family to a nearby city to renew the visa he’d obtained for Louise. Leaving her and May in the car, he went into the immigration office with the paperwork. Louise seized her chance. With just £123 in local currency in her pocket, she grabbed May and ran to a nearby taxi rank, begging a kindly-looking driver to take them to the Irish consulate in the Syrian capital, Damascus, 200 miles away.
“It was a six-hour drive along dirt roads through places where people were being killed every day," recalls Louise, who made sure her hijab covered every blonde hair on her head.
Once in Damascus, Louise and May stayed in a safe house for two weeks while the Irish embassy tried to organise their escape.
But because Mostafa had reported her, Louise was now... a fugitive. Wanted for kidnapping May, she faced life imprisonment or death by stoning under Islamic sharia law – and the embassy couldn’t convince the authorities to let them leave Syria.
With the civil war worsening, Louise and May were on their own. In desperation, Mandy got in touch with some people who agreed to smuggle them out of the country – for a fee. She paid them with the money Louise had transferred and, a few days later, three armed men arrived in the dead of night and drove Louise and May into the mountains six miles away.
“I had no idea if I could trust them, but I had no choice," says Louise. “When the mountains got too steep, we had to leave the car and walk, throwing ourselves to the ground when we saw an army patrol below. May was trying to be brave, and I clutched her hand tightly, terrified for us both."
Early the next morning, on October 14, they crossed the Lebanese border, where a representative from the Irish consulate met them and took them back to Dublin. “No words can describe how grateful I am to everybody who risked their lives to bring us home," says Louise, who now lives in Ireland with May and advises other parents in similar situations. She has written a book about her experience, which is being turned into a Hollywood movie.
“I guess it’s an amazing story. We were lucky," she smiles. “For a while after we got home, I’d find food stashed around May’s room, which must have been because she’d gone hungry in Syria. She was clingy for a long time, too, and still doesn’t like to be with strangers much. She’s had therapy to deal with it all and I’m proud of how well she’s doing now."
Although there is an international arrest warrant for Mostafa for abduction and breaching a court order, he has never been caught.
“Some days I wonder where he is or what he may be planning," says Louise. “But if I worried about it all the time, I wouldn’t leave the house. I just make sure I never speak ill of him to May. I say her dad wasn’t thinking clearly as he loves her so much, and it was my job to bring her back to a safer place."
Research from the FCO found that 74 per cent of people believe that fathers are more likely to abduct their children than mothers – but surprisingly, the opposite is true.
“In 70 per cent of the cases reported to us, it’s the mother who has taken the child," says Alison from Reunite. “When relationships go sour, they might want to go home to the support of their family, without thinking of the child’s best interests."
Tragically, Safraz Khan, 44, from Croydon, has first-hand experience of this. In August 2011, his daughter, Aamina, then six, was snatched by her mum, Humma, 39, and taken to Pakistan.
“I can’t even begin to imagine why Humma would take our daughter, who enjoyed her school, her friends and her life here," he says. “She had all that happiness and security, yet her mother took her to a foreign, dangerous place. I can only think she did it to spite me."
Safraz and Humma, who were both doctors, had an arranged marriage in 2004, but their relationship fell apart and they separated four years later. Safraz was awarded custody of Aamina.
Safraz has spent more than two years searching for his daughter Aamina
“The court felt she was better off with me as I was her primary carer," explains Safraz. “The arrangement meant I had her throughout the week, while Humma had her three weekends out of four and we shared all holidays. Humma never appealed or went back to court, so I thought she was happy with the arrangement."
But then on August 20 2011, Humma collected Aamina for the holidays and, six days later, secretly took her away to Pakistan, where she had relatives.
“When I went to collect Aamina the day before she was due to go to school on September 6, nobody answered the door," remembers Safraz. “Under the terms of the residence order, Humma knew she wasn’t allowed to take our daughter out of the country. I spoke to her family, who tried to convince me that they were in the Lake District, but I knew something was seriously wrong and reported her missing."
Aamina still hasn’t been found. The police in London and Pakistan have been involved in trying to find her and Safraz has spent £80,000 searching for his daughter. He believes she is in Pakistan, but when the family house there was raided, although some school books were found, there was no sign of his daughter.
Humma, Safraz and Aamina
While Louise and May are doing everything they can to rebuild their lives, Safraz is still in limbo, not able to let go or move forward.
“This July I am going to miss Aamina’s ninth birthday," he says. “Sometimes I dream I find her and we’re hugging and crying, but then I wake up and she’s still gone. Part of me feels like I’m now grieving for her, but I will never give up."
FYI
35 children were abducted and taken from the UK to Pakistan in 2012/13 – more are taken there than anywhere else in the world.*
For advice, visit Reunite.org or Gov.uk/international-child-abduction.
Photography: Conor Buckley Hair & make-up: Ciara Allen Sources: *Foreign & Commonwealth Office, Department of Justice & Equality, Ireland
Stolen: Escape From Syria by Louise Monaghan (£7.99, Mainstream Publishing)
By Ben Gelblum & Claie Wilson
Document THESUK0020140309ea39001me
