{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"888"}
____
Home Scotland
27% think Ukip ARE a racist party but 29% still back them
By DAVID WOODING, Sunday Political Editor   
840 words
4 May 2014
16:23
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
We poll voters a year before general election
MOST voters think Ukip have become a magnet for racists and bigots, a poll reveals today.
Six out of ten people believe Nigel Farage’s anti-EU outfit is packed with extremists. Yet they are still prepared to desert mainstream political parties to support him.
Ukip are poised to win the European parliamentary elections because voters think Mr Farage is more “in touch".
More than a quarter of Tories and one in ten Labour backers will vote Ukip on May 22. But they will return to the fold at the General Election a year from now, according to a special YouGov poll for The Sun on Sunday.
The verdict comes after a week of controversy over Ukip candidates’ outpourings. More than a quarter of voters — 27 per cent — say Ukip are a racist party with many racist members and supporters.
A further 35 per cent think Ukip are not racist but attract supporters with racist, extreme or odd views.
But the image has failed to dent the Farage bandwagon, which is set to steamroller its way to success in the Euro elections. Ukip top the poll with 29 per cent support, three points ahead of Labour and six above the Tories. The party’s tough stance on immigration is pulling in support.
Almost a third — 29 per cent — back their planned controls. And Mr Farage is neck-and-neck with Labour leader Ed Miliband as the party chief most in touch with ordinary people.
But when it comes to what voters see as the biggest issue — the economy — the Tories are way out in front.
David Cameron is also streets ahead as the man most suited to be Prime Minister. He is also seen as the most decisive and the most likeable leader.
‘Not damaging support’ But while his personal rating is better than Ed Miliband’s, his party lags three points behind Labour.
Two-thirds of people have had enough of coalition government and would rather see a single party in power after the election on May 7 next year. But if Britain ends up with another hung Parliament, they would marginally favour a Labour-Lib Dem alliance next time around.
YouGov’s Anthony Wells said: “Despite most people thinking Ukip attracts racists — even if it’s not racist itself — that doesn’t appear to be damaging the party’s support.
“The Conservatives have a big lead on the economy but on many other issues — like the cost of living, health and housing — Labour have the advantage. Where the Conservatives are really ahead is leadership, with Mr Cameron seen as far above his rivals."
The Tories lead by 18 points as the best party to grow the economy, but Labour’s “cost-of-living crisis" push has Mr Miliband 20 points up for ensuring wages keep pace with prices.
And while Mr Cameron is seen as the best leader on the world stage, Mr Miliband is seen as more honest.
Tory chairman Grant Shapps said: “On key issues such as the economy and welfare, we have taken the difficult decisions needed to turn our country around. All Ed Miliband offers is more spending, borrowing and taxes."
After four years in power, voters say the Coalition’s best success is raising the personal tax allowance to £10,000 — which the Lib Dems say was THEIR idea. They are also praised for capping benefits, freezing fuel duty, cutting the deficit and legalising gay marriage.
But the bedroom tax, higher tuition fees, Royal Mail privatisation, raising VAT and cutting the 50p tax rate are seen as their worst deeds.
Most of us think we are worse off By PETER KELLNER, YouGov President
THE old saying “it’s the economy, stupid" remains true and it’s the phrase that will decide next year’s General Election.
But the question is, which party will the economy help?
YouGov’s poll found that the Tories trounce Labour by two to one when voters were asked who they trust most to keep the economy growing. Labour leads by the same huge margin on making sure ordinary people’s wages keep up with inflation.
In the long run, the economy and living standards go hand in hand. Millions think differently on these two things. That’s why David Cameron talks about Britain’s growth numbers, which are beginning to perk up, while Ed Miliband stresses the “cost of living crisis", which voters feel.
In our poll, more think they are worse off than a year ago.
Nick Clegg hopes voters will think that the best thing the Coalition has done – raising the personal tax allowance to £10,000 – was a Lib Dem idea.
Ukip’s Nigel Farage is gaining ground by blaming our troubles on Europe and immigration.
Our poll shows all four party leaders have a message that chimes with voters. But which will have the greatest impact?
Document THESCOT020140504ea54002xl
