{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"2796"}
____
Home Scotland
Paedos’ rights; IT’S a masterpiece of understatement. Labour veteran Patricia Hewitt says the National Council for Civil Liberties was “naive and wrong" to help the Paedophile Information Exchange.
391 words
27 February 2014
22:54
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
In fact our revelations that forced her belated apology are by far the most disturbing yet in the “rights for paedophiles" scandal.
The ex-Health Secretary says her mistake was to accept the PIE as a “campaigning organisation".
But she personally stands accused of backing sex with “consenting" children over ten and the legalisation of incest. A committee of her NCCL organisation also supported “caring paedophiles".
Repugnant stuff, even in the permissive 1970s.
Labour deputy leader Harriet Harman and her MP husband Jack Dromey also worked at this same discredited outfit in that decade.
It’s time they apologised too.
Migrant chaos
IMMIGRATION is out of control. As things stand, it cannot be controlled.
Of all this Government’s hasty promises four years ago, slashing net migration to tens of thousands a year now looks the most ridiculous.
They HAVE cut migrants from outside the EU. They are powerless to stop them coming from within it.
As our economy improves, far fewer Brits are moving abroad — while thousands flee their native Romania, Bulgaria, Italy, Spain and Portugal for greener pastures here.
Some will benefit the UK. But our schools, hospitals and housing cannot cope with an extra 212,000 people a year. And this was the figure BEFORE all controls on Romanians and Bulgarians were removed last month.
This is a crucial issue for voters.
The Sun has urged David Cameron to make it a red-line demand in his renegotiation with Europe. It is disheartening to learn he can expect little support from Angela Merkel.
And while Labour are right to say Government policy is in tatters, it was THEM who deliberately expanded our population by millions.
On immigration Labour have zero credibil- ity. The Tories’ is rapidly disappearing too.
Bonus balls
THE sums at RBS don’t add up.
Boss Ross McEwan says a taxpayer-owned bank that loses £46billion in six years “cannot spend money as though we are in profit".
Then he hands out £576million in bonuses to his cosseted bankers.
Which illustrates the disconnection between these vastly overpaid suits and the lives of ordinary people...
As well as the incredible losses their firm is making.
Document THESCOT020140228ea2r000gp
