{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3425"}
____
Sun Says
One brave lad
414 words
16 May 2014
01:35
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
ONE in three of us will get cancer. We would all aspire to tackle it with Stephen Sutton’s courage and energy but few of us will.
So much has been said about this extraordinary teenager’s selflessness and humour. His uncrushable spirit.
His drive to raise millions for other cancer sufferers.
He gave us a lesson in handling the prospect of death and in handling life.
“You only get one shot," he said. “Make every second count. Don’t rely on tragedy to have a good time. Make positive changes today."
Life is short. At just 19, his was far too short.
Stephen leaves a family full of pride, a £3million-plus legacy for teenage cancer sufferers...
And maybe many other people, inspired by him to change their lives for the better.
Boom & bust BRITAIN’S booming again. Well, SOME of it is. That’s a crucial difference.
It’s easy for Londoners to see the amazing job figures and growth fore- casts and assume the whole country is basking in the recovery’s warmth.
Tell that to people in working-class towns in the North and Midlands where the Pound Pubs thrive.
It’s true jobs are being created almost everywhere. But many are part-time and pay rises are dipping again, to barely above inflation.
Bank of England boss Mark Carney is wise to be cautious about hiking interest rates early just to cool the capital’s soaring house prices.
That would hurt many people’s finances elsewhere.
We’re not out of the woods until every part of Britain is on the up.
Boot lags out YOU’D think that when a foreign criminal finished his jail sentence he’d be put in a van to Heathrow for the first plane out.
But no. Hundreds stay put behind bars for incredible periods — in a few cases five years.
Some lags don’t fancy returning home. So we keep them locked up while they go through lengthy appeals at our expense.
The cost of this lunacy to taxpayers? About £34million.
We’re told a new Immigration Bill will speed it all up. Great.
A sane country would just boot these villains out an hour after release.
Cup tide THERE’S killer quicksand on a Brazilian beach near England’s World Cup opener.
Our fans will need to tread carefully. A few post-match beers, a boozy stroll, then what?
They sink. It’s all over.
Document THESUK0020140516ea5g00005
