{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2350"}
____
Woman
Shut it, sister
By LOUISE MENSCH, Sun Columnist   
927 words
17 April 2014
03:12
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Sexism UK: Sun columnist hits back
UNITED Nations “expert" Rashida Manjoo caused a storm with claims the UK is one of the most sexist countries she has visited.
Bizarrely, she put us behind the likes of Algeria, India and Azerbaijan — countries that are hardly known for their progressive treatment of women.
Here outspoken Sun columnist Louise Mensch hits back.
UN Special “Rapporteur" Rashida Manjoo says the UK is the most sexist place she has ever been to.
And with that joke of a pronouncement she has managed to hammer the last nail into the coffin of UN credibility.
So Britain is the biggest boys’ club Rashida’s ever seen?
That’s pretty amazing, since she’s previously reported from rape capital of the universe, India, where girls are burned alive for having too small a dowry.
Where women are routinely gang-raped and where a politician recently suggested the victims “should be hung" but the rapists let off because “boys will be boys".
Or how about the other countries she visited on this trip. Somalia, where a 13-year-old girl who had been raped begged for mercy as Islamists stoned her to death?
Croatia, where even the EU says the number of women working and going to college is “significantly below the EU average"?
Italy, where Berlusconi’s bunga-bunga parties symbolise how the elite treats women — and where female ministers faced a “sexist onslaught" in the press two months ago over their fashion choices?
What about Bosnia, where rape was a national institution?
Give over, Rashida — your Marxism is showing. And it isn’t pretty.
Socialist Rashida is from South Africa and a Muslim.
In her own crime-ridden country, rape is more than commonplace — it’s a way of life.
A UN report ranked South Africa number one for rape and stated 41 per cent of victims are children — and female genital mutiliation is widely practised there and under-reported by a complacent government.
How DARE this woman call herself a feminist?
The reaction on Twitter was one of total contempt.
“Has the UN forgotten how it sat back on Rwanda?" asked one tweeter.
We’ve had Maggie Thatcher as Prime Minister. Theresa May is Home Secretary.
And Justine Greening is the unfortunate Cabinet minister who has to deal with Rashida and her like at the UN, as she hands out aid to fight discrimination against women in the failed dictatorships that they prefer to London.
But the UN has never had a woman as Secretary-General — and only one of its four top jobs is held by a woman.
Do you think that’s why gender-apartheid Saudi Arabia sits on the UN’s Human Rights Council?
Shall we remind Rashida of women’s “human" rights in Saudi Arabia? They are lashed for driving and required to obey a male “guardian" wherever they go — including travelling abroad.
They have no rights over their children and rape in marriage is legal there.
No, really, UN!
Terrific job on women’s rights!
The UN is a bloody disgrace.
Their last “rapporteur" was anti-government too — protesting against George Osborne’s welfare reforms. You know, the ones that recently made us the fastest-growing economy in the G7.
And be of no doubt — you pay Rashida’s wages.
Our UN dues sent this woman to Britain to criticise government policy on women — while she REFUSED to visit any government-funded shelters for domestic violence that she was invited to.
No bloody wonder they wouldn’t let her into Yarl’s Wood immigration centre — the UN has an anti-British agenda and an anti-capitalist one, too.
Clearly Rashida knew just what she was going to say before she had the privilege of touching down in the country of Mrs Pankhurst, Boadecia and Elizabeth I.
This is a country where women get things done — unlike her own.
This is the country of Jane Austen and Florence Nightingale, the country of Mary Wollstonecraft, founder of feminism.
It’s the country of self-made millionaires Martha Lane Fox and Tamara Mellon.
It’s the country of Beatrix Potter and J.K. Rowling — of Kate Bush, the Spice Girls and Baroness Trumpington.
UK women have run MI6, defeated the Armada, invented nursing, and pioneered astronomy and — in Mary Somerville — popular science.
Culturally, militarily, in the arts, music, science, business and politics, British women have led the world. What, precisely, has the UN done? What wars has it stopped? How many women has it saved from rape and mutilation?
The UN is arguably even a force against the liberation of women.
It sanitises Saudi Arabian and other African and Middle Eastern countries’ abuse of women under the flag of “cultural rights".
Who sits with the Saudis on that “human rights" committee? A roll-call of the worst offenders: Algeria, Morocco, China, Rashida’s South Africa, Namibia, Russia, and Vietnam.
The lot of them are cesspits for women’s equality.
It’s as a “Rapporteur" — that’s pretentious for “reporter" — of this very UN Committee, the one with Saudi Arabia and South Africa on it, that Rashida Manjoo took her business class flight to the UK to slam us for being sexist.
Well, take a hike, sister. And if you want to find “in your face sexism", take a look around your own UN committee room.
You’ll find it everywhere.
But don’t get too close to the Saudi delegation.
They don’t want a female like you sitting anywhere near them.
Document THESUK0020140417ea4h000p2
