{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1275"}
____
Politics
Lib Dems: Migrants vital for OAP care; A LIB Dem health minister has sparked fresh uproar by insisting high immigration is vital to prevent Britain's elderly care system from "collapse".
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
358 words
28 February 2014
19:40
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Normal Lamb's controversial intervention stoked an already bitter Coalition row.
Business Secretary Vince Cable infuriated Tory MPs by welcoming a massive 212,000 increase in foreign arrivals last year.
The former Lib Dem deputy leader also blasted David Cameron's failing target to get immigration down to the tens of thousands annually as "unworkable".
Backing his welcome, Care and Support Minister Mr Lamb said: "I'm acutely aware that the care system everywhere would collapse without workers from other countries.
"The vast bulk of people who come to this country come to work and we benefit from that."
The MP for North Norfolk He added: "It is very tempting to claim that these people are coming into our system to take our benefits, but most are doing pretty vital jobs in care, in the hotel and hospitality industry".
But immigration campaigners insisted there were 2.3 million unemployed Brits who could be trained up to do care work instead.
MigrationWatch UK chairman Sir Andrew Green said: "With over two million unemployed our focus should be on getting young workers into entry level jobs rather than slagging them off".
The soaring numbers of new arrivals last year have left the PM's all important election pledge target in tatters.
Experts said Thursday's shock figures meant it is "extremely unlikely" that the Government will succeed.
Migration Observatory director Scott Blinder said. "This highlights the fact that the net migration target is not something that can be delivered purely through policy, but relies on other trends as well."
"The key changes in this report are to EU migration - an area over which immigration policy has less direct influence."
In a dramatic change over the last 12 months, the majority of the net influx - 131,000 - are now from within the European Union, while numbers from the rest of the world were down 25,000.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140301ea2s0008d
