{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3591"}
____
Louise Mensch
It’s easy to beat waster to a job if he’s on couch; THERE was a strong reaction to my column on White Dee last week — after which the “depressed" star did two MORE TV interviews.
By LOUISE MENSCH   
1,206 words
23 February 2014
02:10
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
But Dee won’t be too happy to find she’s even more out of sync with the average British woman. We’re grafting harder than ever, as new figures out this week show a massive surge in women’s jobs.
In the year after Maggie Thatcher died, more British women are in work than at any time since records began in 1971 — the year I was born. There are 14million of us bringing home the bacon — and usually frying it up afterwards too.
If we don’t want to raise a nation of White Dees, we must tackle youth unemployment. Too many kids are sitting at home on benefits when they could be and should be working.
If you start out with bad habits, you’re unlikely to get out of that comfortable welfare trap. There are lots of options — figures show there’s part-time work in micro or mini jobs.
Young people need to get that habit good and early — so they can wind up like their hard-working mums — and not Dee’s friends on Benefits Street.
When I was a teenager I had to work a Saturday job if I wanted an allowance. I won’t lie, I bloody hated it.
Standing in a clothes shop in Wadhurst, Sussex, folding “snazzy" sweatshirts and bored out of my mind. After that it was a bookshop, which I thought would be great, but I was bored there too (no reading on the job).
But it taught me you have to work if you want money. Today, young Brits on Twitter ask me why they should be compelled to work for their benefits if the job’s not “fulfilling".
“Depressed" Dee herself said on TV last week she couldn’t work as she’d have to call in sick if she was “feeling down". How many of us don’t “feel down" on a Monday morning traipsing in to work?
Labour MP Frank Field admitted there’s a “servant class" of Romanians and Bulgarians “beating" young Britons to jobs.
But don’t blame the immigrants — it’s easy to beat a young waster to a job when he doesn’t get off his couch. Ten per cent of all new jobs last year went to these hard workers. Too many young Brits just don’t want to serve coffee or work for the minimum wage.
Field says we should SLASH benefits to young people after a much shorter time.
I agree with him. These youngsters are fit and able — but not willing. All too often the under-25s start out drinking and loafing on the dole, then become deeply depressed — and after that, unemployable.
It’ll soon be spring, when hard-working mother birds kick grown-up chicks out of the nest to force them to fly. Maybe that’s not such a bad idea for Britain either.
And as for those young Romanians snapping up low-paying jobs — at least if they settle here and have children, those new Britons will see two parents with a work ethic.
Leash this menace
Tragic Eliza-Mae
THE latest tragedy was almost too much to bear. A dog bought in a pub comes home and allegedly savages to death six-day-old Eliza-Mae Mullane.
What’s it going to take to get tougher laws on dangerous dogs? Vets say NEVER leave a pet with a child – but it happens all too often. Last year, 11-month-old Ava-Jayne Corless was savaged to death by a pitbull her stepdad brought home.
Here in America, a woman with cats was savaged to death by two of her neighbour’s dogs – which she had complained about to police nine times. Usually I’m against bureaucracy, but we need some red tape to leash this menace.
Warnings aren’t enough. It should be a criminal offence to leave your dog alone with a young child.
All breeds known to be aggressive, not just banned ones, should come with statutory guidelines. And it should be compulsory to neuter male dogs unless you are a registered breeder. It reduces their aggressiveness.
More than that, we need the law on irresponsible dog owners toughened up.
Much stiffer fines are called for, or tough community service.
How about a month or two cleaning up dog mess?
Showcase of shame
I KNOW a Ukranian lady from the pro-Russian part of the country who tells me there is only one reason Putin hasn’t poured the tanks into the capital Kiev – he’s bound by the Olympic truce.
This was the pledge he made, calling for world peace during the Winter Games.
I bet he regrets that now.
Sochi itself is turning out to be vladdy awful for the Russian President – not the Putin propaganda triumph he wanted. We cringed at tales of bulldozed houses, arrested protesters, mass government hacking and the shooting of stray dogs. Then we laughed our heads off at the viral photos of #SochiProblems, showing the crumbling disaster that is Putin’s Russia.
Finally, the Games themselves open with one ring missing – and they stink to high heaven, with the Russian stitch-up in awarding the figure skating gold to one of their own just the latest example.
From before the Games started to the very end, these multi-billion Olympics have made Putin and Russia a laughing stock.
So I guess there is some justice in stinking Sochi.
Cheer for sporting choice
Golden girl Lizzy Yarnold Getty
SPORTS minister Helen Grant was a champ for women this week.
Fifty per cent of girls drop out of voluntary PE by the age of 14 – and it gets worse as they get older. Why? A lack of “feminine" sports and too much sweating makes them feel uncomfortable and unattractive.
That’s what the girls themselves say. But when Helen said girls should be free to choose more feminine sports, the Left predictably went nuts. Since when did “feminine" become a derogatory term?
Paralympic rowing champ Pam Relph added: “I’m proud to have been a ‘feminine’ cheerleader. The women were strong and athletic."
Despite Left-wing rage, boys will be boys and girls – like Sochi skeleton champ Lizzy Yarnold – will be girls. We should cheerlead for choice!
Police the pop pickers
SO the Brit awards were a drug-addled haze.
We had James Corden on stage making jokes about the amount of cocaine going down backstage, while Boy George said he could hear celebs sniffing away in the loos.
Gossip aside, we have to ask why there is one rule for rich, famous people and another for poor folk on the street.
Philip Seymour Hoffman died of a heroin overdose – and when he did, the great and good were lining up to lecture us about the evils of drugs.
If we want to be fair in society, police should be on hand for all these things – wandering backstage at the Brits, the Grammys and, yes, the Oscars too.
Document THESUK0020140223ea2n001p7
