{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1062"}
____
Politics
Cam attacks Ukip for 'doing down Britain'
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
364 words
7 May 2014
21:27
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
DAVID Cameron opened up a new election assault on Ukip by attacking it for doing down Britain.
After months of trying to ignore Nigel Farage's poll-topping party, the PM changed tack to blast it head on for being too pessimistic about the country's prospects.
In a bid to out-trump Ukip on patriotism, the Premier told MPs: "So much of their view seems to be that we don't have a bright future in this country.
"I absolutely believe that if we get our deficit down, we get our economy growing, we show that we can be one of the success stories of the 21st Century.
"We're making progress and that is the way to challenge their world view."
The Tory leader will also begin a two day election tour of the South West, a key battleground with the anti-EU party for the council and Euro polls on May 22.
Mr Cameron agreed with Tory MP Sir Tony Baldry who said during PMQs "Ukip's policies are based on fear, fear of the world, fear of foreigners".
Meanwhile, Nigel Farage unveiled 50 ethnic minority Ukip candidates in a bid to defeat a barrage of racism allegations levelled against his party in recent days.
As they stood on a stage behind him, the Ukip leader insisted: "I do not support tokenism, but our ethnic minority candidates are bearing the brunt of this hate campaign.
"So I say to you that this is Ukip: black, white, young, old, Christian, Hindu, Muslim, in fact every minority - all simply believing in Britain."
- A TORY boss was accused of blundering when it emerged he likened Ukip voters to grooms who misbehave on a stag night.
In a private meeting, No10's director of communications Craig Oliver said former Conservative defectors were chasing a "last bit of fun" before settling down and returning to the Tories.
Ukip were also accused of hypocrisy after it emerged they had paid for Eastern Europeans to hand out election leaflets that warn about EU immigrants taking British jobs.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140507ea57004bl
