{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1836"}
____
Politics
Ukip's euro election vote will more than double
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
497 words
23 April 2014
01:00
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
UKIP's vote in the euro elections will more than DOUBLE - putting it on course to be the biggest protest in British election history.
An exclusive YouGov poll for The Sun revealed the anti-EU party is set to win a jumbo 27% of the nation's support on May 22, the highest figure ever notched up by any outsider.
Millions of the big three Westminster parties' usually loyal voters say they will defect in the European Parliament vote, the survey also found.
One in four of all registered Tory supporters say they will vote Ukip, as will almost one in 10 regular Labour backers and one in 20 loyal Lib Dems.
Nigel Farage's party are running Labour - on 30% - a close second in the nationwide ballot, with pollsters predicting they will overtake them by polling day to win it.
The Tories - on 22% - are set to be pushed into a humiliating third place for the first time in any national vote, and the Lib Dems are a distant fourth on 10%, ahead of the Greens on 6%.
But the survey also reveals many of them will return to David Cameron and Ed Miliband at the general election.
Asked at the same time how they would vote in a House of Commons election, just 12% said they would vote UKIP, with 34% choosing the Tories and 37% Labour.
YouGov's Anthony Wells said: "Ukip's potential vote will be by far the biggest breakthrough by any party outside of the Westminster big three.
"But many of those votes are being leant to Ukip and will return to the traditional parties at the general election."
The previous biggest outsiders' vote was also for Ukip in the 2009 euro elections, when they notched up 16.5% of the vote - only to tumble back down to 3% a year later at the 2010 general election.
The findings came as a row continued to rage over Ukip's controversial new campaign adverts blitz that warn immigrants are after British workers' jobs.
Tory MP grandee Nicholas Soames lashed out to brand them "deeply divisive, offensive and ignorant".
Mr Soames insisted: "Even allowing for our failings, this country is at heart kind, generous and tolerant. Ukip is unBritish".
Senior Labour MP Keith Vaz added: "Ukip have lowered the tone of the European debate with these spiteful and inaccurate claims on immigration which seek only to divide communities".
But Mr Farage defended his £1.5m record poster campaign, hitting back: "What we're saying with these posters is an accurate reflection of the harsh realities of life".
DAVID CAMERON was accused of gaffing for hosting unpopular EU president Herman Van Rompuy at his official country retreat Chequers last night just as the euro campaign began.
The overnight stay came after "a working dinner" between the two men, No10 said.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140422ea4n003pf
