{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"376"}
____
Rod Liddle
You should have taken risk, Nige
By ROD LIDDLE, Sun Columnist   
1,376 words
1 May 2014
10:53
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
HAS Ukip boss Nigel Farage lost his nerve? Is he running scared?
It looks horribly like this might be the case.
There’s an important by-election due to take place in Newark. The local Conservative MP, Patrick Mercer, has resigned after being involved in a lobbying scandal.
It’s prime Ukip territory: A fairly well-orf swathe of middle England which likes its Conservative MPs to be fairly Right-wing.
Frankly, there wasn’t much daylight between Mercer, who was a good MP, and Ukip on a whole bunch of issues.
Mercer was a rebel who had no time at all for David Cameron’s band of Old Etonian, metropolitan liberals. He was an ex-Army man who found them absurd, frankly.
So why has Nigel Farage announced — yet again — that he will not stand in Newark?
His party is soaring ahead in the polls. He’s got the mainstream politicians terrified out of their wits.
So frightened, in fact, that a bunch of them have got together in a cross-party association to scream “raaaaaaccissst" whenever Ukip are in the news.
This sad conglomeration is being led by a ghastly old hag from the last Labour government, Barbara Roche.
She was on Newsnight on Tuesday attacking Ukip — but all she had to say was “raaaacccissst", over and over again, like a morbidly obese, lobotomised sheep.
Roche was a minister in the government which let an astonishing three million foreign workers into the country — a policy the present Labour leader Ed Miliband now admits was terribly misguided.
For the awful Roche, anyone who complains about immigration is a racist.
The people who lose their jobs as a consequence are racist.
The people scared of being mugged in the street are racist.
You’re all racist, you lot, all of you — anyone who has a few misgivings about immigration.
No wonder the woman can’t find a seat any more.
But still — given all this, why has Farage decided not to fight his corner?
Imagine what it would do to Westminster politics if the bloke actually won?
It would truly upset the apple cart.
But instead, Farage has called the Newark by-election a “distraction" and decided he’s going to have nowt to do with it.
The truth is he’s scared that if he loses it will banjax his prospects of Ukip winning the Euro elections next month.
Suddenly, Ukip won’t be the party poised on the edge of a breakthrough — they will be the party that couldn’t quite make a breakthrough.
They will live in the public mind as also-rans.
I think this is timid of Farage — who most of the time is made of sterner stuff.
Change your mind, Nigel — and, for once, take a risk.
Man! I flu like a woman (who looks like a man)
APPARENTLY, when men are ill they begin to fancy women who look like men.
When man flu strikes, the more masculine a woman appears, the more they like her. If she’s got a beard, so much the better.
This is because we think a truly mingin’ man-bird will look after us better than, say, Megan Fox – who we worry will just say bugger this for a game of soldiers and clear off to the nearest nightclub, with mischief on her mind.
This is the conclusion of research carried out in Finland, by the way.
I was in Finland a couple of years back and I have to tell you that most of the women looked like men, and the remainder resembled elk.
Bang for the buck IT must be horrible to be banged up in prison.
And just imagine how much more horrible to be banged up in prison and to find someone has broken your nose-hair clippers.
It could really send you over the edge, no?
Luckily, justice is at hand.
Triple murderer Kevan Thakrar received £815 compensation from some idiot of a judge because someone broke his clippers and also stole a bottle of cranberry juice from him.
Thakrar machine-gunned three people to death over a drug debt.
While in prison he launched a vicious bottle attack on three guards – none of whom has received compensation.
And nor has scumbag Thakrar been punished for this assault.
We’ve got our priorities right, haven’t we.
Risky on the jobbit MEN always seem to like relationships which have the whiff of danger about them, don’t they?
I assume that’s the reason why Lorena Bobbitt has had so many sexual partners in the past 21 years.
Lorena, if you remember, sliced off her husband’s old fella with a carving knife and chucked it in a field. The willy, not the knife.
The American was very famous for a while – and not in a good way, you would have thought.
But now she’s been bragging about how loads of men have been queuing up for a bit of Bobbitt action – it hasn’t harmed her love life at all.
Meanwhile, her now ex hubby, John Wayne Bobbitt, had his todger glued back on by surgeons and has made a living as a porno star.
Only in America, as they say.
---------
- OH no – they’re going to remake Dad’s Army.
There are plans for a feature film starring Toby Jones as Captain Mainwaring and Bill Nighy as Sergeant Wilson.
Both are excellent actors.
But we live in different times and the things which we all found funny back then are likely to bring prosecutions these days.
For example, I don’t suppose Corporal Jones will be telling everyone about how he routed the “fuzzy-wuzzies".
If he does, he’ll be sent on a course or appearing in court mumbling “don’t panic!"
And we don’t like taking the mick out of the Germans these days, either – it’s considered impolite.
And in these times can you get away with making a film which is comprised pretty much entirely of white middle-aged men?
Lenny Henry will go bonkers.
---------
WHY do we always put judges and lawyers in charge of things?
They are usually expensive, pompous and dedicated to protecting the Establishment.
We’d be better off, when important jobs come up, to give them to plumbers, or child-minders, or those slightly odd young men who stack the trolleys outside Morrisons.
The new press regulator is to be headed by a judge – Sir Alan Moses, it was announced on Tuesday.
I mean, obviously Sir Alan is brilliant, and handsome, with strong rippling thigh muscles and so on... but over the past 20 years the legal profession has taken over every part of our society. And I’m not convinced we’re much better off.
---------
THE latest evil, racist and sexist thing to be banned by the PC police is... DOORKNOBS!
Yes, the very liberal city of Vancouver, in Canada, has banned doorknobs from existence – and now campaigners over here want the UK to follow suit.
Actually, it’s not because they’re racist and sexist. Doorknobs are OK on that front – and they don’t mind transgendered people either.
But they do discriminate against people with no hands. The handless community.
Or people who can’t use their hands. And maybe people who can use their hands but don’t want to, as is their right.
The lever is a better means of opening doors, lobbyists argue.
And so that’s it for doorknobs – good night, and close the door on your way out, please.
---------
YAY , the HS2 train is going ahead!
I’ve always wanted to get to Birmingham really, really, quickly – and soon my dream will come true.
Well, I say “soon" – it’ll be 12 years before the line opens.
Back in the mid-1800s it took them about 12 years to criss-cross the entire country with railways. But in those days nobody took any notice of the moaning minnies who objected to railway lines running through their kitchens and stuff.
I’ll bet that this time around, once the line is opened, people will wonder why there were so many complaints in the first place.
Document THESUK0020140501ea5100038
