{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"3132"}
____
Home Scotland
Bluekip
By JONATHAN REILLY and RHODRI PHILLIPS   
386 words
24 April 2014
12:41
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Exclusive . Photos of Nigel Farage's campaign poster girl naked and taking part in lewd acts
A KEY aide to Ukip leader Nigel Farage was last night at the centre of a sex scandal after explicit naked snaps of her emerged.
Lizzy Vaid, 27, was photographed taking part in a series of lewd acts.
The Sun has seen the sexually explicit shots, which are too graphic to reproduce — or even describe — in a family newspaper.
It is the second controversy Ms Vaid has been involved in this week.
Yesterday we told how she posed as a 窶忻oter" from Devon in the party窶冱 manifesto 窶  despite being a full-time Ukip employee .
After we approached Ms Vaid over the raunchy photos — taken when she was 20 — she contacted cops.
It is understood she has blamed an ex-boyfriend over the release of the images.
Last night the Met Police confirmed they were investigating if any crime had been committed.
On her Twitter account Ms Vaid, of Brighton, describes herself as “Ukip Events Manager and Assistant to Nigel Farage, as well as a lover of social occasions".
In November she appeared on the front of the Ukip monthly bulletin after writing an article slamming UK leaders headed: “They have failed a generation."
In it she said: “There are 20million jobless in the Eurozone. Many are now heading to Britain but we have 2.5million unemployed of our own, including 1million 18-24 year olds.
“Open borders is a nonsense, which Ukip will end."
This month she defended her party’s immigration policy — and blasted critics for calling them racist.
She tweeted: “I am half-Indian, I work for and support @UKIP policies. I am not a racist. Our immigration policy is about SPACE and NOT race!"
In one Ukip election broadcast Ms Vaid is filmed in a yellow vest top and leopard print heels.
She has also appeared in online “selfie snaps" of Mr Farage’s entourage.
Ms Vaid calls the Ukip leader “not only an inspiration, true statesman, a genuine man but a friend".
Last night, a party spokeswoman said of the explicit pictures of Ms Vaid: “It is a personal matter. It is not a matter for the party."
 jonathan.reilly@the-sun.co.uk 
Document THESCOT020140424ea4o00233
