{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2292"}
____
Politics
Britain may need border controls if Scots go it alone
By KEVIN SCHOFIELD, Chief Political Correspondent   
354 words
21 May 2014
03:36
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
BORDER patrols may have to be introduced on the British mainland because an independent Scotland would need thousands of immigrants to stay afloat, it has been claimed.
And people moving between Scotland and England might need to show their passport.
The warnings came after a report said Scotland would not be able to pay for its pensions without a huge influx of foreign workers to help balance the books.
Experts at investment giant Exane BNP Paribas warned Scotland had a "far worse demographic" than the rest of the UK because of an ageing population.
That means it has fewer "people to generate wealth and more people to support".
The report recommended: "Encouraging inward migration of labour to offset the current demographic profile and maintain a healthy economy would be essential."
The Scottish National Party has insisted border checks would NOT be needed if Scots vote to go it alone in September's independence referendum.
But MPs with English constituencies near the border told The Sun the controls would be unavoidable if thousands of immigrants flood in to Scotland.
Former Scottish Secretary Michael Moore, the MP for Berwickshire, Roxburgh and Selkirk, said: "You either have similar immigration policies, or you have border controls.
"If it's the intention of an independent Scotland to have a vastly different immigration policy, then some way will have to be found to manage migration across the border."
Berwick MP Sir Alan Beith said: "If the UK Government believed that Scotland was letting in people who could pose a danger, it might be necessary to exercise some controls at the border. That would mean passport checks."
But Scotland's First Minister Alex Salmond insisted there would still be an "open border" after independence.
He said: "We'll have the common travel area, which has been in existence across these islands not just between Scotland and England, but between the Irish Republic and the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
"We would continue with that."
k.schofield@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140521ea5l000p3
