{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1271"}
____
Politics
UKIP adopt BNP slogan as election battle-cry; NIGEL Farage has sparked uproar after adopting a BNP slogan as UKIP's election battle-cry.
By EMILY ASHTON, Whitehall Correspondent   
473 words
28 February 2014
17:29
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
He launched the controversial "Love Britain, Vote UKIP" motto at his party's crucial spring conference, declaring: "It's ours now."
It came as he railed against mass immigration and bemoaned the lack of English voices on London trains.
His rant prompted far-right BNP leader Nick Griffin to brand UKIP a "cheap, BBC-produced knock-off copy of the BNP's genuine alternative to the out-of-touch old parties".
But Mr Farage said his party could pull off the "biggest political shock" in years by coming top in May's European elections.
And he claimed UKIP was on track to get a "good number" of MPs into Westminster next year.
The racist BNP was sued by Unilever in 2010 after using the slogan “Love Britain, Vote BNP" alongside a photo of a jar of Marmite.
But Mr Farage defended UKIP’s new motto, saying: “We are claiming that territory, and do you know what?
“To hell with the BNP or anybody else.
"It’s our slogan now. Not changing it, keeping it forever."
In a rousing speech in Torquay, Devon, he said Britain had lost control of its borders thanks to the three main parties.
"The fact that in scores of our cities and market towns, this country in a short space of time has frankly become unrecognisable," he said.
"Whether it is the impact on local schools and hospitals, whether it is the fact in many parts of England you don't hear English spoken any more.
"This is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren."
He said he felt "awkward" on a recent train journey from central London into the suburbs because only foreign languages were being spoken.
"It wasn't until after we got past Grove Park that I could actually hear English being audibly spoken in the carriage," he said.
"Does that make me feel slightly awkward? Yes."
Mr Farage insisted that UKIP was "not anti-immigration" but said new arrivals should be judged on both "quantity and quality".
Trying to shake off the party's "fruitcake" image, he insisted that UKIP "had changed" since 2010.
But he was left red-faced when a UKIP member asked a speaker at a fringe meeting: "How can you be both a Muslim and an English man?"
Meanwhile Mr Farage revealed that UKIP could do a deal with Labour - in return for an in-out EU referendum.
Sporty Khloe puts her Kurves on show He said: "I'd do a deal with the devil if it got this country the opportunity to win back its independence."
e.ashton@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140228ea2s005bq
