{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3403"}
____
Politics
Sun cabbie grills Ed on European elections
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
1,230 words
16 May 2014
12:12
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
THE Sun's cabbie Grant Davis is interviewing the four main party leaders ahead of next week's euro elections.
In the back of the floating voter and real-life London taxi driver's ride yesterday - pimped up especially for the campaign - was Labour boss Ed Miliband.
GRANT: Lately Ed, I am watching you on the telly and you seem to be talking about anything but Europe. Why won't you discuss Europe, Ed?
ED: I am keen to discuss Europe. I'm being honest with people about my priorities if I become Prime Minister. The biggest issues the country faces is the cost of living crisis, the NHS.
GRANT: Working class people like myself are worried about the influx of immigrants, especially from the EU. We can't stop them coming over because we are in the EU. How can we stop it, Ed?
ED: It is important Labour talks about immigration. I have changed our position. Look I just have to be honest with you, I don't think shutting our borders is going to work. Europe has got to change.
GRANT: But it won't Ed, will it?
ED: This is something I have given great thought on. The way we tackle the cost of living crisis, we can change it. The undercutting of wages, we can change it. We are determined to change it but the question is: do you want to exit or do you want to change it. Let me be honest with you Grant, when has Britain been successful? When we have been engaged with the rest of the world.
GRANT: Surely you have got to trust the electorate and say we are having a referendum? You voted me in, you put your trust in me and I will give you the trust back, I will let you decide.
ED: Well I understand that argument. Leadership is about what people want, what is your honest view about what the priorities for the country are. I have said there will be a referendum if there is any transfer of power from Britain to the European Union. I am being open with you that is unlikely to happen.
I can't honestly say to you Grant that our priority for the country is let's spend two years having a debate about exiting the European Union. I think we have got too many other pressing problems.
GRANT: What is wrong with the Labour guy like yourself saying, yes, you know what, I am a Socialist and I am proud to be a Socialist?
ED: It was actually Tony Blair who put on our card Democratic Socialist Party. And as New Labour. In the end I think it is less about the labels, it is about who do you speak for.
GRANT: Nigel Farage: I had him in the cab on Monday.
ED: I met him for the first time the other week.
GRANT: Did you like him?
ED: Yes, I got on perfectly well with him. I disagree with him a lot.
GRANT: I bet you did. I mean, they call Nigel Farage 'fruitcake', they call Cameron, 'Old rich boy', and they call you 'Red Ed'. Is that fair? Are you Red Ed?
ED: You know my Dad was a bit of a socialist, and he would have loved the idea of Red Ed - but he would think it was not really very true. People need shorthand don't they. Look, I am trying to propose sensible solutions. It is not revolutionary.
GRANT: You want to break up the banks and break up the cartels. Isn't that revolutionary?
ED: I don't think it is very revolutionary. I think it is pretty common sense. But look I don't really care in the end what labels people use, I will just do my own thing, plough my own furrow and say what I think is right.
GRANT: So you don't want to wave the red flag?
ED: I think it is about moving forwards, not moving backwards. Moving forward from New Labour, certainly not going back to old Labour.
GRANT: You are not Old Labour, you are not New Labour, what are you?
ED: I like One Nation Labour. Because that is about representing the whole country and that is what we need.
GRANT: Working people now, no one listens to us. It is just like work rats.
ED: That is what I try and do.
GRANT: With all the problems we have you would expect Labour to be galloping away in the polls, but you are neck and neck with the Tories. How do you explain that, Ed?
ED: The polls go up and down a lot. That reflects the fact that we are at a time when politics is pretty unpredictable. People are still making up their minds. I think people are still thinking about where to put their cross.
GRANT: So you think under the Conservatives we have become more of a divided nation?
ED: I definitely do. It is actually the rich against everybody else. And that is a massive issue for us.
GRANT: Now here we are look, Downing Street (the cab passes by on Whitehall).
Will I be dropping you off?
ED: I was rather hoping you might actually.
GRANT: If you get in Ed, if I vote for you, are you going to put me taxes up?
ED: I want to cut taxes for working families. I definitely want to try and cut taxes for working families. We said we want to have the 10p tax. Now I'm afraid Labour got that abolished when we should not have done. We want to bring back a 10p tax rate to make life easier for people. We want to go back to the 50 pence tax rate, and we want a new 10p rate.
GRANT: How do you get on with David Cameron then?
ED: I think it is really important not to hate your opponents. I don't think that helps you actually. So I get on personally with him perfectly well, where there are international issues where we can cooperate we do and we have meetings and we talk about that.
GRANT: Are you more brainer than him?
ED: I said this thing the other day... I am not really saying who is cleverer, I am saying I know what I believe. What you get with me is consistency. The Sun and other people may not like some of the things I have said, but I have been consistent. I know where I stand.
Quickfire questions GRANT: In Brussels, how much would you pay for a pint of beer in Euros?
ED: In the UK about £3.50. No idea. (Actual price - 5 Euros)
GRANT: How much if you went out and grabbed a ham baguette in Brussels?
ED: A few Euros? I don't know. (Actual price - 3.50 Euros)
Grant's verdict Ed's a really nice fella, and His heart is in the right place. But for me we need firm decisions on Europe, not just ifs and buts. He needs to be firmer on what Labour will do to change the EU.
Join the debate on Twitter @ #SunCab t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140516ea5g001xh
