{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3031"}
____
Politics
Miliband facing southern revolt over Left-wing agenda
By KEVIN SCHOFIELD, Chief Political Correspondent   
822 words
8 May 2014
10:42
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
ED Miliband is facing a revolt from southern Labour candidates who believe his Left-wing agenda will cost them next year’s election, The Sun can reveal.
Prospective MPs standing in key target seats say the party must stop talking about things like the so-called Bedroom Tax if they are to appeal to swing voters.
They aired their views directly to Mr Miliband during a tense meeting a few weeks ago.
Outside London, Labour have just 10 MPs in the South of England – compared to more than 50 when Tony Blair swept to power in 1997.
They need to increase that tally considerably if they are to stand any chance of winning next year.
The Sun has learned that the Labour boss met with around 20 candidates standing in the South to discuss election strategy.
A source at the meeting said: “People were very clear that we have to start saying less about austerity and more about aspiration.
“We have got to stop banging on about the Bedroom Tax and the North-South divide because those messages are not going to win for us in the South.
“In fairness to Ed he did listen. I think he does get it, but it’s just too easy for us to fall back into our comfort zone."
The warning echoes comments made by a former Labour Cabinet member last week.
John Denham, who was also Mr Miliband’s Parliamentary aide when he became party leader, said most people in the South did not think Labour spoke for them.
He said: “We have to stop comparing the South to everywhere else.
“Despite my best efforts, many of my party colleagues insist on talking about a North-South divide. It’s one of the problems we have in winning support for Labour in the South."
Labour’s problems in the South come despite Mr Miliband’s pledge that he would lead a “One Nation" government.
Shadow Commons leader Angela Eagle admitted the party had a major problem attracting voters in the South.
She said: “We always have to be mindful there are as many people who are struggling in the South of England as there are in the North.
“We have to tailor our messages to remember them and not always think that the northern perspective is the only one. And I speak as someone who represents a North West seat."
The warnings come amid growing concern among Labour MPs that the improving economy and Ed Miliband’s miserable personal rating will see them lose in 2015.
Labour’s healthy opinion poll lead has also been whittled away in recent months by the Tories.
One senior Labour MP told The Sun: “If the election were tomorrow I’d be quite confident. But it’s not, so I’m worried."
One disgruntled Labour PCC from a southern constituency told The Sun: "Parroting Ed's party line from HQ gets you absolutely nowhere on the doorstep.
"It's desperate, so I long ago gave up on it and now tell people what I would do instead.
"Immigration is the number one issue voters have with us, and by a country mile.
"They are angry with our record and they want to know what we would do about it now.
"But we are nowhere on immigration yet, and that doesn't look like it's going to change."
In a speech to party workers at Labour HQ, Ed warned their Tories enemies would have "deep pockets and powerful interests on their side" and would fight "a campaign of smear and fear".
Dubbing the next year as "the fight of our lives", Mr Miliband added: "If they want to dust down the playbook from 1992 or import the worst excesses of Aussie-rules politics, we will speak out and call them out".
But in a bid to differentiate himself from David Cameron, he added: "I don't just want to run our country.
"I want to change the way our country is run."
Labour also unleashed a fresh onslaught against the Lib Dems, and plan to pound the party relentlessly on broken promises and its failure to stand up to Tories.
It also released a comic new election broadcast, in which leader and Deputy PM Nick Clegg is lampooned as the Un-credible Shrinking Man.
Labour insiders said the black and white spoof film is a new way on engaging voters who are fed up with politics.
But Mr Milband ran the risk of polarising the electorate further with the biting 'class war' attack on the Tories and Lib Dems.
The election broadcast - shown on TV channels last night - cast the Deputy PM as a weak, shrinking man around a Cabinet table of arrogant Conservative toffs who relished in sacking poor nurses and defending rich bankers.
k.schofield@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140508ea58000gr
