{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2590"}
____
Sun Says
PM surrenders; DAVID Cameron’s planned renegotiation of Britain’s powers in Europe is years away. But on immigration, incredibly, he’s already thrown in the towel.
411 words
18 March 2014
00:04
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Sun has repeatedly urged him to make limiting migrants from within the EU a “red-line" demand.
Yet the Prime Minister, in remarks quietly leaked on Sunday, revealed he only intends to fight “vast migrations" when NEW countries join the EU.
That’s pie in the sky, PM. What about the 27 CURRENT ones?
Migrants are already pouring in from wrecked EU economies such as Spain and Portugal as Britain’s finances improve.
They were the chief cause of the shocking and dramatic rise in net migration last month which slammed into reverse the Government’s previously successful drive to cut it.
Voters know what strain it’s putting on housing, schools, hospitals and transport.
Last year, when The Sun asked more than 2,500 people whether they wanted the door slammed on EU migrants, 72 per cent said Yes.
Of those, 42 per cent rated it of “utmost importance".
Mr Cameron has simply stuck two fingers up at them.
Prime Minister, that’s pathetic.
Help poorest
A £41,000 salary won’t feel like a fortune if you’re the sole breadwinner in a family in the South-East. But the harsh reality is that most of Britain earns a lot less.
Tomorrow’s Budget is George Osborne’s last chance for a tax giveaway before the election in 14 months. Whatever he announces can take effect before then.
But money is still tight and his options limited. So he must target low-earners, who have suffered most from the recession to which Labour’s overspending left us defenceless.
Siren voices are urging the Chancellor to throw the squeezed middle-classes a bone.
That must take second place to raising the tax allowance at the bottom of the pay scale — which benefits everyone except the very highest earners.
Help the poorest first, George.
RIP L’Wren
WE do not yet know exactly what drove L’Wren Scott to suspected suicide.
We can only express our shock and our sorrow for her family, friends and to Sir Mick Jagger.
In this age of celebrity, millions crave the sort of fame, wealth and success L’Wren had as the apparently sure route to happiness and a shield from the pressures of “real" life.
Her death shows it’s not a sure thing.
Document THESUK0020140318ea3i000rt
