{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3629"}
____
Columnists
We Tories should be the Workers’ Party; WANTED: A new party to stand up for the interests of British working people.
BY ROBERT HALFON, MP for Harlow   
857 words
24 February 2014
01:26
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
In 1900 the Labour Party was created to ensure a fair deal for workers.
But modern Labour has moved away from them — to representing benefit claimants.
If you don’t want to work but live on benefits, if you believe working people should pay your welfare bills through their taxes, then Labour is for you, giving you that safety net but never a ladder to replace dependency with aspiration.
Party leader Ed Miliband thinks the £117billion a year that taxpayers pay on welfare benefits is too little.
So who is ready to stand up and say to working people, on average earnings of £27,000, that the £1,120 you pay every year out of your taxes to pay the “wages" of benefit claimants — not even including the state pension — is high enough and should be reduced?
Who is really going to speak up for those families across Britain where one partner goes out to work at 6am in their van and comes back home at 7pm, when the other partner goes out to work?
The kind of families that rarely have a holiday, struggle to keep their heads above water but have a work ethic second to none.
They would rather work than live off the earnings of other hard-pressed taxpayers.
If Labour, with their credo of high benefits and high taxation, has abandoned workers, who can step in to fill the gap?
Not the Liberal Democrats, who represent the chattering classes with their pro EU, pro high green taxes agenda.
Nor UKIP, who are angry that Britain has moved on from the 1950s without their permission and seem to think that bashing immigrants, or getting lawful Muslims to sign special papers, will get working people on side.
Might it be the Conservatives, the party of Disraeli, who made it their mission to “elevate the condition of working people"? Or of Thatcher, who introduced the right to buy?
Possibly, but years of neglect have meant that the Conservatives have been decimated in Scotland and weakened in the north of England while, for all sorts of historical and political reasons, many millions of ethnic minority voters are still suspicious of the party.
Can the Conservatives reclaim the mantle as the party for hard-working people?
So far they have cut taxes for 20million lower earners, created 1.6million jobs and 1.5million apprenticeships, capped benefits and frozen fuel duty.
But to win back support, radical change is needed in the very nature of the Conservative Party.
Let’s stop bashing trade unions and make clearer the distinction between their militant leaders and hard-working members.
Let’s offer Conservative-minded trade unionists free membership of the party.
Let’s value public sector workers — nurses, doctors, police and teachers — millions of whom put service above self.
Let’s support working people by strengthening the minimum wage and fight for a living wage — achieved through further tax cuts for lower earners.
Let’s also transform the Conservative Party, so never again will it be allowed to be called the party for the rich.
First, rename it the Workers’ Party, the party that speaks for the aspiration of hard-working people and has the policies that count to help them.
Second, replace the party’s tree emblem with a symbol of a ladder — representing the moral mission that has always provided the foundation of Conservative values.
Third, let’s give working people a real reason to join the new Workers’ Party — with a joining fee of just £1 it could be more of a trade union than a political party.
Not a trade union of the Bob Crow variety but one that offers real services to its members.
So a discount fuel card offering cheaper petrol, and other retail offerings that help with the cost of living.
Instead of asking members for money, the new Workers’ Party would be offering services to members.
None of this is rocket science but there is a huge opportunity here.
Back the workers, forgotten by Labour, and the Conservatives might even return to power — and this time with a good majority.
- I ONCE met a man who told me the Government wouldn’t let him go to the zoo. He explained that he didn’t get enough benefits, so he couldn’t afford to visit.
I asked him if he knew that benefits were not Government money but taxpayers’ money, that average-wage earners were paying £1,120 in taxes every year on welfare. Should more taxes be paid so he could go to the zoo?
His response was illuminating: “It is my human right to go to the zoo." I think of this man whenever I read about “cuts".
Taxpayers pay £117billion a year for welfare benefits. We are the 12th-biggest spender on welfare in the world.
Is it really the case that the Government doesn’t spend enough of taxpayers’ money? Should welfare spending be unlimited, so everyone can go the zoo?
Document THESUK0020140224ea2o000xd
