{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"184"}
____
Politics
Plain cig packs 'will be law by next year'
By EMILY ASHTON, Whitehall Correspondent   
487 words
4 April 2014
01:01
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
DAVID Cameron has been forced into a humiliating climbdown over plain fag packets after a major review found they will help prevent kids smoking.
The PM had scrapped the plan last year in a bid to focus on voters' essentials like the economy and immigration.
But ministers have now announced they want to get plain packs on the statute book by next spring.
It means that cigarette firms will be forced to sell fags in drab, unappealing cartons - most likely plastered with grisly health warnings.
A report by top children's doctor Sir Cyril Chantler found the move would lead to a "modest but important reduction" in smoking rates.
He said it was vital to stop youngsters getting addicted to tobacco given the massive burden on the cash-strapped NHS.
Health Minister Jane Ellison said 200,000 kids aged between 11 and 15 start smoking in Britain every year, around 600 a day.
She told MPs: "If this rate of smoking by children was reduced even by two per cent, for example, it would mean that 4,000 fewer children take up smoking each year.
"Sir Cyril's report makes a compelling case that if standardised packaging were introduced it would be very likely to have a positive impact on public health."
She said there would be a final short consultation before the move becomes law ahead of the 2015 general election.
But critics argue that evidence from Australia, which became the first country to bring in plain packs in 2012, shows little impact on smoking rates.
Furious Tory MPs slammed the "nanny state" move.
Robert Halfon said: "Conservatives believe in freedom and the best way to stop smoking is through education and not by banning things."
Former minister Sir Gerald Howarth added: "I do not believe that this is a Conservative measure, it is an example of the nanny state."
It is an embarrassing double U-turn for Mr Cameron who had initially backed the plan.
The Sun revealed last May how he ordered it to be pulled from the Queen's Speech.
That came after No 10 spin doctor Lynton Crosby advised him to get the "barnacles off the boat" and concentrate on core issues.
Labour warned the Coalition was simply kicking the issue "into the long grass" again by ordering yet another consultation.
Shadow health minister Luciana Berger said more than 70,000 kids had taken up smoking since Sir Cyril's review was announced in November.
But health campaigners hailed the move.
Cancer Research UK's chief executive Harpal Kumar said: "The Chantler Review has backed a significant step towards a healthier future for the UK's children."
Mr Cameron’s official spokesman said: “The Prime Minister is minded to go ahead with this, subject to the consultation on detailed regulations."
e.ashton@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140403ea44005k1
