{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"3497"}
____
Home Scotland
UKIP launch £1.5m anti-immigration ad campaign
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
453 words
21 April 2014
22:01
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A MULTI-millionaire has blown a record £1.5million to fund a controversial UKIP poster campaign attacking immigration.
Internet tycoon Paul Sykes forked out for hundreds of billboards nationwide to carry stark messages in the anti-EU party's biggest ever advertising blitz.
They warn Brits in the bluntest terms that EU migrants are taking their jobs.
The ad campaign marks the start of UKIP's Euro elections campaign, with just a month to go until polling day on May 22.
One poster has a large index finger pointing out at the audience and the message: "26 million people in Europe are looking for work.
"And whose jobs are they after?"
Another carries a photo of a British construction worker begging for change on a street, beside the headline: "British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour".
And on all of them is the message: "Take back control of our country - vote UKIP on 22nd May".
Critics blasted the posters as the type of propaganda used by the far-right British National Party.
Labour MP Mike Gapes said they were "racist" and called on "all decent British Commonwealth and EU citizens" to register to vote in the key poll.
But Ukip boss Nigel Farage hit back to say: "Are we going to ruffle a few feathers among the chattering classes? Yes. Are we bothered about that? Not in the slightest.
"These posters are a hard-hitting reflection of reality as it is experienced by millions of British people struggling to earn a living outside the Westminster bubble."
Mr Farage added: "The political earthquake I have spoken of is on its way".
The party's biggest donor said he was bankrolling the blitz "to bring home to the British people what is at stake".
Yorkshire entrepreneur Mr Sykes - worth an estimated £650m - added: "The European elections are the most important for many years.
"We have the chance to support a party - UKIP - that represents a complete break with the past."
UKIP also announced its membership has passed 36,000.
Pollsters have predicted the party will top the European Parliament elections, relegating the Tories into a humiliating third place.
Mr Farage will mount a tour of traditional Labour stronghold areas this week in a bid to pick up new votes from Ed Miliband's Labour Party.
But he still faces demands to make good on his pledge last week to have his European parliament allowances independently audited.
A Brussels probe has been launched after a claim that tens of thousands of pounds for his West Sussex constituency office are unaccounted for.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESCOT020140421ea4l003bh
