{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1767"}
____
Scotland
No love lost as Alex says: You’re dumped
By BILL LECKIE   
1,352 words
24 April 2014
03:59
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
IT’S not you, it’s us. You’ll always be our best friends.
We just need some space, it’s for the best.
Seriously, First Minister. That speech to England last night was one cliche short of dumping them by text then going out with their sister.
As heartfelt as Man United thanking Davie Moyes for all his tireless efforts in cocking up their season. As sincere as a petrol station checkout girl telling you to have a nice day. In other words, textbook Alex Salmond.
You’ve got to love a man who swaggers over the border and tells the neighbours not to worry, they’ll still be welcome to pop in and buy a loaf or marry our daughters.
Well, you’ve got to love him unless you’re one of those neighbours, in which case you probably feel like chasing him back to Gretna on the end of a pitchfork.
See, the old break-up cliches fool no one any more.
Even the ones who did use to buy them only need to Google “break-up cliches" for a Gullible Idiot’s Guide to what the words actually mean:
“It’s not you, it’s me" means: It’s you.
“Let’s stay friends" means: Please don’t stab me.
“I just need some space" means: You’re a mentalist who’s freaking me out.
Decode the half-hour address he gave outside Carlisle Cathedral and this, in truth, is what Eck is telling England and the rest. He says he wants us to stay Bestest Buddies 4Eva, but he means the sooner they’re the hell out of our lives the better.
Now, it may well be that the good people of Carlisle fall into that Gullible Idiot category, in which case all you can do is tilt your head at them and go: “Aw, bless."
But even then, like every dumpee in history they’ll soon find out the lowdown about this idea of going from being in a full-scale relationship to being single people who get along great — that it lasts as long as it takes to dig into a box of CDs and find one that means the world to both of you.
Or, in this case, as long as it takes for an independent Scotland to start offering businesses cut-rate corporate tax to shift from England’s side of the wall to ours.
“People would still live in Annan and work in Carlisle," says Eck, “or live in Penrith and work in Lockerbie. Friends and family would continue to visit each other. We’d still watch many of the same television programmes. People from Scotland and England would still celebrate personal unions — by getting married in Carlisle Cathedral or perhaps by going to Gretna instead."
The man paints a beautiful scenario. His vision of peace and har-mo-nee drowned only by the howls of protest as a frozen food firm shifts FROM Penrith to Lockerbie to save itself a million quid a year. Well, that’s what I’d be doing as leader of a stand-alone Scotland. Never mind waiting around to see if existing employers stayed with us, I’d be pulling every trick in the book to poach English businesses... best pals or no best pals.
“Help with building premises? No problem. Two rates-free months a year? Done. Whatever it takes, just come on up..."
And believe me, if the vote goes Yes and if Eck can deliver this kind of influx of industry, I’ll be the first to applaud him. If he can convince a majority of Scots to back his plans AND convince the rest of the UK to send us off with their blessing, he truly will be a magician.
It’s just that... well, there’s still an awful lot about the Yes argument that reminds me of that guy in Edinburgh who appears to be leaning against a wall while six feet off the pavement, pictured right.
It’s a really impressive stunt and part of you really wants to believe he actually CAN levitate.
But it’s all really just willing suspension of disbelief, that tick in our brain that filters out the implausible so that we can enjoy something truly fantastic.
That’s the feeling I get with a lot of the pro-indy arguments, this insistence that everything will be just dandy if only we can get shot of those horrible ogres in London.
You want the Government you personally chose? Vote Yes! You want an end to poverty and inequality? Vote Yes!
You want your grandweans to look back on you as a heroic freedom fighter? Vote Yes!
If only it was that simple, I for one would most definitely be voting Yes, Yes and thrice Yes. But it’s not. As Professor Jill Stephenson, an Edinburgh Uni expert in nationalist politics, described Salmond’s St George's Day speech, so much of it is “assertion backed by no evidence".
True, the No campaign under Cap’n Darling remains an unremittingly miserable procession of threats and woe-betides.
But they don’t have to convince anyone to do anything, just to be happy not to do anything.
They’re the half of the marriage who’ve settled for sitting in the mortgaged house with the bills being paid from a joint bank account.
They’re the ones doing it for the sake of the kids. If the lovelessness of it all is killing them inside, they never let it show. Eck, on the other hand, not only has to convince the other half of the marriage to break away, but if and when we do, he has to make sure there’s still a decent roof over our heads and a decent wage coming in. And that’s the bit he’s still to convince many of us he’s capable of.
After all, who’s the winner if you get your freedom, but spend it penniless in a bedsit?
Let’s all keep on running
THANKS so much for the donations which keep on coming in for my London Marathon fund in aid of Macmillan Cancer Support.
My kitty’s sitting at more than £2,800, our 20-strong team look set to raise £50,000-plus and the 930 who ran for Macmillan had already brought in £955,000 before a step was run.
By the time all donations are in, that could rise to beyond £1.5million, enough to finance 26 nurses for an entire year.
Now multiply that amount by all the other charities represented a week back on Sunday. I’m overwhelmed by that level of human kindness.
Should so many people have to put their bodies through so much to fund vital services? Course they shouldn’t. In a fair world, we’d scrap nuclear weapons and divert the money into hospitals and schools.
It’s not a fair world, though. So long live the London Marathon and all others that do the Government’s job for them. Long live the jumble sales and the parachute jumps and the fancy dress Fridays at work.
Because if they all stopped happening... well, where the hell would Britain be then?
TONY BLAIR has called on Britain to “pick a side" in the war against Muslim radicalisation in the Middle East. Hmm. Call me pernickety here, but didn’t he already do that for us when he started bombing Iraq?
Dover & out, Nige UKIP this week unveiled a £1.5million billboard campaign to warn the nation of the dangers of immigration.
Can’t help thinking it would have been a lot cheaper if Nigel Farage had just bought a Lord Nelson outfit from a fancy dress shop and painted the words F*** OFF on the White Cliffs of Dover.
AND in other news, a young couple and their baby continue their free holiday to Australia.
Join us after the break when millions will continue not to give a toss.
Document THESUK0020140424ea4o000ji
