{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1515"}
____
Features
Minimum rage; Working in 'menial jobs' I don't meet one Brit. The immigrants want to get on. It's all that's right — and wrong about Britain; IT has become a common moan that immigrants are taking all the UK’s “menial" jobs.
1,589 words
15 March 2014
00:49
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
But recently the employment minister and service industry bigwigs have poured petrol on the debate by suggesting that “workshy" Brits think minimum-wage jobs are beneath them and would rather claim benefits.
Around 2.34million Brits are out of work, including 900,000 16 to 18-year-olds. Meanwhile most jobs in coffee shops, pizza parlours and on building sites seem to be filled by non-indigenous workers.
So what is really going on? To find out, The Sun sent MARTIN DAUBNEY to work at the “menial" end of the British labour market for three days.
Martin says: “I didn’t encounter a single British-born employee.
“The immigrants I worked with were hard-working, respectful and want to get on. These companies are a microcosm of all that is right – and wrong – about modern working Britain." Here is how he got on...
Pizza Hut: Hourly pay £6.31
Martin takes Pizza job
TO see what life is really like in the slow lane as a pizza delivery lad, I arrive at a new Pizza Hut in Dagenham, east London.
Straight away an order comes in and I have three minutes to make a pizza, five-and-a-half to bake it, eight minutes to deliver it and eight to get back. Timing is everything.
Pizza ready, I clamber into my bike kit and, with the pizza strapped into my box, get on my 50cc Peugeot moped and buzz off like an angry hair-dryer in hot pursuit of fellow delivery rider Osman Serdi, 35.
We arrive and — pizza on left arm, helmet on right — I knock on my customer’s door. “Good afternoon, madam, my name’s Martin and I’m here with your Pizza Hut order," I beam to a clearly peckish, plus-size woman.
I guess this isn’t her first time ordering a large cheeseburger pizza with all the trimmings.
“That will be £12.45, madam," I say and she stuffs a ball of money into my mitt. It is exactly right. No tip, despite Osman’s verdict of my “excellent" first order.
Back at base I ask the team about life at Pizza Hut. The firm employs more than 13,500 staff at 334 delivery outlets, as well as 300 dine-in restaurants. My entry-level pizza job would earn me £6.31 of dough per hour.
Area Manager Doriana Accorra, from Sardinia, joined Pizza Hut in early 1997 as a pot-washer.
Doriana, 36, says: “I started at the bottom but Pizza Hut has made me the person I am. We are a very diverse team and a very multi-cultural business. Most of the team here are Pakistani."
Again, there is a distinct lack of Brits even though the jobs are out there. Last December, Domino’s Pizza boss Lance Batchelor said: “Since the immigration laws were tightened, we are finding it harder to hire staff."
Doriana adds: “Lots of British students work here part-time but they tend to see it as a means to an end. Yet you can go from being a floor-cleaner in the UK to manage a restaurant in France.
“We are living proof that you can get where you want in life if you work hard. We do have a lot of people who work under 16 hours a week because they want to stay on benefits. But once they try it, they come off benefits."
Store Manager Faraz Alam, 30, from Saudi Arabia, adds: “We need to change people’s perceptions that earning £100 here is better than getting £100 benefits."
I leave feeling enthused by the team. And best of all, I go home with all the pizza I can eat.
Labourer: Hourly pay £6.36
I TURN up at 7am prompt, ready to put in a day of hard graft for a self-employed builder.
I am the only Brit on the job — hardly surprising given that Tom Rolls, boss of Rolls Property Services, only employs Macedonians now because “Brits just don’t want to do the dirty work".
As the son of a miner who has worked in factories, dug holes and even sold my stuff to avoid the dole, this sticks in my craw. I am determined to fight Britain’s corner during nine hours of back-breaking labour.
“What is the dirtiest job today?" I ask Mario, Tom’s burly Macedonian helper who I will be working with renovating this Victorian house in Earlsfield, south-west London.
Eyeing me suspiciously he says: “That ceiling must be ripped down. There’ll be 100 years of s**t up there."
I tell him to stand aside, determined to prove that not all Brits are layabouts who’d rather watch Jeremy Kyle than graft. Three hours later, I’m coughing up black phlegm, can barely breathe or see and can taste toxic Victorian lime plaster. But I’ve won Mario’s respect. Over a tea break, he tells me his story.
Mario, 37, has been in London for nearly five years. He has an economics degree and has picked fruit, gutted fish and cleaned toilets to get by.
He says: “Back home, there is 30 per cent unemployment so I came to Norwich to pick fruit. There were 400 of us — Macedonians, Bulgarians, Poles, Slovakians, Czech, Moldavians, even Mongolians. But not a single British person. The gaffer said the locals couldn’t be bothered to do the work."
His present “gaffer" Tom Rolls, 34, says: “My English workers moaned about hard graft, took endless fag breaks and packed up as soon as it looked like it was getting dark. Brits just don’t want to do the dirty work.
“Then three years ago I hired Mario and I only employ Macedonians these days. Their work ethic is faultless.
“I pay them the same daily rate as Brits, and they all pay tax and stamp. It’s rubbish to assume businesses like mine only employ immigrants because they’re cheaper.
“I employ them because they’re better, work harder and don’t stop until the job is done."
Mario adds: “Six of us share a three-bedroom flat. People think we are taking the p*** but why waste money on rent? We are all saving to start our own businesses or to support our families. In the meantime, we are paying tax and helping to rebuild your economy. That is something Brits on the dole cannot say."
Costa Coffee: Hourly pay £6.36
Martin makes a coffee Louis Wood
THERE is nothing frothy about coffee — it is a serious business.
Before I am allowed to unleash lattes on an unsuspecting public, it is off to the Costa Roastery training school in Lambeth, south London, for a half-day barista course.
I’m given a tour of the plant by Chief Coffee Master Gennarro Pellicia, 39, who personally samples every batch of coffee.
He then shows me how to make the perfect cappuccino. The steamer nozzle must be only half in the milk, which is then swirled and tapped to remove its biggest bubbles, then poured at a precise speed to give the creamy head.
As I put on my Costa barista uniform and make him my first coffee, Gennarro tells me: “You’re ready to go into a store, Martin!"
His enthusiasm is infectious. But by the time I arrive at the Costa on Great Marlborough Street in central London, I am in a panic. And it is the lunchtime rush.
Four lattes in and I’m holding my own, until an American fella drawls: “I’d like a dry, soya flat white." He may as well be talking Martian and, sensing my terror, a co-worker steps in to rescue me. The queue is unremitting. After just an hour of this I’m frazzled and have clocked up £6.36 wages.
Back in January, employment minister Esther McVey sparked outrage by implying that workshy young Brits should get off their backsides and take “entry level" jobs at places like this, rather than expecting immediate success.
Martin with Costa team
Apart from demeaning a vital service, her comments totally missed the point that jobs at Costa are actually vastly over-subscribed.
When Costa opened a store in Nottingham in February 2013, more than 1,900 people applied for eight jobs. Still, there are no British workers here.
Store manager Johanna Bielawska, 23, from Poland, tells me: “In three years I’ve only had one English person work for me. I don’t know why the English don’t want to do this work. If they tried it, I’m sure they’d really like it.
“At Costa you get experience and can move up very quickly. As part of the Whitbread group, you can move to hotels, even abroad.
“We are proof that if you want to work, you can get on."
Most of my team speak English but none was born here.
They are all bubbly, fulfilled and clearly love being part of the Costa family. They socialise together, take pride in their work and feel lucky to have their jobs.
But I won’t be joining them. After a meagre day’s shift I’m a has-bean. And off my nut from too much caffeine.
Document THESUK0020140315ea3f0018j
