{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3115"}
____
Katie Hopkins
Extremist schools aren’t immigration they’re colonisation
By KATIES HOPKINS, Sun columnist   
1,371 words
25 April 2014
01:18
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
“HOPKINS – shut up, sit at the back of the classroom and wear this veil."
I know what my two word response to that would be — the second would be “off."
But in British schools allegedly commandeered by Islamic extremists, girls are being forced to do exactly that. They sit at the back, faces hidden because they are worth less than boys.
Inspectors have been sent in to assess the damage of these so called “Trojan horse" schools in Birmingham — and it is extensive.
The curriculum is madrassah, an Islamic way of teaching which misses out all the sensible stuff kids need to know.
They can’t teach much biology because it involves rude things like sex. But school inspectors point out studying reproduction is needed for GCSE.
The schoolkids do get to listen to external speakers, though. One was said to be an Al-Qaeda supporter who advocates the stoning of homosexuals — how very New Age.
It is important to remind ourselves that most faith schools are doing a great job, turning out polite kids and achieving better than average results.
But if accepting other faith schools means we also have to accept extremists into the heart of our cities — then it is too high a price to pay.
The Prime Minister has been reinforcing Britain as a Christian nation underpinned by British values, and he is right.
It doesn’t mean we go to church every Sunday.
But it means we will stop to help a stranger in need and try not to steal anything (other than the occasional multi-pack of toilet rolls on the hook at the back of the trolley).
But Muslim faith schools run by extremists have no place in our great country.
We must always make sure children are being taught, not radicalised.
Radicalising young people is like incubating monsters in your airing cupboard. When they hatch in the middle of the night they will destroy everything that matters to you without remorse.
It is too easy for thoughts to be planted in children’s heads that anti-terror squads will be dealing with for generations to come.
The original Trojan horse was a ploy to defeat the city of Troy. Do we have a new city of Troy, now called Birmingham? Have extremists already got inside the gates of the city?
Protect culture Michael Gove has sent the former head of Scotland Yard’s Counter-Terrorism Command to investigate. Ofsted has sent a bloke called Michael.
I am putting my money on the guy from the Yard.
These schools are not British by any definition I understand — yet they are on our soil and paid for by the British taxpayer. Some of these schools are 100 per cent Muslim.
This is not immigration. This is colonisation of British soil.
I have had enough of protecting the rights of people who choose to come to our country. It is time we protected the culture of this great country which attracted them here in the first place.
Tam’s prams
IT is no wonder Tamara Ecclestone likes a flash set of wheels given her father is top dog at Formula One.
But as a new mother, does she really need five prams? Where the heck is she storing them all?
I used a Maclaren stroller with my gang, because it folds down into something small enough to hide behind the sofa.
But Tamara has prams the size of Range Rovers. Her bespoke Silver Cross is about the width of a football pitch and cost £1,450.
She has spent just more than £5,000 on her fleet. That’s about the cost of a new car (it is a Dacia, so you wouldn’t want one).
Five pushchairs, five grand – and one tiny baby to put in them all.
Just goes to prove money can’t buy common sense.
Suing is the pits
A SPANISH motorbiker is pressing for damages against Michael Schumacher – despite the fact he is in a coma.
The Spaniard came off his motorbike when Schumacher allegedly failed to give way at a roundabout. He is suing for a broken wrist, a broken watch and damage to his bike.
The press report reassures us if it went to trial, Schumacher “would not be required to attend". Given the poor chap has been in a coma since December, I’m sure that is a great relief to him and his family.
I really question the moral fibre of a cretin that can ask for money from a family when they are at their lowest. What is Spanish for “get stuffed, you little worm?"
Proven gill-ty
NOT so long ago I spoke out in defence of a lovely Army recruit who made the foolish decision to swallow a goldfish, a raw egg, fish food and enough alcohol to kill ten men in a Neknominate stunt.
The RSPCA decided to wade in to make an example of the lad.
They brought in expert witnesses, vets and half of the God squad to grieve over the fate that befell the creature.
The vet’s report said: “A stomach would be a completely unsuitable place for a fish."
Well, throw me in the sea and call me Flipper, you don’t say.
I suspect we all know keeping a fish in a stomach isn’t what the pet shop would advise.
The defence kept a straight face and reminded the judge the fish didn’t have a name.
After a pint glass of shots most of us can’t remember our own either.
The poor lad now has to pay a £300 fine and £431 in court costs.
Next time you are thinking of donating to the RSPCA, remember this is what they are doing with your cash.
While dogs are dying of neglect, they’re busy hiring lawyers for goldfish.
Inking feeling A MAN who has been charged with murder is worried his tattoo might prejudice the jury – and wants it removed sharpish.
He might be on to something. Having MURDER tattooed across your neck in six inch letters might not be the best way to go about looking innocent on your big day in court.
My advice to the accused would be to stay positive and think around the problem.
Your tattoo does not say GUILTY. This is a positive.
You could try and tattoo I DID NOT COMMIT in front of MURDER – if your neck is big enough.
Or a roll neck jumper might work in your favour.
Just steer clear of brands such as Killer jeans or Gangsta Hoodies.
I don’t think they would help your cause.
Ad ban’s a farce CENTER PARCS holiday company has had an advert banned because it encourages parents to take their kids out of school in term time.
The advert said, “Your family. Your time". Which I can see might make teachers cross, because term time is when your child should be learning how to do useful things like read and write.
The Advertising Standards Authority decided to ban the ad – based on two complaints from viewers. Two? 150 people complain when I walk down the street!
I’m not a fan of kids being taken out of school in term time, but I am even less of a fan of an authority making decisions based on a few miserable people having a moan.
People who complain about things on their TV need to learn to use a remote control – and turn over or turn off.
Hairy, scary mummy...
A POLAR bear has had a cub in a Russian zoo.
That’s it. But I had to write something for the picture editor to allow me to put in this really cute snap of the baby bear cuddling up to mum.
My daughter says the mother is like me — hairy, scary and liable to rip someone’s head off at any time.
Sticker time WE just got the new Panini Fifa sticker book for the World Cup and the man of the house is lining up friends to swap cards with. He says it is “for the kids". Yeah, right.
Document THESUK0020140424ea4p0063k
