{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"34"}
____
Politics
Labour jobs for the boys
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
762 words
25 March 2014
02:05
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
New political aristocracy
IT used to be just Tories who handed power from generation to generation.
But 13 years of Labour rule have created a political aristocracy on the Left.
Brought up surrounded by power, the sons of former party heavyweights are now after their own seats. Here we profile the four most prominent Red Princes — and rate each of their chances of becoming an MP...
Kinnock 10/10
CAMBRIDGE-educated and married to left-wing Danish PM Helle Thorning-Schmidt, Stephen is as privileged a Labourite as they come.
Dad Neil is an ex-Labour leader and EU commissioner and mum Glenys a former minister.
Stephen, 44, worked for the World Economic Forum — but he has now been selected to fight the seat of Aberavon in Wales in 2015.
It’s been Labour since 1922 and has a 11,000 majority.
Straw 8/10
WILL’S father is veteran MP Jack Straw — Home Secretary and Foreign Secretary under Tony Blair.
Will first came to public attention at 17 as a schoolboy when he was exposed buying cannabis from two journalists.
Director of the left-leaning Institute for Public Policy Research, he’ll fight the Lancs bellwether seat of Rossendale and Darwen.
The Oxford grad, 32, was praised after avoiding his father’s safe seat.
Should make it by 2020.
Blair 6/10
EDUCATED at Bristol University, Euan is former PM Tony Blair’s eldest son.
Having grown up in Downing Street, he has never hidden his ambition to follow in his dad’s footsteps.
Euan, 30, recently fuelled speculation he would make a run by leaving his job at bank Morgan Stanley.
He has also canvassed for the party. But dad Tony is now seen as a pariah by many in Ed Miliband’s party and that may hurt him.
Prescott 2/10
THE son of ex-Deputy PM John Prescott, David left school at 18 to work his way up in journalism.
The aggressive PR man lost a selection battle to fight the safe Labour seat of Greenwich and Woolwich last December.
In 2008, he also lost a fight to succeed dad John in Hull East. On Twitter he uses Nelson Mandela’s motto: “Judge me by how many times I fell down and got back up again."
Could be seen as soiled goods.
And how privileged is the Shadow Cabinet? CRITICS of David Cameron’s government always point to the number of Old Etonians that surround the PM. But a look at the Shadow Cabinet reveals the richest Labour team ever, with at least seven millionaires. Here are some of its most privileged members...
Ed Miliband: 7 Millionaire economics graduate from Oxford and the LSE, he has a £2.3million London pad. Earns £140k a year plus pension and expenses.
Harriet Harman: 8 Daughter of a solicitor and surgeon, the millionaire lawyer lives in a £1million house with MP husband Jack Dromey.
Ed Balls: 7 Professor’s son attended private school before graduating from Oxford. The millionaire and MP wife Yvette Cooper earn £300,000 a year.
Yvette Cooper: 6 Like husband Ed, she graduated from Oxford and went to Harvard in the US. The couple share a £900,000 home in North London.
Jon Cruddas: 8 Millionaire Labour policy chief and his wife Baroness Healy have three homes, one a £650,000 pad in Notting Hill.
Chuka Umunna: 8 A millionaire solicitor. His family has a £1million villa in Ibiza. He attended fee-paying St Dunstan’s in Catford, South London.
Tristram Hunt: 7 Son of Lord Hunt went to fee-paying University College School and Cambridge. The millionaire paid £740,000 for his North London home.
Hilary Benn: 9 Millionaire son of late MP Tony. Went to Holland Park School, known as the socialist Eton. West London house valued at £2million.
Emily Thornberry: 6 Millionaire barrister is married to High Court judge and lives in a £2million home in North London. Kids go to selective school.
Douglas Alexander: 6 MANY members of the Shadow Cabinet have more down-to-earth backgrounds than some of their advantaged colleagues.
They include Vernon Coaker, who trained as a teacher, and Owen Smith, who was a radio producer.
Meanwhile Ivan Lewis and Liz Kendall were charity workers.
Jon Trickett was a builder and plumber, while Lord Bassam of Brighton was a social worker and set up a squatters’ foundation.
Solicitor Sadiq Khan, one of seven kids to Pakistani immigrant parents, is moderately wealthy and lives in Tooting, South London.
Document THESUK0020140325ea3p000um
