{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3255"}
____
Rod Liddle
Migrant worries? Get stuffed, voters
By ROD LIDDLE, Sun Columnist   
1,304 words
15 May 2014
09:06
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
HERE’S a question it won’t take you terribly long to answer.
How well is the Government abiding by its “solemn promise" to cut the number of immigrants to this country to under 100,000 per year?
The Prime Minister made that pledge shortly before the last election.
He put that incredibly sincere and grave expression on his shiny face and his hand on his heart. And he made a vow to the electorate.
The Tories — deadly scourge of mass immigration! You can trust them.
He knew then — and he knows now — that immigration, along with the economy, is the single most important factor for voters.
So, what’s actually happened? The Prime Minister says the figures are heading in the right direction.
But that’s true only if you turn the graph upside down. Or stand on your head while reading it. One of the two.
This year, the numbers of people flooding into the country have actually increased.
We have had a net gain of a staggering 212,000 people arriving, mostly from Eastern Europe.
Our borders have got even leakier. They are now leakier than a sieve from which someone has removed the bits between the holes.
Not only that, but things don’t look much better for the future, either.
Asked if immigration would be nosing down in the NEXT set of figures, David Cameron came out with the following Churchillian quote: “The figures will be what the figures are."
No kidding, mate. A bit short of a solemn promise now, isn’t it?
In fact, the next batch of figures are likely to be pretty shocking — because they’ll take account of the new influx from Romania and Bulgaria.
All those neurosurgeons and rocket scientists who have turned up since January 1. If you remember, a short while ago, the Left was crowing that hardly anyone had arrived here from those two countries.
And they blamed Ukip for scaremongering when actually everything was tickety-boo, no problem, etc.
Well, the news is that at least 30,000 Bulgarians and Romanians have come to Britain this year. That’s hardly a piddling amount, is it?
And here’s the problem for the voters.
The Tories like immigration because it means a short-term boost to the economy and employers can pay their workers rather less money.
That sort of thing is always popular with Tories.
And Labour and the Lib Dems like immigration because they still seem to think that anyone who moans about it is a raaacccissst.
Even Ukip doesn’t mind having quite a few immigrants arriving every month, for exactly the same reason as the Tories.
So on this issue — the most important issue as far as the voters are concerned — the message from the parties is pretty much unanimous: Get stuffed.
BBC has hit a new Lowe...  A LOCAL radio disc jockey was sacked by the BBC for playing the old version of the song The Sun Has Got His Hat On. 
David Lowe had not realised that the second verse contains the kind of language not usually heard on the radio these days. Unless you’re listening to a rap station.
It goes: “He’s been out tanning n*****s down in Timbuktu – now he’s coming back he’s going to do the same to you."
Just ONE listener complained – but Lowe was sacked by BBC Radio Devon after 30 years of hard and low-paid labour.
Quite rightly, the BBC didn’t sack Jeremy Clarkson when he came very close to uttering the N-word.
But it seems there’s one rule for the likes of Jezza – who makes a lot of money for the Beeb – and another for poor old David Lowe.
Cods wallop
A PRIMARY school in Swindon has banned fish. No fish allowed in school dinners, no fish allowed in lunchboxes.
This is because ONE pupil is allergic to fish.
Parents have said the ban is over the top and one mum complained that her daughter eats pretty much nothing but fish, so what’s she going to do now?
Do you ever get the impression that this child-centred business has gone a bit too far?
Do you ever wonder, late at night, when you’re lying in bed, whether the country has been taken over by mentalists?
Simon's lesson in fencing THERE have been reports that Simon Cowell has put up an electric fence around his London mansion to keep out the foxes.
It is said that he was worried they might attack his two dogs, called – ahem – Squiddly and Diddly. None of this is true, I can reveal.
There IS an electric fence around Simon’s property, but it was put there by the foxes, to keep the strange orange-skinned celebrity off their territory.
“We just didn’t feel safe at night," a fox said yesterday. “We couldn’t give a toss about his dogs. It’s Cowell who sends a shiver of fear down our spines."
----------------
THERE’S a test you can do to find out if you’re a psychopath.
One of the questions is: Do you believe people who are conned deserve what they get? If you answer yes, you’re on the way to being a psycho. Hmm, maybe.
But what about the case of Juliette D’Souza, a London “witch doctor", now in court accused of fleecing her clients of more than a million quid?
She allegedly told her rich customers that the huge sums of money they gave her were hanging from a magical tree in the Amazon rainforest, all the better to ward off evil spirits.
Now, ask yourself that psycho question again...
----------------
FEW people can have faced certain death with such relentless good cheer and bravery as teenager Stephen Sutton.
 He died yesterday, four years after being diagnosed with bowel cancer. 
He packed more into those four years than most people manage in a lifetime – and raised more than three million quid for charity, so that others might have a better chance of fighting that wicked disease. It’s a cruel world, though, no?
----------------
THE Duke and Duchess of Cambridge’s dog, Lupo, is to star in a series of stories for kids.
Aby King has written the first one – Adventures Of A Royal Dog – in which Lupo meets a weird corgi called Vulcan.
I’ve got some plotline suggestions for Aby.
How about Lupo And The Mess On The Carpet, in which the dog is repeatedly kicked by the Duke of Edinburgh?
And what about Lupo And The BBC Royal Correspondent, in which Lupo, urged on by Prince Charles, savages Nicholas Witchell and buries his remains in the garden at Buck House?
----------------
LOOKS to me like Katie Price’s love-rat hubby is trying to win her back. Kieran Hayler was spotted buying a huge box of dog biscuits .
Presumably he’ll gift-wrap it at home.
If that doesn’t do the trick, maybe he could buy her a rubber bone and some worming tablets.
----------------
AHA! So now we know. The British public was not quite so fond of Austria’s bearded lady, Conchita Wurst, in the Eurovision Song Contest, as we’d been led to believe.
We placed the wet-eyed warbling idiot a distant third – it was the panel of experts who put her, or him, top.
The public actually went for those Poles with mammary glands the size of the Channel Islands, pretending to churn butter in a suggestive manner. Quelle surprise, huh?
Incidentally, did you notice that, once again, the only country not to announce their voting results in English were the ludicrous French?
Shut up, Pierre: Nobody understands what you’re trying to say, or indeed cares.
Document THESUK0020140515ea5f00001
