{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1353"}
____
Politics
It’s time PM was HONEST over EU; The Sunday Issue; ANGELA MERKEL came to Parliament and gave us a clear vision of what the European Union is all about.
By GISELA STUART, German-born Labour MP   
843 words
2 March 2014
02:14
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
For her, it is delivering three promises — peace, freedom and prosperity. David Cameron sat listening.
Whether you agreed with her or not, you were left in no doubt about what she thought best for her country.
For her, German interests and European interests are one and the same. This has never been the case in the UK.
Gisela Stuart MP SWNS
So far, all our Prime Minister has given us is a wish-list — treaty changes, a referendum, a review of EU competences and greater control over immigration.
But he hasn’t told us how he is going to get any of these.
He wants treaty changes but has been pretty vague as to what changes he wants.
Chancellor Merkel also thinks treaty changes are needed — but not the kind Britain has in mind.
SHE wants to co-ordinate the economies and financial institutions of eurozone countries. That means deeper political integration.
HE wants to review Brussels’ powers and make sure we only do things at EU level that can’t be done by nation states.
The PM says he will control immigration. Yet net migration to the UK was 212,000 in the year to September, up 58,000. He can’t do a thing to restrain free movement within the EU. Angela Merkel made it clear.
David Cameron promises an in-out referendum in 2017. This rather conveniently kicks it beyond the next General Election.
Having failed in 2010 to win an outright majority, what makes him think he will do so in 2015?
And when it comes to Europe, he knows the Lib Dems aren’t playing ball now — and that they won’t do so in future.
If asking the people is right in 2017, why not have a referendum in 2014?
David Cameron wants us to believe that by the time he has completed the talks, he will be able to go to the British people and recommend a “yes" vote.
He hasn’t told us what his “red lines" and “must-haves" are.
If he can’t tell when it’s time to say “job done — that’s the kind of EU we can work with", how can voters? If David Cameron has trouble defining what being “in" means, he has even more trouble explaining what “out" would entail.
Promising to have a referendum that doesn’t give people a proper choice is an abuse of democracy.
It’s time the PM was honest with the British people.
The German Chancellor was clear that she wanted to keep the UK in the EU but not at any price.
And this is where we come to the crunch question.
Is being part of an EU that has at its core a single currency and is moving towards deeper political integration in the UK’s long-term national interest?
Making reference to speculation about how much she could help, Chancellor Merkel admits she will disappoint us.
This might be true in the future but David Cameron has disappointed us already. He is running out of time and ideas.
He may think politics is about getting a bit of this and getting rid of that but this amounts to little more than a string of short-term political fixes from a Prime Minister whose promises on Europe are vague, shallow and vacuous.
Cameron wants...
DAVID CAMERON is demanding tough curbs on freedom of movement among the 28 EU countries.
He believes migrants should be banned from finding work in richer states until their own economies have caught up. The PM also wants to claw back power over benefits so he can restrict payments to EU migrants.
And high on his list of demands is the right for countries outside the eurozone to block decisions taken by the 18 who are in the single currency, such as Germany. Mr Cameron also believes member states should be allowed to block EU laws and red tape – and the return of the power to set our own social and employment laws.
Plus he wants a new treaty to form a more trade-focused relationship between EU countries.
But Merkel says...
ANGELA MERKEL strongly backs Mr Cameron’s demands on restricting welfare handouts for migrants.
She says Germans are as angry about incomers having equal benefit rights as Britons are.
Mrs Merkel will also support his bid to let non-euro countries have a say in eurozone decisions.
The Chancellor is open to persuasion on letting groups of national parliaments reject EU proposals but is against any new national vetoes.
However, she is dead against halting freedom of movement. She is against fundamental reform of the relationship between countries although she has agreed to tweak existing treaties.
And she has signalled a will to free the UK from some employment rules, including a cap on working hours.
Document THESUK0020140302ea32001p9
