{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3672"}
____
Politics
Party leaders vote as poll tips Ukip Euro win
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
805 words
22 May 2014
15:09
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE . Disaster ahead for Tories and Lib Dems
UKIP will win today's Euro elections in the biggest protest vote in British democratic history, a major projection for The Sun has revealed.
In a massive revolt, livid voters will deliver a full-on kick in the ballots to the Westminster elite they see as all the same and "telling lies all the time".
Party leaders Nigel Farage, David Cameron, Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg were all seen casting their votes today.
London Mayor Boris Johnson was also snapped visiting a polling station - wearing his cycling helmet.
The YouGov projection - based on a massive opinion poll of 6,124 adults over the last two days - gives Ukip the most votes cast, with 27% of all support.
Labour will come a close second on 26%, and the Tories an embarrassing third with 22%.
In a deep humiliation for the Lib Dems, the Greens will push them into fifth by coming fourth on 10% against 9% for Nick Clegg's party.
Of the 70 European Parliament seats up for grabs in England, Scotland and Wales, our pollsters YouGov also say Ukip and Labour will get 22 MEPs each - up nine each from the 2009 euro elections.
The Tories will get 16 MEPs - down 10, the Greens four - up two, and the Lib Dems a mere three - losing EIGHT of their current MEPs, an electoral decimation.
The projection also says both far-Right BNP MEPs will go.
Thursday's euro vote is the first nationwide election since 2010 and a key test for David Cameron, Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg with less than 12 months go to before the next general election.
If highly reliable YouGov's projection proves right, Nigel Farage's anti-EU party will have shaken off a deluge of gaffes, and racist and homophobic allegations to make history when the counting finishes on Sunday night, becoming the first political party to top a national ballot without a single MP in the Commons.
It will spell grim news for Labour, who will be the first official Opposition NOT to win a Euro Election in 30 years.
And in a disaster for the Tories, it will also be the first time they have finished below second in a nationwide election in its two century history.
The survey's respondents themselves openly admit their vote is a major protest vote.
Less than a quarter -23% - say they are crossing ballot papers to pick the right MEPs to send to Brussels.
Instead, 63% say it is to express their views - with 42% wanting to have a say on our relations with the EU, and 21% about the UK's political scene in general.
In a deeply damning verdict on the Westminster status quo, almost half of Brits - 44% - say "there is no real difference these days" between the Tories, Labour and Lib Dems.
Just a third disagree with that.
And exactly half - 50% - also say Britain's politicians "tell lies all the time" and "you can't believe a word they say", with just less than a fifth - 19% - disagreeing with that.
Immigration tops the list of issues that is influencing folk's votes, followed closely by our EU membership.
But despite all the fury, Britain remaining in the EU is still narrowly preferred, by 42% to 37%.
Controversy continues to engulf Ukip right up to the wire, as the party launches an investigation into a party leaflet in Oldham that suggested illegal ways of rigging votes.
Mr Farage admitted: "When everyone's firing every thing they've got at you, sometimes the cracks begin to show".
A Ukip victory will clear out bookies, with punters piling money on them to win.
Ladbrokes said 80% of all bets struck have been on Nigel Farage's party, and narrowed their odds down to 1/2 to win most votes, having been at 3/1 when betting opened last year.
Voters are also going to the polls to elect all 32 London boroughs, 36 metropolitan authorities, and other local councils largely in the Midlands and the North.
Of the 4,216 seats up for grabs, Labour are expected to gain around 500 off the Tories and Lib Dems, with Nick Clegg's party faces losses of up 350.
After the election, 16 English councils are likely to become virtual one party states, the Electoral Reform Society predict, as they will be so heavily dominated by Labour councillors.
- IMMIGRANTS from Europe have now overtaken the number of new arrivals from the rest of the world, the latest migration figures are expected to confirm.
The trend will heap more pressure on the PM to toughen up his EU renegotiaion demands.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140521ea5l0058x
