{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1566"}
____
Politics
Nigel Farage wins first Europe debate
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor and KEVIN SCHOFIELD, Chief Political Correspondent   
937 words
27 March 2014
01:48
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
NIGEL Farage thrashed Nick Clegg in a landmark first live debate on Britain’s EU membership last night, The Sun can reveal.
In a direct clash between in and out, the UKIP chief and Lib Dem boss locked horns live on TV and radio.
An exclusive live YouGov poll of listeners and viewers - run moments after the hour-long clash ended at 8pm - found 57% thought Mr Farage “performed best overall".
Just 36% backed Mr Clegg, and 7% said they couldn’t call it.
The overwhelming result is a crushing blow for the Deputy PM.
Both men went into the debate under massive pressure, and at times came close to losing their notoriously short tempers.
The 47-year-old Lib Dem concentrated his fire on the threat to jobs that getting out of the EU would pose.
Insisting three million British livelihoods depend on the EU, Mr Clegg summed up his entire thrust: "At the end of the day, it's about jobs jobs jobs.
“I’m not prepared to see anyone lose their job on the altar of Nigel Farage’s anti-European dogma".
And the 49-year-old UKIP chief kept returning to his favourite theme, immigration – and how the UK will never be able to control it by remaining in the union.
In the pair’s most bitter clash, the Deputy PM pulled out a recent UKIP by-election leaflet that claimed as many as 29million Romanian and Bulgarians may be heading here.
Brandishing it, Mr Clegg said: “It's simply not true. There aren’t even 29million people living in Romania and Bulgaria.
“Let's not scare people. You’re owed the facts."
Mr Clegg added: “I want us to be Great Britain, not little England".
But Mr Farage urged Brits to reject “a tired status quo" and abandon Brussels.
He demanded: “Are we to be a self governing nation or not?"
“I believe the people are on our side."
The Deputy PM laid down the debate challenge in a desperate move to court badly needed support ahead of the crunch Euro Elections in May.
The Lib Dems are braced for a ballot box drubbing, and could even lose ALL 12 of their MEPs.
But the anti-EU party boss was judged to need a victory a little more.
Mr Farage’s surge up the polls has faltered in recent weeks as his party came under heavy scrutiny and in the face of a Tory fight back for the hearts of older voters.
Before the showdown in front of a live audience of LBC listeners off Trafalgar Square, the UKIP boss’s old former flatmate Godfrey Bloom, who left UKIP to become an independent MEP last year, said: "Farage has to win, and he has to win convincingly.
“He can't draw. It's Nigel's subject, it's Nigel's baby."
Mr Farage – who had “a quick whistle-wetter" pint before it - said he had been “waiting 20 years" for the prime time moment.
And he insisted he wouldn’t let his "vile temper" get the better of him, saying that he is "passionate but even handed".
The debate – aired live on LBC radio and Sky News - was compered by Nick Ferrari, on whose show Mr Clegg had initially laid down the challenge.
LBC radio presenter Mr Ferrari dubbed it “the debate the nation has been waiting 40 years to hear".
Mr Farage won the toss of a Euro coin to make Mr Clegg speak first.
The Tories and Labour tried to play down the debate’s significance, after David Cameron and Ed Miliband both refused to take part in it.
And the PM’s official spokesman again refused to say whether Mr Cameron would be tuning in to it last night, only saying: "I've no further update on whether the transistors will be glowing in the Cameron household".
Privately, many Tories were backing Mr Clegg, desperate to see UKIP take a hit and needing the Lib Dems’ share of the vote to recover to take votes off Labour for them.
Some pro-EU Tory MPs even publicly endorsed the Deputy PM beforehand.
Veteran Nicholas Soames tweeted: “Go do it Cleggmeister".
The debate will be re-run for a second time next Wednesday on April 2, when it will be screened live on BBC2.
Lib Dem Treasury Chief Secretary Danny Alexander put a brave face on The Sun’s grim poll news for his party.
Mr Alexander said he thought his boss had “won hands down".
But he added: “If 36% of people are backing Nick Clegg, that means there are a lot of votes out there for us on Europe".
More say it's time to leave OUR poll results gave Nigel Farage a big ratings boost.
Those holding a positive impression of him soared from 40 per cent to 52. People viewing him negatively dropped from 56 per cent to 46.
And the YouGov poll of 1,003 voters backed his quit the EU stance.
Those wanting to get out rose from 42 to 44 per cent. Staying in support fell from 48 to 47 per cent.
More people now think leaving would be good for jobs — 34 per cent compared to 28.
In a worrying result for David Cameron, our poll also revealed 69 per cent of Tory voters backed Mr Farage as the winner, along with 42 per cent of Labour voters — and even 20 per cent of Lib Dems.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140326ea3q002gz
