{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3173"}
____
Politics
David Cameron attacks Ukip 'extremists'
By KEVIN SCHOFIELD, Chief Political Correspondent   
345 words
11 April 2014
01:00
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
DAVID Cameron yesterday launched a bitter attack on Ukip "extremists" ahead of next month's Euro elections.
With polls suggesting the Conservatives could come third for the first time ever in a national poll, the PM made a desperate plea for voters to reject Nigel Farage's party.
He said their MEPs rarely voted and couldn't be trusted to stand up for Britain.
His outspoken remarks came after a bruising week over his handling of the Maria Miller affair.
Mr Cameron has been attacked for failing to sack the shamed Cabinet minister, who finally resigned on Wednesday amid mounting furore over her expenses claims.
Launching the Tories' European election campaign, the PM said: "Looking at the other parties, there are effectively two extremist camps.
"One says 'We love the European Union'. The other says 'We hate the European Union'.
"But in all this there are three words they are missing, three words that sum up everything we are about in Europe. Britain's. National. Interest."
Addressing Ukip directly, Mr Cameron said: "When it comes to standing up for Britain in Europe, is there anyone you would trust less than a group of Ukip MEPs?
"They talk the talk in Britain, but as soon as they're on that plane to Brussels they change completely.
"When they do actually bother to vote, they don't stand up for Britain.
"Indeed their own leader has said they "cannot change a thing in Brussels."
His remarks came as a new poll put support for Ukip at a record high.
The Ipsos Mori survey put support for the party on 15 per cent, four points up on last month.
- TORY MP Chris Heaton-Harris last night called on the PM to go further on immigration.
He said: “The message I’m getting on the doorstep is that immigration is the number one concern for voters.
“We should have control over our borders so the Government needs to go further."
k.schofield@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140410ea4b0053g
