{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2785"}
____
Politics
PM's immigration pledge in tatters; DAVID Cameron’s election pledge to slash immigrant numbers lay in tatters today after an explosion in the number of Europeans flooding to Britain for work.
By STEVE HAWKES, Deputy Political Editor   
317 words
27 February 2014
14:43
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Official figures showed net migration soared nearly 40 per cent to 212,000 in the year to September.
The number of Bulgarians and Romanians coming to the UK almost TREBLED to 24,000 - and that’s before the lifting of restrictions on both countries in January.
Furious Tory backbenchers rounded on the Government and called for immediate changes to the Immigration Bill.
Nigel Mills MP told the Sun: “It’s a disaster isn’t it?"
In all, today’s figures showed 532,000 people immigrated to the UK in the year, including thousands of Poles, Spanish, Italians and Portuguese.
Net migration subtracts those leaving the country.
In 2010, the Home Secretary Theresa May vowed to bring the net migration number down to the tens of thousands by 2015.
At the time, she told the Sun: “We’ll reduce immigration and you can judge us on it."
Today, the Home Office insisted it was doing everything it legally could -- with non-EU migrants down to the lowest level since 1998.
Immigration minister James Brokenshire added: “We cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants.
“So we are focusing on cutting out the abuse of free movement between EU member states and seeking to address the factors that drive European immigration to Britain."
Labour’s shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper said: “These figures show the Government's net migration target is in tatters, and their immigration policy is a mess.
“David Cameron promised, 'no ifs, no buts' to cut net migration to the tens of thousands, yet these figures show net migration has gone up and is now more than twice that figure."
steve.hawkes@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140227ea2r004pi
