{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"1910"}
____
Showbiz
Getting the Elbow inspires new album; Exclusive . How a break-up helped to influence Elbow's new album The Take Off And Landing Of Everything; SIPPING a pint of Guinness in his local boozer, Elbow’s Guy Garvey is talking about fame and what it’s like being recognised.
BY JACQUI SWIFT   
1,794 words
7 March 2014
00:32
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
“It’s fine. People are usually polite or say nice things about our music," he tells me.
“It’s only late, drunken nights that can get a bit tiresome.
“Y’know, when you get big lads holding you in a headlock for half an hour. Or: ‘Come and have your picture taken with suchabody’s stag do.’
“It can get a bit much if you are trying to talk to your mates, though generally speaking if that’s the case, I’m off me t*ts as well so it’s all right.
“But there was this time once in Matt And Phreds (the live venue in Manchester) when this bloke was staring at me. He then came up to me and asked: ‘Where do I know you from?’
“I was like: ‘Ah, we are in a band, we’re called Elbow and we’re doing all right. My name is Guy Garvey.’
“And before I could sink into full pop star mode, the man then said, ‘Guy Garvey? I know you. I went to school with you, you div!’ And it’s moments like that that I never forget."
There are no airs or graces when it comes to Elbow. Five normal lads who have had their feet firmly on the ground since I met them back in 2001 before they put out debut album Asleep In The Back.
Down the pub, Garvey chats to locals and friends from the studio while guitarist Mark Potter downs a quick drink before dashing off to his eldest son’s parents’ evening.
Elbow are just 'five normal lads'
With album number six The Take Off And Landing Of Everything just around the corner, they are seeing family and friends as often as they can “before the crazy season starts", laughs Potter.
A walk away from the band’s Blueprint studios in Salford, Elbow have just finished an afternoon of rehearsals — and so Garvey is in a good mood.
“It’s been strings and brass today and I have to say we’re sounding pretty good," he smiles. “We can’t wait to get out and play these new songs."
And it’s a glorious album from the band Garvey fronts with Mark Potter, drummer Richard Jupp, bassist Pete Turner, and keyboardist and producer Craig Potter.
Many of Elbow’s songs have been influenced by their love for their home city of Manchester.
But for the new album, Garvey wrote about New York, a city he has spent lots of time in over the last few years.
He says: “For the first time there is also a love song to another city. There has been a love song to Manchester on every album, but I do love New York — not as much as Manchester, but it is like New York is the other woman."
New York Morning was one song inspired by his many visits to the Big Apple. “I was in New York for my first trip without the band and jet lag had me" says Garvey. “I woke up at 5am and went out with an iPod of the new music I’d written with the boys. And I just sat watching life go by." One line in the song is: “It’s the modern Rome and, folk are nice to Yoko."
Garvey says: “That line was nearly edited out, because I would never normally name anyone else. But it’s a source of national shame for me, that we kicked Yoko Ono and John Lennon out of the country. They went somewhere else because of the way they were treated here."
Track list for The Take Off And Landing Of Everything
The Take Off And Landing of Everything was started more than three years ago. But last year, Garvey went through a huge life change when he split with his long-term girlfriend, writer Emma Jane Unsworth.
The pair had been together for nearly ten years and the split influenced lyrics on the album.Garvey says: “The Take Off and Landing Of Everything covers my international globe-trotting and also the start, middle and ending of my relationship with Emma."
But far from being an album of woe and heartache, the record looks forward.
Opening track This Blue World is classic Elbow, a fragile ballad — and the delicate Honey Sun is over a beatbox beat with Garvey singing: “I cannot stay where all the broken plans were made."
He adds: “It’s a tightrope.There is a point I won’t cross which is why Emma and I separated. But in a nutshell it’s because we wanted different things. Nobody wronged anyone. It just came to a natural end.
“I went out to dinner with her last night, as mates, and we were both saying to each other how we’ve never been happier.
“We were trying to hold the relationship together for a long time, knowing it was nothing to do with loving one another.
“Neither of us regrets any of it and we are both happier than we have ever been. And despite the sadness of saying goodbye to someone so close in that respect, we will always be friends.If you both decided mutually that is was wrong, you can celebrate all elements of it, including its ending.
“And she’s still an influence on my lyrics. I had the opening lines to My Sad Captains, ‘I’m running out of miracles’ but she gave me the chorus."
And it’s not just Garvey’s lyrics that have been influenced by their relationship.
He says Unsworth’s upcoming book Animals has parts of their old life together in it. “There are a few lines in the album that are in her books. And we both can’t remember who wrote them. Animals is p***-funny." For this album there have been some changes to Elbow’s working relationship.
For the first time band members worked separately on songs, while Garvey says he has been paying attention to how he writes lyrics.
“I’ve been experimenting with not doing second and third drafts of lyrics, he says. “But even if I know I can improve on a phrase or a sentence, it was about keeping the energy as it was in the first place.
“We’ve always worked office hours, but after the success of The Seldom Seen Kid (2008’s Mercury Prize-winning album), we went to four-day weeks instead of five because everyone but me had young families.
I voiced a documentary about The Beatles, which said that, towards the end, if any three Beatles were together the work ethic was the same — it was vibrant. But the group dynamic of the four of them got tired.
“So this time I thought we should have a different day off each and see what it threw up.
“The time we were away from each other, the lads started writing on their own.
“Our influences are so diverse and we’ve brought them to this record. Real Life (Angel), for example, is very post-dance and was written by Craig who is into his hip-hop. Then Colour Fields was Pete on his own and Honey Sun was Mark on his own."
The new album cover
Elbow tackle the thorny topic of immigration on Blanket Of The Night, a song about two refugees.
Says Garvey: “Another thing I like about New York is everybody who lives there is an immigrant. Look what can be achieved by people getting their heads together. It’s the centre of Western capitalism and it’s run by and populated by people from all over the world.
“Here both sides of the house are talking about these people like they are parasites trying to board your ship and steal your gold. It’s people fleeing their homes where they want to live and having to do that, risking their lives to do that.
“Look how desperate they are. That song is trying to engender sympathy."
Garvey turned 40 yesterday and he tells me that he looks forward to the next decade.
“My life has got better as I’ve got older," he says.
“My 20s were exciting and full of energy and fun but I didn’t know myself. I hadn’t had any success and was wondering what I was doing in a band. There is a security to knowing who you are, though it would be good to have some of that energy still."
On the song Fly Boy Blue/Lunette, Garvey sings: ‘I’ve made the decisions I’ve made on life and a liver."
He says: “There, I’m basically saying, ‘Am I going to keep doing this?’ — and he points to his pint. ‘Or am I going to live longer but not quite as happy.’
“So the jury is out. I can’t really say I’ve become a macrobiotic hippy when I’ve got a pint of Guinness in my hand, can I?"
Laughing, he says: “We’ve been a band for nearly 25 years now, it is madness that we are still here."
But he adds: “I can’t imagine us never being in this band, though we’ve had some ups and downs.
“I don’t know how it’ll end. Probably in a fireball in a doorway of Asda. Simultaneously snuffed out.
“But being in Elbow has been the greatest of times. When we played the Olympics Closing Ceremony (Elbow also wrote the BBC’s theme tune to London 2012), it was f****** great.
“It was like a sports day because everyone was wishing each other well. No one was a rock star there.
“I spent most of the night with Timothy Spall, getting drunk with him.
“Kate Moss got hold of Timothy and was telling him how much she loved all his films.
“She took her hair extension out, popped it in his pocket then gave him a kiss on his cheek and said: ‘I love you.’ And Timothy said: ‘You did witness that, didn’t you? It did actually happen?’
“So life is good. I love my work, my friends and my hometown. If I do have time away from work, I love to go to New York.
“It’s been important to this record. But next time I might go to Istanbul. I’m looking ahead.
“I’m 40 and I am single and I can do what I like."
Document THESCOT020140307ea37000xk
