{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3003"}
____
Politics
Ministers fear number of EU immigrants to overtake those from rest of the world
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
571 words
9 May 2014
06:10
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE
MINISTERS fear immigrants from Europe have now outstripped new arrivals from the rest of the world - heaping more pressure on David Cameron to toughen up his EU demands.
The alarming trend will be confirmed with the release of 2013's full official immigration figures in two weeks' time.
New arrivals, largely from cash-strapped southern and eastern European states, could even top 250,000 for the first time ever.
The bombshell stat will ride roughshod over the PM's ruined pledge to bring all net migration down to under 100,000 a year.
Under current EU rules, Britain is powerless to stop anyone coming here from the 27 other member countries.
There is growing anger among senior Tories that Mr Cameron is asking too little from Brussels in his renegotiation bid.
He has refused to include any curtailing of the lynchpin freedom of movement principle in his seven public demands so far.
One minister told the Sun: "We simply have to go further, and the numbers from the EU in a few weeks time will prove that.
"They will be bad, and it's frustrating as we've made a lot of progress on cutting non-EU arrivals.
"The PM has simply got to put freedom of movement on the table, and he knows it".
The new figures will also bolster The Sun's 'Red Line' demand for Mr Cameron to win control back of the UK's borders - or see Brits vote to leave the EU in his 2017 referendum.
The last quarterly immigration figures, released in February, revealed there were 141,000 more non-EU immigrants arriving than leaving in the 12 months up to September 2013 - down 20,000 from the previous year.
At the same time, the number of net new EU immigrants DOUBLED to a record new total of 131,000 - just 10,000 less than the number of arriving foreigners from the rest of the world.
Migration Watch UK last night backed growing Tory calls for freedom of movement restrictions.
The cross-party pressure group has predicted there will be more than half a million more EU immigrants coming to Britain in the next five years alone.
Its chairman Sir Andrew Green said: "EU migration looks set to continue at its present high level for some years to come.
"We simply cannot continue with the mass immigration we now face.
"If we are to stay in the EU, we must achieve a significant reduction in immigration from within the union."
Among the PM's list of seven demands so far, only two touch on immigration - a call to restrict access to benefits and new restrictions for all new countries who join the EU in the future, such as Turkey.
In a significant success for Home Secretary Theresa May's clampdown, non-EU newcomers are now down to their lowest level since 1998 - from a peak of more than 250,000 10 years ago under Tony Blair's government.
But frustrated Tories know the explosion of new EU arrivals thanks to the Eurozone crisis has left them unable to claim much credit for that.
In dire timing for the Tories, the next quarterly figures will be released on May 22 - the euro and council elections polling day.
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140509ea5900105
