{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"792"}
____
Politics
Loaded foreigners ‘should pay millions for fast track visas’; Damning report said they offer virtually NOTHING to Britain; LOADED foreigners should be forced to bid millions for fast-track visas - after a damning report said they offer virtually NOTHING to Britain.
By STEVE HAWKES, Deputy Political Editor   
459 words
25 February 2014
18:18
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Official Government advisors said they were “skeptical" wealthy tycoons delivered any economic benefit at all when they are allowed to settle.
The Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) said if anything hundreds of Russians and Chinese flooding to Britain pushed house prices out of the reach of ordinary Brits.
MAC chair Sir David Metcalf said: ““We express some healthy scepticism regarding the value to UK residents of high net worth individuals coming to the UK."
Under radical proposals, MAC said 100 “premium" visas should be auctioned off every year to wealthy tycoons around the world.
A reserve price of £2.5million would include a guarantee that £500,000 would go to “good causes" - such as Cancer Research or sports funding.
Sir David said that while the “reserve price" or minimum bid for auction was £2.5million the final price could be much higher.
“It could be £6million or £7million. The auction will set the price."
Raising £500,000 from 100 tycoons would mean £50million a year for charities.
Currently wealthy foreigners can buy their way into Britain by LENDING the Government £1million.
Mr Metcalf said: “The present system is designed to minimise the gains to UK residents and maximum gains to the migrants.
“Think of what they get? Rule of law, property rights, access to capital.
“We want to make sure British residents get something out of this."
The report threatens to ignite the row between Business Secretary Vince Cable and Home Secretary Theresa May over immigration.
Speaking a year ago Cable said Britain “simply can’t afford" to miss out on wealthy Chinese immigrants or tourists. He said rules should be relaxed to encourage more to come.
Figures released by the MAC revealed 560 visas were granted to “investors" in the year to October 2013, compared with 140 in 2009.
Almost half of all investor visas go to Russians and Chinese, but others have been granted to Iranians and Kazakhs. The Chinese made up 32 per cent of all investor visa issued this year.
Immigration lawyers have panned the MAC for suggesting money go to charity.
But Mr Metcalf hit back, comparing them to the Leeds United team of the Seventies which “kicked the opposition in the tunnel". He added the MAC was not suggesting passports were sold - but that settlement came at a higher price.
The Home Office said: “The Government is grateful foor the MAC’s report and will carefully consider its recommendations."
steve.hawkes@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140225ea2p005ha
