{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2010"}
____
Scotland
Costa del Haul
By IRINA WILKIE   
1,067 words
29 April 2014
13:23
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
- Villas in link to dodgy dosh - 'crime gang' will face trial
LEGAL chiefs have launched a daring bid to seize a whole STREET of swanky Spanish villas from a suspected Scots crime gang.
The four plush detached holiday homes and a pub — worth a total of £1million — have been earmarked by prosecutors who strip crooks of dirty cash.
It’s believed the sun-soaked properties in the unnamed region of Spain were “tainted" gifts snapped up by the alleged criminals.
Last night Lindsey Miller, Procurator Fiscal for Organised Crime, revealed: “This is a cul-de-sac of villas that were all bought around the same time.
“We suspect they are tainted gifts which are purchased through cri-minal enterprise and then given to others.
“It is an indication of how organised criminals are trying to thwart Proceeds of Crime laws by hiding money abroad — in the mistaken belief that will protect them."
The homes were ‘frozen’ with the help of Spanish authorities who are also probing the gang.
If the owners — who can’t be identified for legal reasons — are found guilty in court, the properties will be grabbed and sold off to help Scots communities blighted by crime.
Ms Miller said: “There are a number of individuals involved in this crime group. If they want to sell the properties — then they have to ask us first for permission.
“If they sell the properties without our permission, then we will restrain the funds."
The alleged crime syndicate is expected to appear at a Scottish court later this year or in early 2015 to face trial. Deborah Demick, new head of the Proceeds of Crime unit, said legal bosses were prepared to use any tactic to hit crooks.
She said: “An entire street of houses is pretty unusual.
“It is not only a street of houses but a street of houses in another country.
“But we are more than happy — and able — to restrain any asset linked to criminality."
The unusual seizure emerged as the Crown revealed it has this year claimed £8.1MILLION from gangsters, money lenders — and even puppy farm crooks.
It brings the grand total of dirty money taken from shady criminals to £88million since the tough Proceeds of Crime Act came into force in 2003.
Solicitor General Lesley Thomson, QC insisted that criminals had to be hit where it hurt.
She said: “The act has resulted in serious disruption to criminals operating in Scotland.
“Those who attempt to build up criminal business are finding we can wreck their ventures by ending their funding streams and their hopes of living off the profits of their crimes. Any business needs profits to reinvest and grow.
“By targeting the revenue stream of those involved in illegal activity, we deprive them of the opportunity to build up criminal empires and in doing so help to make Scotland a safer place."
Justice Secretary Kenny MacAskill said that the results sent out a warning shot.
He said: “The figures demonstrate that the Proceeds of Crime Act continues to be an extremely powerful and effective tool in the fight against organised crime in Scotland."
One of the biggest scalps seized by prosecutors was businessman Russell Stirton — who was ordered to hand over £58,700 after being snared with the cash.
Stirton, of Mugdock, Dunbartonshire, was rumbled in December 2007 by elite cops working for the former Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. They had been tipped off that Stirton, 54, was meeting a courier in the car park of World of Golf in Drumchapel, Glasgow.
Stirton is married into the McGovern crime clan, based in the city’s Springburn.
Drug dealer brother-in-law Tony McGovern, 35, was shot dead in 2000 following a feud with former best pal Jamie ‘Bull’ Stevenson, 48, who has recently been released from jail for money laundering.
Prosecutors also targeted Charles Swan, 68, who admitted operating a squalid puppy farm based in Airth, Stirlingshire.
The property was raided by animal welfare officers who seized 57 dogs in August 2011. Swan was caged for eight months 18 months later.
It was reckoned that he had earned £12,340 from misery.
But he had no assets to settle the bill. Swan was told to pay just £1, but it means prosecutors can swoop as soon as he acquires any cars or properties — without the need to go back to court.
When crime doesn’t pay Mohammed Riaz — drug dealer
RIAZ, 43, was targeted under proceeds of crime after being convicted of supplying heroin. In 2012, he was jailed for seven years after being nabbed with two kilos of the drug.
Cough it up...£203,724
Paul Donnell — armed dealer
THE 43-year-old was nabbed after a raid on his home in Erskine, Renfrewshire, in September uncovered drugs, guns and ammo. He was jailed for nine years two months later.
Cough it up...£14,650
Kwai Fun Li — gang master
IMMIGRATION cheat Li, 46, admitted employing illegal workers at her Chinese restaurants in 2009 and 2010. Last September a six-figure confiscation order was made against her.
Cough it up...£722,956
David Cochrane — Environment crime
THE dodgy scrap metal dealer was convicted in June of illegally keeping and treating waste for 14 years and fined £53,000. His firm was told to pay back over £40k.
Cough it up...£41,131
Thomas Reid — loan shark
IN 2011 Reid, 68, admitted running an unlicensed consumer credit racket from his home in Motherwell from 2005-10. He was slapped with a Proceeds of Crime bill in February.
Cough it up...£45,000
Charles Swan — puppy farmer
IT’S thought Swan, jailed for eight months last March, made £12,340 from a squalid Stirlingshire puppy farm. But he had no assets, so a confiscation order was reduced to £1.
Cough it up... just £1
Andrew Usher — tax dodger
THE 34-year-old was told to pay back cash in January after admitting two fraudulent VAT returns for purchasing a house and a boat. He was also told to do 300hrs unpaid work.
Cough it up... £50,000
Brian Ellis — property fraudster
AFTER a civil hearing, Ellis, 47, of Edinburgh, was told in January to hand over £105k when it was decided he obtained property by lying on his mortgage application.
Cough it up...£105,115
irina.wilkie@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140429ea4t000xd
