{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"639"}
____
News
Judge is axed after living with an illegal immigrant; Exclusive; A TOP judge blasted for going soft on foreign criminals has been axed over an illegal immigrant who lived with him.
By STEVE HAWKES, JOHN FAHEY and DANIEL SANDERSON   
589 words
10 March 2014
00:27
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Richard McKee, 65, agreed to step down after telling bosses he was giving financial support to the Nigerian woman.
The Lord Chief Justice’s office hit the roof after Fatima Umar, 39, was arrested at the home she shared with the judge and assaulted TWO police constables.
She was then found to have overstayed her UK visa.
Umar is serving two eight-week jail terms for the twin assault and causing nearly £5,000 damage at Mr McKee’s flat in Kilburn, North London.
Judge's home where Umar was arrested Brad Wakefield
She would typically face deportation after being judged to have “overstayed".
Police records show she assaulted the judge in 2011 and was sentenced to 14 weeks’ jail.
And last year Mr McKee was given a severe reprimand by the Lord Chief Justice’s office as cops probed “unlawful activities" being carried out by “others" at his premises. But he was able to remain a member of the highest asylum and immigration court.
He was one of three judges named and shamed two years ago for allowing 26 foreign criminals to avoid deportation and stay because of their “right to a family life".
Mr McKee ruled in favour of ELEVEN foreign criminals in 13 cases between 2011 and 2012.
Last night MPs were demanding answers after it emerged the arrest and resignation happened at the beginning of February and that the judge can retire on a full pension of at least £50,000 a year.
Tory backbencher Dominic Raab said: “It beggars belief that a judge tasked with defending our borders has been helping someone who has flouted them, only to walk away with a full pension. Those who uphold the law should not be above the law."
Legal experts said it is a crime to employ an illegal immigrant or marry them in a sham wedding, but it is not an offence to give them money.
Mr McKee told The Sun: “I am sorry but I really can’t say anything."
The judiciary refused to comment on the nature of his relationship with Umar.
A spokeswoman said it was brought to the Chamber President’s attention that Judge McKee was providing financial support to an alleged immigration offender. She added: “This was put to Mr McKee who then retired with effect from February 4."
Asked about the two previous incidents, she said Umar’s 2011 arrest was disclosed but not an issue at that time.
And the judiciary decided a reprimand in 2013 was “appropriate" after a review of the case.
The spokeswoman said any verdicts made by Mr McKee in the past three years could only be challenged on “points of law", not by his conduct.
Scandal emerged over 3 years
2011 — Umar assaults the judge and is sentenced to 14 weeks’ jail.
2011 and 2012 — Judge McKee hears 13 cases and rules in favour of the foreign criminal in 11.
2013 — Judiciary give judge a severe reprimand after police launch an investigation into “unlawful activities" carried out by “others" at his premises. He remains in immigration and asylum chambers.
2014 — Umar arrested at the house and assaults two police constables. She is found to have overstayed her visa. She is jailed. The judge agrees to step down.
steve.hawkes@the-sun.co.uk 
Document THESUK0020140310ea3a0010a
