{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"983"}
____
Sun Says
Two-face Nigel
350 words
20 May 2014
00:59
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
THE two faces of Ukip leader Nigel Farage are laid bare today.
One side portrays an affable bloke who is straight-talking and unequivocal on Europe and immigration — issues many ordinary Brits place at the top of their list of political priorities.
The other betrays a man and a party with unpleasant streaks of racism, sexism and homophobia.
Only last night, Mr Farage had to admit he “got it wrong" with his outburst about Romanian immigrants.
But the fact so many voters look set to overlook such traits when they go to the polls on Thursday demonstrates how strongly they feel about the EU and our open borders.
The Sun understands and shares these concerns. We have made curbing immigration a Red Line demand for the PM.
The Conservatives are the only party offering both the promise of a new deal with Europe AND the prospect of being in Government to deliver it.
So they need to listen to those voices hailing Farage as a hero and turn this week’s protest votes into next year’s Tory votes.
Mr Farage’s apology for yet another offensive gaffe might make that job easier.
Fry Clegg WITH friends like Nick Clegg who needs enemies?
The Europhile Deputy PM says that David Cameron’s demands to Brussels amount to “small fry".
If the PM wonders if he’s gone anything like far enough to satisfy Eurosceptic backbenchers, the Clegg test shows he’s failed miserably.
Talking to Sun cabbie Grant Davis, the Lib Dem leader even lays claim to being the one driving demands for tighter border controls.
At least he won’t upset his Coalition partners with his views on the other big concern for voters.
When he says Labour can’t be trusted on the economy, Mr Clegg is on the money.
Rule the World PRIME Minister David Cameron “dares to dream" of victory.
Of defying gloomy forecasts. Of overcoming great odds to clinch the ultimate prize.
Yes, that’s right — of England winning the World Cup. What did you think we were talking about?
Document THESUK0020140519ea5j003pd
