{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3521"}
____
Fabulous
Get all the gossip from Fabulous
BY CYAN TURAN   
410 words
20 April 2014
17:23
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
We bring you the great and the not-so good of this week
The Graph Of Greatness Great! Malala's father
After Pakistani pupil Malala Yousafzai was shot by the Taliban for going to school, her father Ziauddin says he’s proud to be referred to as “Malala’s dad". If only there were more like him.
Ophelia Lovibond
She’s been acting since 2000, but Ophelia, 28, is finally enjoying the limelight, starring in BBC2’s hit W1A and Sky Atlantic drama Mr Sloane, which airs in May. She’s also got the greenest eyes we’ve ever seen. Fact.
Shopstaurants
Space Ninety 8, an Urban Outfitters concept store, has opened in the States with a bar and restaurant, so you can shop and eat and drink all at once. We’re hoping the trend will catch on.
Brooklyn
You have to know about new movie Brooklyn, currently shooting in Ireland and out next year. It stars Saoirse Ronan and Julie Walters, and is about an immigrant in ’50s NY. It’ll be a hot ticket, trust us.
Amanda Holden
Say hello to our new style crush. From the hot white jumpsuit (no undies needed) she wore to the BGT launch, to her perfectly coiffed barnet and that sun-kissed, super-toned bod, Amanda is one sexy mamma.
Ed Stafford
Ed the explorer holds the Guinness World Record for being the first man to walk the length of the Amazon river, and now the new Bear Grylls is presenting Marooned on the Discovery Channel (May 4, 9pm). You can be our saviour any day, Ed.
#PizzaInTheWild
The most random Instagram hashtag we’ve seen, but don’t let that deter you. Created by photographer Jonpaul Douglass, the series of pics shows pizzas just about everywhere they shouldn’t be – on animals, up mountains, next to lakes. Endless entertainment, although we can’t help but mourn all that wasted pizza.
Not great Ronan Keating
The Boyzone star and ’90s heart-throb is playing the singing voice of, er, Pat in upcoming film Postman Pat: The Movie (out next month), after unsuccessfully auditioning for a role in The Hobbit. Oh, Ronan¿
Lawomir Kostrzewa
He’s the Polish priest who’s claimed that a line of Lego characters could “destroy" children’s souls. Thought plastic kids’ toys were innocent? Apparently not.
Words: Cyan Turan Photography: Rex Features, Wireimage Youtube.com/user/pixi2woo
Document THESUK0020140420ea4k002bd
