{"newspaper":"thescottishsun.co.uk","id:"2294"}
____
Home Scotland
Chaos on lags
413 words
21 May 2014
02:03
thescottishsun.co.uk
THESCOT
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
THE repeated escapes of dangerous prisoners expose chaos at the heart of the Coalition’s jails policy.
One minute these men, despite a history of violence and absconding, are judged safe enough to be put in open prisons or given days out.
The next — surprise, surprise — they’re on the run yet again and the public warned not to go near them.
It doesn’t add up. They’re either too dangerous to go free, or they’re not.
Justice Secretary Chris Grayling has a hardman image. Yet Tory MP Philip Davies’ proposal to ban day release for killers was thrown out only last week... before another murderer did a bunk.
Now Mr Grayling is hastily tightening the rules, almost two years into his job and four since the Coalition took power.
He should have a total rethink over the shambles at HMP Kennet, from which 12 lags have fled in a year.
The Tories were always the party of law and order. What’s gone wrong?
Poor from Ed STRIP away the corny rhetoric he thinks impresses voters, and Ed Miliband’s policy on low pay evaporates.
The minimum wage, he announces, must “rise more than average earnings over the next parliament".
But it HAS done — ever since 2008.
Miliband’s plan to link the two is foolish. It would have meant the minimum wage falling in 2009 along with average pay. Instead it went up.
Let’s be clear. We back a higher minimum wage too. So does the Coalition. Miliband’s not unique there.
But by falsely giving voters the notion that average pay is surging ahead, he is constructing a problem in order to pose as its solution.
Just as he did with his plan to control “soaring" rents, which are in fact edging up at below inflation.
Labour is truly scraping the barrel.
Grave offence HOW dim do you have to be to liken immigration to Britain to an invasion by enemy troops during the world wars?
And how sick to use the graves of our soldiers for political capital?
Ukip’s latest Euro election tactic is an outrage. We can’t believe Nigel Farage gave it the nod... but he’s no longer talking to us.
We’re not sure why.
Dirty Twix YOU have to admire the low cunning of the choccie giants.
The price stays the same. The chocs get a facelift — and shrink.
Well two fingers to that idea.
Document THESCOT020140521ea5l0002z
