{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"953"}
____
Politics
Exploiting our heroes
By TOM NEWTON DUNN, Political Editor   
596 words
20 May 2014
06:40
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE . Ukip using Britain's war dead to drum up anti-foreigner votes
UKIP have been accused of descending to a new low after activists used graves of Britain's war dead to drum up anti-foreigner votes.
One Euro election leaflet obtained by The Sun carries a photograph of a cemetery of the fallen in France.
Above the sombre snap, the headline on it reads: "They fought and died to keep Britain free from foreign invasion.
"Don't let their sacrifice die in vain. VOTE UKIP."
The election literature - similar to imagery used by fascist parties like the BNP - is being spread around parts of Wales.
It carries the anti-EU party's official HQ address.
But Ukip refused to distance themselves from the shocking leaflets.
And party leader Nigel Farage's spokesman refused to return The Sun's calls about them.
But Labour MP and ex-Parachute Regiment officer Dan Jarvis said: "People all over Britain will be appalled by this apparent attempt to exploit shamefully the memory of our war dead to drum up votes.
"We should be honouring our fallen heroes respectfully in this important year of remembrance, not twisting their service for political purposes.
"Any attempt to invoke fears of 'foreign invasion' alongside images of war graves is offensive and irresponsible."
The leaflet emerged during another torrid day for Ukip, with just 48 hours to go until the Euro elections polling day.
A Labour councillor called the police claiming he was assaulted by shamed Ukip MEP Roger Helmer. 
The Ukip MEP - slammed for his views on gay people and rape victims - tried to wrestle a megaphone off a protestor in Retford, Notts, while campaigning for the pivotal Newark by-election on June 5.
The Sun earlier this month revealed Mr Helmer's outrageous views on homosexuality from a 2000 booklet in which he said being gay was "not a valid lifestyle worthy of equal respect".
Black Labour MP David Lammy also slammed Mr Farage as racist in the row over his claim that Brits wouldn't want to live next door to Romanians.
MP for Tottenham Mr Lammy said: "I am from a background where my parents arrived here as immigrants.
"I remember a context in which some people said you don't want these people living next to you.
"That was racist. What Nigel Farage said over the weekend was racist, so I'm clear, he's a racist."
In a bid to defuse the controversy, Ukip took out a full page advert in the Daily Telegraph, at the cost of thousands of pounds, to insist Mr Farage was right to bring up a higher crime rate among Romanians.
But his claim that immigrants from the Eastern European nation are responsible for 92% of ATM crime in London were disputed.
Mr Farage issued another apology for the slur, saying: "If I gave the impression in that interview that I was discriminating against Romanians, then I apologise certainly for that".
Premier David Cameron also labelled Mr Farage's comments on Romanians as "pretty unpleasant".
The PM said: "I think he has said in recent days some really pretty unpleasant things and he even himself has had to admit that he got it wrong.
"What I've heard from some of the candidates, some of the donors to the party, is a succession of pretty appalling things.
"What we need in Britain is not the politics of anger, we need the politics of the answer."
t.newtondunn@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140520ea5k001b9
