{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1864"}
____
Politics
Blue-collar Brits do lose work when immigrants flood into the country; BLUE-COLLAR Brits DO lose work when immigrants flood into the country, a devastating official report has revealed.
By STEVE HAWKES, Deputy Political Editor   
372 words
6 March 2014
18:06
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Furious Tory MPs called on the BBC to apologise as a document it claimed was being “suppressed" - and would contradict Government claims - was released in full.
The report into the impact of migration on British workers said there WAS evidence of “labour market displacement" when the economy is struggling.
And it said lower-skilled Brit workers were the most likely to lose out when times are hard as businesses opt for cheaper migrants.
Home Office officials jumped on the findings and said they completely backed Home Secretary Theresa May.
The report compiled by civil servants admitted there was little to suggest Brits lose out from immigration when the economy is strong.
But the Home Office said that too echoed the Home Secretary’s previous comments.
On Tuesday, the BBC’s flagship Newsnight programme claimed the report would show the effect of immigration on unemployment was “actually very, very small".
Tory backbencher Michael Ellis demanded the broadcaster “apologise".
He told the Sun: “In my view Newsnight and the BBC should be embarrassed and should apologise.
“Not for the first time they have put their own political agenda ahead of the facts. It’s clear now that what they were reporting on air was in fact wrong and that the Government was right."
Theresa May has continually referred to a report by the Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) in 2012 when detailing the need to cut immigration.
This claimed that for every extra 100 non-EU migrants that come in, 23 fewer “native" people are employed.
Tory MP Nadhim Zahawi said: “The report that the Home Secretary was quoting on has not in any way been contradicted."
Yesterday, Newsnight’s Chris Cook said it had. But he admitted research into the issue had been “very narrowly drawn". “It does not seek to cover all of the economic impacts, let alone the cultural or social effects of large movements of people."
He added: “This kind of research is also difficult to interpret."
steve.hawkes@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140306ea36005mv
