{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"2602"}
____
Politics
Tories warn PM EU immigration reform demands fall short; DAVID Cameron has been warned by his own MPs that his key demands over Europe fall well short on the key area of immigration.
By EMILY ASHTON, Whitehall Correspondent   
539 words
18 March 2014
05:45
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The PM has set out his agenda for renegotiating Britain's membership of the EU - but crucially they do NOT include controls over the flow of migrants from current member states.
That is despite a landmark poll for The Sun revealing immigration is the most important issue to Brits when it comes to reforming our links with Brussels.
Mr Cameron is now under growing pressure from his own backbenchers to go further as anti-EU party UKIP taps into voters' frustration.
In his seven-point plan for reforming Europe, the PM said there must be controls to prevent "vast migrations" when new countries join the EU.
And he demanded tighter rules to make sure migrants come here to work not cash in on benefits.
His strategy was backed yesterday by European Mainstream, a group of 62 Tory MPs who want Britain to stay in the EU.
But others warned that Mr Cameron needed to do far more on immigration to win over fed-up Brits.
Tory MP Mark Pritchard said: "Unless and until qualified limits are put on migrants from existing EU countries the impact of capping future EU migrants flows will make little difference.
"Tougher benefits tests are welcome but need to go further."
Fellow Tory MP Nigel Mills said many people were worried about the impact of immigration on their jobs, wages and housing.
He said: "It doesn't tackle the fundamental problem of how many people we can allow to keep coming here especially at a time when we've got close to one million young people unemployed.
"We can't just import cheap labour from elsewhere. We need the ability to control our borders and limit immigration from the EU. That is people's key demand on the EU.
"Net migration is now increasing and that's due to EU migration.
"It is not in our national interest now to have unrestricted migration from 27 member states.
"I don't think it's anywhere near enough to say when the next country joins we'll sort it out then."
Mr Cameron has promised to renegotiate Britain's links with Brussels ahead of an in-out referendum in 2017.
Senior minister Ken Clarke, a staunch Europhile, insisted most Tories were pro-European - and branded some of his Eurosceptic colleagues "eccentric".
He said: "It's certainly true that in the ministerial ranks of the Conservative Party, the pro-European segments I think are in the majority.
"The price of orthodoxy is being less newsworthy than some of my more strident, and dare I say, more occasionally eccentric colleagues."
Policing Minister Damian Green urged pro-EU Tories to speak out - warning that otherwise Brits could vote to leave the EU.
He said: "It is easy for those of us who are broadly speaking pro-European inside the Conservative Party to decide it's always easy to keep our head down and keep quiet, this is exactly not the time to do that."
e.ashton@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140318ea3i001xi
