{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"3755"}
____
Politics
Boris lashes out at PM for 'not doing anything' about flood of EU immigrants
By EMILY ASHTON, Whitehall Correspondent   
610 words
28 April 2014
21:06
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
BORIS Johnson has let rip at David Cameron for "not doing anything" about the flood of immigrants from the EU - and warned voters feel "deceived".
The London Mayor - long tipped as a future Tory leader - called for an end to "completely untrammelled" migration from Europe.
His blast comes after The Sun issued a "red line" demand to Prime Minister Cameron to win back powers from Brussels to halt the tidal wave.
Boris said Britain urgently needed to change the rules on the "freedom of movement" of people across the EU.
It follows the PM's pledge to loosen the UK’s links with the EU ahead of a planned In-Out referendum in 2017.
Tory backbench MPs fear that anti-EU party Ukip is winning the argument among fed-up Brits ahead of next month’s Euro elections.
Boris told Total Politics magazine: "One of the reasons why people are so angry about immigration, it's not so much the numbers or the impact - though they are angry about that - it's about the continual deceit that we can somehow solve this problem whilst remaining members of the EU with free movement.
"They can see there's a massive incoherence in the argument and they think 'Well, what are we doing about that?'
"And the answer is well 'We are not doing anything about it at the moment'."
The former Tory MP for Henley said people in new EU states should have to wait "much longer" before they can move to Britain.
And he said migrants should be forced to find work before arriving so they do not take advantage of the UK benefits system.
Boris fumed: “There's no reason, in my view, why we need to have completely untrammelled movement from the EU."
While insisting he was still "pro-immigration", he said the Government was wrongly turning away talented non-Europeans.
The London mayor also repeated his controversial call for a one-off amnesty for illegal immigrants who arrived a decade ago - arguing it would mean up to 750,000 more people paying tax.
Speculation in Westminster is mounting that Boris will stand in next year’s General Election - paving the way for him to succeed Mr Cameron as Tory leader.
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of Migration Watch UK, branded the amnesty call "bonkers".
He said: "It's very welcome that Boris has recognised the need to tackle immigration from the EU even if we have to tackle some aspect of freedom of movement.
"But he's wrong to think that it's not a question of numbers. After four million immigrants in the Labour years, the public has had more than enough."
Tory MP Mark Pritchard tweeted: "Ukip attracting support on EU migration/immigration issues more than issue of leaving the EU. Free movement of peoples needs a look."
Home Secretary Theresa May has previously suggested a cap on the number of EU migrants coming to Britain.
But this was branded “illegal and undeliverable" by Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg.
We revealed in a landmark poll last year that immigration is seen as the crucial issue when it comes to renegotiating our powers.
Some 42 per cent of Brits believed slamming the door on EU migrants was of “utmost importance".
Another 20 per cent said it should be a “major aim".
Ten per cent more agreed we should renegotiate to limit numbers. That totalled 72 per cent.
They were the standout figures in our YouGov survey of 2,662 adults.
emily.ashton@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140428ea4s004jy
