{"newspaper":"thesun.co.uk","id:"1713"}
____
Politics
Slime Minister
By STEVE HAWKES, Deputy Political Editor   
434 words
18 April 2014
00:40
thesun.co.uk
THESUK
English
© 2014 News Group Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
EXCLUSIVE . PM stung by jellyfish on hols
SUN-SEEKING David Cameron has been attacked by foreign invaders on his hols in Lanzarote.
The PM - taking time out from rows about the future of Europe - was stung by a JELLYFISH as he took a dip in the sea.
He noticed the nasty scratch on his arm as he stepped back on to the beach in the coastal village of Arrieta, to the north of the Canary Island.
Locals claimed other tourists were zapped in the latest jellyfish invasion to affect the tourist hotspot.
Just weeks ago, officials in Tenerife were forced to close a beach because of a swarm of Portuguese Man of War.
The Lanzarote Government has previously launched an investigation into why so many have been turning up in their waters.
The PM was stung on Wednesday during a visit to Playa de La Garita in the idyllic coastal village of Arrieta.
A source said: “It was a pretty minor thing which didn’t require treatment.
“He came out of the water and seemed to be pointing out something on his arm to his protection team."
The worst stings can cause nausea, vomiting or even kill. Most simply leave an itch. Victims are advised not to scratch or rub the wound, but simply use disinfectant.
Experts claim it’s a complete myth that urine helps to ease the pain.
Downing Street refused to comment on the incident, as the PM prepared to fly back with his wife Sam for a trip to the in-laws over the Easter weekend.
Sources in Westminster joked it’s just the latest problem David Cameron has been having with foreigners - after months of rows over the EU and immigration.
The PM and his advisors want to renegotiate the rules around the freedom of movement for EU nationals.
Lanzarote officials were forced to close several beaches two years ago after noticing their waters were becoming infested with the spineless creatures.
As many as 170 different species of jellyfish are found around the Canary Islands - with the Portuguese Man of War becoming far more common.
Locals claimed the island has been PLAGUED by the creatures.
They blame global warming and underwater seismic activity off the volanic island of El Hierro.
The island’s Department of Fisheries said rising sea temperatures could be to blame - as well as lower rainfall in recent years.
The most common jellyfish in the waters around the islands are the Portuguse Man of War, La Aguaviva and El Velero.
steve.hawkes@the-sun.co.uk
Document THESUK0020140417ea4h005bp
