{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1477"}
____
  
Columnists
Labour and Lib Dems are natural allies again; They agree on most future policy, unlike the coalition partners who agree on almost nothing
George Eaton   
829 words
14 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
There is still no politician Labour enjoys beating up more than Nick Clegg. When Harriet Harman declared at Prime Minister’s Questions this week, “He may love Britain, but Britain doesn’t love him back," her party’s backbenchers roared with delight. For them, while David Cameron is an enemy, Mr Clegg is a traitor. The leader of a party that consistently positioned itself to the left of new Labour is despised for enabling Andrew Lansley’s NHS reforms and the abolition of the 50p income tax rate.
In Labour circles they distinguish between those who want to “crush" the Liberal Democrats and those who want to “accommodate" them. Ed Balls’s recent interview with the New Statesman, in which he said that he “understood" Mr Clegg’s decision to enter coalition with the Conservatives and support “a credible deficit reduction plan", was viewed as paving the way for a rapprochement; but as the unending assault on the Deputy Prime Minister shows, it is the “crushers" who have won. The 25 per cent of 2010 Liberal Democrat voters who have defected to the Opposition are too electorally valuable for Labour to go soft on Mr Clegg and hand them “permission" to return.
But the tribal rhetoric masks an unspoken truth in Westminster: there is now remarkably little that the parties disagree on. In the pre-2010 era, there were important differences between the two on foreign policy, civil liberties, taxation and banking. But Ed Miliband’s repudiation of new Labour means these divisions have been consigned to history. He has condemned the Iraq war, Tony Blair’s disregard for civil liberties and Gordon Brown’s “light-touch" regulation of the City of London.
Added to this is the impressive degree of overlap on future policy. Mr Miliband’s support for an in/out referendum if further powers are transferred to Brussels is just the latest area in which the reds and the yellows have converged. Both favour a mansion tax on properties worth more than £2 million, a voting age of 16, an end to the use of unqualified teachers in state schools, greater oversight of the intelligence services, scrapping winter fuel payments for wealthy pensioners, reform of party funding and the maintenance of the Human Rights Act. I could go on but you get the idea.
While Labour and the Lib Dems have moved closer, the Lib Dems and the Conservatives have moved ever further apart. With 14 months of the current parliament still to run, the coalition appears exhausted and unable to agree on a substantial programme for the looming Queen’s Speech. One Tory backbencher recently lamented to me that it had become a “zombie government", forced to increase the number of days allocated to Opposition motions for want of legislation.
The common ground that was celebrated in 2010, inspiring heady talk of a permanent electoral alliance, has given way to intractable differences over immigration, Europe, taxation and education. Even those once considered allies, such as Mr Clegg and Michael Gove, now spend most of their time attacking each other. If there were to be a second coalition between the Tories and the Lib Dems, it is far from clear what it would actually do.
Conversely, there is already a rich Lab-Lib programme for government. Additionally, if the Lib Dems could choose to form a government with either the blues or the reds in the event of another hung Parliament, one Shadow Cabinet minister told me that he thought the deal could be won by offering early reform of the House of Lords and proportional representation for local government. The Tories could not match such an offer from Labour.
It would be wrong to suggest that there are no differences between the parties. The Lib Dems’ priority is an increase in the personal allowance to £12,500, but Labour would rather reintroduce the 10p tax rate. Mr Miliband is committed to freezing energy prices, but Lib Dems regard the pledge as unviable. Most importantly, Mr Clegg, Danny Alexander and David Laws (both named in the party’s 2015 coalition negotiation team) support a faster pace of deficit reduction. But it is not hard to imagine these differences being resolved once the ministerial red boxes are within reach. By contrast, many of the Tory-Lib Dem divisions are simply too great to be overcome in the sleep-deprived days following a general election.
In their most candid moments, Lib Dems have been heard to remark to their Labour counterparts: “The problem is we’d have nothing to disagree on." Mr Clegg’s party fears becoming indistinguishable from its bigger brother, but for the Tories and the Liberal Democrats the problem is now finding anything to agree on at all.
George Eaton edits The Staggers, the New Statesman’s politics blog
Document TIMEUK0020140314ea3e000u5
