{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2177"}
____
  
Politics
Camerons reveal how their nanny became British citizen
Francis Elliott, Political Editor   
651 words
8 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Samantha Cameron was named on an application for British citizenship made by the family’s Nepalese nanny that succeeded just a few months after the last election, No 10 said last night.
Downing Street released the information as it struggled to contain the fallout caused by a Home Office minister’s claim that the “wealthy, metropolitan elite" were fuelling migration.
James Brokenshire’s accusation has thrown the spotlight on coalition ministers, such as David Cameron and Nick Clegg, who employ foreign staff. In its efforts to fight off accusations of double standards No 10 revealed that the Camerons’ nanny was now a British citizen.
That led to questions over how Gita Lima had secured a British passport and to calls from Labour for “complete transparency and openness".
“There should not be any delay in providing this information so that people can be assured that he has acted appropriately," Phil Wilson, Labour MP for Sedgefield, said.
After initially refusing to answer queries over Ms Lima’s application and what steps the Prime Minister took to ensure he did not exert undue influence over immigration authorities, Downing Street released a statement.
“Mr and Mrs Cameron’s nanny became a British citizen in late 2010. Mr and Mrs Cameron did not write a letter supporting their nanny’s application for British citizenship. The normal application process was followed throughout. As is usual, Mrs Cameron was named on her application as her employer," it said.
Ms Lima was hired by the Camerons in the latter half of the last decade through a charity that helps immigrants escape abusive bosses. Kalayaan is based in Holland Park, close the family’s former home in Notting Hill.
The charity has been highly critical of a 2012 change in the visa rules that limits foreign domestic staff to working for a named employer and sets a six-month deadline on their residency. Ms Lima took a leave of absence in 2012 but has since returned to work to help the Camerons look after their three children.
The focus on the nanny, which comes at the end of a week of coalition rows over immigration, has infuriated senior Conservatives. Mr Brokenshire had been intending to draw a line between the Tory and Liberal Democrat positions on migration when he blamed middle-class employers.
“For too long, the benefits of immigration went to employers who wanted an easy supply of cheap labour, or to the wealthy metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and services, but not to the ordinary, hard-working people of this country," he said in a speech to the Demos think-tank on Thursday.
Asked whether Mr Cameron and his wife had chosen their nanny on the basis of cost, a spokeswoman said: “I think they were guided by someone who would look after their children in the way they wanted to."
Mr Clegg said yesterday that he employs a Belgian as domestic help.
Mr Brokenshire’s speech came after a Government analysis concluded there was “relatively little evidence" that migrant workers had replaced Britons in jobs during the boom years.
The Tories have set a goal of reducing net migration to tens of thousands by the end of the Parliament, a target that looks set to be missed after the most recent figures surged year-on-year by more than a third to 212,000 in the 12 months to September 2013.
Ministers have repeatedly cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee published in 2012 and covering the period from 1995 to 2010 that found 23 British workers were left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals from outside the EU. The new analysis, however, stated that “when data from part of the period of economic downturn (2009 and 2010) were omitted, the impact of non-EU migration was not found to be statistically significant".
Document TIMEUK0020140308ea38000jd
