{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"375"}
____
  
UK News
The Times Diary (TMS): Bitchy remarks to the Queen and Italian politician waggles a dead fish
Patrick Kidd   
568 words
1 May 2014
13:16
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
With friends like these
Every day a government whip has to write a report for the Queen on happenings in Parliament. These are usually rather dry, but when Janet Anderson got the job in 1997 she decided to have fun. A Radio 4 documentary, called With Humble Duty Reports, tomorrow reveals some of Anderson’s amusingly bitchy remarks to HM.
Who, for example, did she call “a tiresome little man who bores us with his attempts to show he’s cleverer than everyone else”? Easy. John Bercow.
She also wrote that Vince Cable was “not very clever . . . cabled not wired”, that Diane Abbott “sank to the occasion” and that Martin Bell was a “pathetic joke figure”. Let the last laugh be on the current Speaker, though. Anderson noted that as Bercow plodded through a statistics-heavy speech, Stephen Pound, a Labour MP, sighed: “I’d rather have a sex life.”
Fishy business
Our MPs used to put on a top hat to make a point of order. In Italy, they waggle a dead fish. Well, one does. Gianluca Buonanno, of the Northern League, brought a sea bass into a debate to make a point about immigration (“bloody foreign fish coming over here, stealing our sardines’ jobs . . . ”) but, unlike the bass, he has not been let off the hook. Buonanno started a 12-day suspension yesterday. On yer pike, the Speaker no doubt said. That’ll teach you to carp.
It’s always the little things that get you. Al Capone was jailed for tax evasion rather than for ordering the St Valentine’s Day bloodbath. Yesterday at Wolverhampton Crown Court, after 800 years on the run, a Mr Genghis Khan pleaded guilty to fraud. We wait to see whether his lawyer asks for several cases of massacre to be taken into account.
Poisoned chalice
Patrick Mercer, who resigned as the MP for Newark after being caught in a lobbying sting, was appointed Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds yesterday, one of two sinecure posts for which an MP can leave the Commons.
While the other post, the Manor of Northstead, is for now held by David Miliband and other recent stewards left to become Mayor of London, an EU commissioner or sit in regional assemblies, six of the past eight Chilterns stewards have gone after a scandal. Unlike his two most recent predecessors, Denis MacShane and Chris Huhne, Mercer has at least avoided jail.
An entry for our Apt Names contest arrives from Canada. A 62-year-old man from Ottawa was charged this week after being caught allegedly exposing his genitals in Mooney’s Bay Park. It gets better: the accused is named as Donald Popadick.
American hustler
A month after his CNN chat show was cancelled, Piers Morgan has fled to California, grown a beard and is seeking work. At least one person, though, would like him back on television. Ricky Gervais tells Q magazine that he needs Morgan: “Before him, I was the most hated man in America.” Gervais still gets abuse for being rude about Americans. Someone sent him a tweet asking why he hasn’t spent some of his millions on getting his English teeth straightened. Gervais replied: “When you’re this rich, you get your butler to chew your food.”
Document TIMEUK0020140430ea51003v3
