{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"880"}
____
  
Education
Mandatory history to teach teenagers 1066 and all that
Greg Hurst, Education Editor   
529 words
5 May 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
History is to become a compulsory subject up to the age of 18 at a leading independent school, to broaden pupils’ cultural knowledge and address the “disgrace” of children dropping the subject at 14.
Brighton College claims to be the first school in Britain to make the subject mandatory for all sixth formers. They will spend an hour a week studying the history in addition to their chosen A levels, though they will not sit an exam in the subject.
In the first year of the sixth form, lessons will span Roman Britain to the 19th century, covering the Anglo-Saxons, Vikings, Normans, England’s relations with Europe during the Middle Ages and key events such as Magna Carta, the Battle of Agincourt and the Spanish Armada. In the upper sixth, lessons will cover international history and how it has shaped foreign policy, looking at the US, China and Russia.
Leading academics have campaigned for history to be a mandatory subject to 16. This was among the principal arguments made by Sir David Cannadine in a book published in 2011.
Michael Gove, the education secretary, resisted such calls in his review of the national curriculum, maintaining the current position whereby history must be taught until 14.
Instead he introduced incentives for schools to enter teenagers for GCSEs in either history or geography by changing school performance measures, which have boosted uptakes in both.
Richard Cairns, headmaster at Brighton College, said: “History is not compulsory beyond the age of 14 in Britain. It is a disgrace that we are the only country in the European Union where this is the case.
“This also means that most history is studied in primary schools, usually in bite-size chunks with no obvious connections between topics. Children are introduced to the Egyptians, the Tudors and Victorian women. It is as if they are on a journey through the history and periodically they are blindfolded. They leave the world of ancient Rome to find themselves chained to the railings outside Buckingham Palace with Emily Pankhurst.”
Pupils at Brighton College will still be able to drop history at 14 when they choose GCSE options. Around 65 per cent of its pupils take the subject at GCSE.
Mr Cairns added: “Education should also be about providing young people with a cultural hinterland. They should be able to recognise Roman influences on our language and architecture, they should be able to distinguish different forms of architecture, understand the impact of immigration on England over centuries not decades, and explain why Britain is so often both insular and global in outlook.”
England’s system of allowing teenagers to choose three or four subjects at A level is often criticised as one of the narrowest post-16 curriculums in the world. Many countries require children to study maths, their own language, history or a foreign language, or give teenagers a wider choice.
Under Mr Gove’s A-level reforms, many schools may drop AS levels and enter sixth formers for only three full A levels although a new post-16 maths qualification is being introduced.
Document TIMEUK0020140504ea55001zj
