{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1714"}
____
  
First World War
Shock and awe: The posters that sold the First World War
Nigel Steel   
1,336 words
17 April 2014
19:15
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Leaders needed a vehicle for mass communication to stir the heart and stimulate the mind — and posters were everywhere
Despite the enmity and hatred generated by the First World War, the warring nations all experienced a great deal in common. People suffered intense loss, homes were destroyed by bombing and fighting and food ran short. But despite these terrible things, most of those that took part remained committed to the war until the very end. The civilians back home continued to believe in the justice of their cause as strongly as the men at the front.
One of the reasons for this was their careful manipulation by governments that needed everyone to believe that their struggle was right and their sacrifices were equally shared. To do this civilian and military leaders had to find a vehicle for mass communication, something that both stirred the hearts and stimulated the minds of their nations. Not yet equipped with radio or cinema, let alone television, the medium they used with remarkable skill was the poster.
Across the years 1914 to 1918, no other form of popular appeal had such a profound effect on the lives of ordinary people as the poster. Posters were everywhere: in railway stations, in city centres, on buses and on walls, subliminally influencing people as they walked casually down the street. Each nation had its own distinct styles and designs. But their purpose was all the same: to bind people together and to uphold their consent in the war.
Since its foundation in 1917 the Imperial War Museum has collected thousands of First World War posters. Now we have brought a selection of these together as a book, some of which you can see here. It is not a comprehensive account of how posters developed or steered global populations at times of crisis, but gives a feel for the dynamism and energy of this popular medium at possibly the zenith of its influence.
These posters provide a sharp and vibrant reflection of the underlying beliefs and values of a devastating global event and remain arresting and appealing to this day. The artists and printers who created them established enduring works of popular art that still convey the strength and determination to prevail of every country. They remind us of the real tragedy of the First World War: that the people of so many nations across Europe and the rest of the world believed their own cause to be right and the war to be just.
Nigel Steel is principal historian of the Imperial War Museum’s First World War Centenary Programme. A longer version of this introduction appears in Posters of the First World War (IWM, £9.99), published May 10
1914-18: Poster boys for the war to end all wars
Richard Slocombe
1. James Montgomery Flagg
I Want You for US Army, 1917 (US)
Most likely this poster is derived from the Alfred Leete version for the British Army. He was interested in and inspired by the Kitchener image but Flagg dressed up as Uncle Sam himself — that is actually an image of the artist. This image was so successful it was used again in the Second World War and is still used today — it hangs outside all US Army recruitment offices. It was also subverted during the Vietnam war — one called I Want Out showed a wounded Uncle Sam. It became a real counter-culture image in the Sixties, part of how the First World War was perceived then, on its 50th anniversary.
2. Fred Spear
ENLIST, 1915 (US)
This is a good example of what is typical about American posters. They’re very emotive, they don’t hold back. You wouldn’t see an image like this in a British poster at the time. Advertising was frowned upon here in a way it wasn’t in the States. This uses the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915 — 128 Americans died on the ship, out of a total loss of 1,1,98, when it was torpedoed by a German U Boat — and was fundamental in shifting US allegiance towards the allied cause. At the beginning of the war it looked as if they might back Germany — America had a big German immigrant population and wasn’t naturally aligned to Britain and France. This was the tipping point.
3. Julius Gipkens
Delka: German Air-War Trophies, 1917 (Germany)
This really sums up the German attitude to war, and to airborne war in particular. What you see here is actually an advert for a show of captured British aircraft being held in a zoo. It was quite apt — the planes are presented as trophies, like caged animals. What it really shows is a sense of inherent superiority in the German pilots. This is why they are presented as grand eagles standing on the British air force roundel, as if they are great natural hunters. It’s an incredibly nationalistic, Wagnerian image.
4. Unknown
Newcao: Nutritious Breakfast par Excellence, 1917 (France)
This is an example of how the war was used to sell products. It presents the French prime minister Georges Clemenceau, who took office in 1917, when France was in the doldrums: its army had mutinied, its defences had failed and so there was a lot of defeatism in France at that time. When Clemenceau came in he was nicknamed “the tiger” because of his bellicose approach that really got France back in the war. Here he’s being used to sell a breakfast that rejuvenates you and gives you the vigour of “the tiger” Clemenceau.
5. Norman Alfred William Lindsay
The Question Mark, 1918 (Australia)
This was the war that defined Australia. Though loyal to the British cause, they committed to the war on their own terms: fighting for freedom, not just to support Britain. Not introducing conscription but relying on volunteers was fundamental to this assertion of self-determinism. This poster was one of five released sequentially in top secret and posted during the night. This was the first one, depicting Germany as a force of barbarism with blood on its hands. The question mark asks: will you settle for this?
6. Alfred Leete
Britons: Join Your Country’s Army! (Great Britain)
This image was originally a magazine cover for the London Opinion and it was that image that bore the immortal legend Your Country Needs You. The poster that we see doesn’t actually say that and was also never actually an official poster. The consensus is that it was probably never seen outside London but the myth of its widespread reach has been exaggerated by the popularity of the US Army version.
7. Howard Chandler Christy
If You Want to Fight! Join the Marines, 1918 (US)
Christy was a prominent magazine illustrator and his “Christy girls” were already very popular. She was an invented female archetype — the girl next door type — already embedded in the American consciousness. Here she is being recruited for war purposes and there is a coy sexuality about having her dress up in men’s uniform. It’s a titillating image as well as a subliminal taunt: if a girl could fight she would, why won’t you?
8. Frank Brangwyn
Put Strength in the Final Blow. Buy War Bonds , 1918 (Great Britain)
A very graphic image showing the act of killing: this is a rare example of British posters not being restrained. The Kaiser was so outraged he sentenced Brangwyn to death in absentia. It is most likely that this poster was used in the London Underground. Frank Pick, the head of London Underground at the time, had banned all official recruitment posters but commissioned his own instead, many by Brangwyn. This poster would probably have been landscape and huge in size, like the posters that cover the tube today.
Richard Slocombe, the senior curator of art at the Imperial War Museum, was talking to Marie-Claire Chappet
Document TIMEUK0020140415ea4g003v2
