{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1195"}
____
  
Columnists
British Euroscepticism is becoming contagious
Peter Kellner   
1,089 words
22 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron’s support for less integration may not be shared by EU politicians - but it is by Europe’s voters
In his quest to reform the European Union, David Cameron has more allies than he probably realises. We all know that he will struggle to persuade other EU politicians to hand powers back to national parliaments. However, a four-country study by YouGov finds that most people in France, Germany and Sweden are on his side. And the main reason for this is that across the Continent few people think the EU has helped them to survive the storms that have lashed the world economy in recent years.
As so often happens in politics, the Prime Minister’s good news comes with an awkward qualification. It carries with it a sharp dilemma about how to pitch his strategy on the EU to Britain’s sceptical voters. Should he wrap himself in the Union Flag and sing the national anthem, or present himself as a good, if hard-headed, European and hum Beethoven’s Ode to Joy?
Our results, to be presented to the German Marshall Fund’s annual conference in Brussels this weekend, demonstrate both his opportunity and his dilemma. It finds that Britain’s voters are far from alone in opposing further integration. Only 5 per cent of Britons favour “a more integrated European Union, with more decisions being taken by the EU”. The striking thing is that figures in the other three countries are also very low: France 15 per cent, Germany 12 per cent, Sweden 5 per cent. Some politicians and other enthusiasts across the Continent may still believe in the goal of “ever closer union”, in the words of successive EU treaties, but most voters in all four countries reject it.
The status quo — the second of four options we offered — is more popular, but still only a minority passion, supported by numbers ranging from 17 per cent in France to 28 per cent in Germany. If we add together those favouring either of the first two options, we arrive at a figure for the broadly “pro-European” portion of each electorate. In every case, it falls well short of a majority, with Germans (40 per cent) the keenest, followed by France (32 per cent), Sweden (26 per cent) and Britain — last, but not by much — on 24 per cent.
Which brings us to the finding that should terrify pro-Europeans across the continent. In all four countries, the EU’s critics outnumber its fans. The most popular option in each country is what Mr Cameron wants: “a less integrated European Union, with a number of powers being returned to member states”. Fewer people in each country want to leave the EU altogether. As it happens, France (26 per cent), not Britain (24 per cent), tops the list, followed by Sweden (20 per cent) and Germany (14 per cent).
If we add together the figures for quitting the EU and reducing its powers, we arrive at the totals for critics of Brussels. They are stark: Sweden 67 per cent, Britain 64 per cent, France 55 per cent, Germany 48 per cent. European integration used to be an article of almost universal faith across the Channel. Huge numbers of voters have now lost that faith, even as many of their leaders still cling to the religion with which they grew up.
Can Mr Cameron exploit this evidence of popular discontent? He will need to be careful. If he is still Prime Minister after next year’s general election, he will take his list of demands to Brussels, Paris, Berlin and other capitals. He is bound to meet strong resistance, either because a number of leaders don’t want a looser EU in principle, or because they can’t appear to give in to the threat of British withdrawal. Faced with these responses, Mr Cameron may not help his cause by telling other leaders that they are out of touch with their own voters.
Perhaps his best option is to argue not in terms of what is right for Britain, but what is right for Europe. At a stroke he would place himself not as someone hovering by the exit door, but as a fresh-thinking leader who articulates the views of tens of millions of people throughout the EU. Which brings us to his dilemma. To seek to lead a public EU-wide debate would be to take a risk with large sections of his own party who view Europe solely through the prism of fighting for Britain’s national interest. Cameron would need to make explicit the case for linking our fortunes to those of the rest of the Continent rather than arguing that Britain’s best option is to be semi-detached.
If he opts for the Europe-wide approach, he might be surprised by the range of arguments that strike a chord across the Channel. Take immigration. Our survey finds that the British are not alone in thinking that the level of immigration over recent years has done more harm than good. Even so, Cameron would be wise to steer clear of any attempt to stop EU citizens from coming to work in Britain, for French and German voters support the principle of free movement — and Swedes love it. But he could win friends by leading a grown-up debate about the social and economic impact of immigration throughout the Continent.
This leads to a more fundamental point. Immigration may be the issue that worries many voters across Europe, and has propelled parties such as Ukip to prominence in many countries. But at the heart of public disenchantment with the EU is the economic turmoil that every society has faced over the past six years. The strongest critics of the EU are people who fear falling living standards.
When times were good, jobs plentiful and living standards rising, the EU tended to be viewed as a force for peace, democracy and prosperity. Today, tens of millions of people see it as a burden. As it stands, the EU is a project for optimists — and our surveys find little sign of optimism returning any time soon. The real prize for the EU is to persuade its citizens that it can also be a project for tough times. In the final analysis, Cameron’s choice is whether to help frame that wider debate, or simply demand more powers for Westminster.
Peter Kellner is president of YouGov
Document TIMEUK0020140322ea3m0007d
