{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2529"}
____
  
Politics
Minister attacks Cable over immigration in coalition rift
Michael Savage and Richard Ford   
675 words
6 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Vince Cable comes under attack today from a Tory minister for regarding a steep rise in migration as a “good thing", amid an increasingly bitter coalition battle.
Deep divisions over the issue will be laid bare as the Liberal Democrat Business Secretary and the new Tory Immigration Minister, James Brokenshire, set out radically different visions over how Britain should deal with immigrants. Mr Brokenshire will issue the extraordinary rebuke to Dr Cable in his first speech in his role. He will warn that only a wealthy London metropolitan elite has benefited from cheap immigration labour.
His warning comes on the same day that Dr Cable turns on Tory critics who attempt to shout down any positive view of immigration. He will use an address at Mansion House in the City to argue that any minister wanting to celebrate the contribution made by immigrant workers needed a “reinforced tin hat".
“I am intensely relaxed about people coming to work and study here and bringing necessary skills to Britain — provided that they pay their taxes and pay their way," he will say.
It comes as a Whitehall battle raged over a politically sensitive report on migration, which warns that previous claims that immigrants took jobs from British workers were not statistically sound. The study, which sources confirmed Downing Street had been sitting on, is hugely inconvenient for the Tory leadership.
The report is now expected to be rushed out by No 10 later this week. It will dismiss claims made by Theresa May, the Home Secretary, that “for every additional 100 immigrants . . . 23 British workers would not be employed".
Her statement was based on a 2012 finding by the Migration Advisory Committee. One source said the Home Secretary had been warned not to use the figure at the time.
The Civil Service study will not offer an updated assessment of how many British jobs are lost as a result of immigration. It says there is little evidence that migrants crowd out British workers, but it concedes that immigration has some localised and temporary impact on the employment of British workers during recessions.
It also confirms that mass migration during recessions can stop wages of the low-paid from rising, but regards the effect as localised and temporary.
Downing Street denied sitting on the report yesterday, saying that it had not yet been completed. Those claims were contradicted by several other Whitehall sources, who said it was finished weeks ago and had been awaiting a publication date from No 10.
The public row over immigration is one of the clearest signs to date that the Lib Dems and the Tories are attempting to appeal to their traditional supporters before the European elections in May.
Mr Brokenshire says today that net migration from the EU in the past year has doubled and is “frankly, just too high". “Some have tried to claim that this rapid increase is somehow ‘good’ for the country. Well, just like the Home Secretary, I disagree. Uncontrolled mass immigration can force wages down and house prices up and put pressure on social cohesion and public services. And let me be clear —it can cause displacement in the labour market."
Net migration rose by 30 per cent to 212,000 in the year to last September.
In his speech, Dr Cable says: “Bear down on immigrants, and you lose some of the most dynamic, innovative and imaginative workers in your economy. The costs are huge."
· Sadiq Khan, the Shadow Justice Secretary and a frontrunner to be Labour’s candidate for Mayor of London, has cast doubt on David Cameron’s attempt to broaden the Tories’ appeal, by claiming that British Asians found it laughable. Writing in the New Statesman, Mr Khan said: “As someone who grew up as an Asian boy in Thatcher’s Britain, I find the Tories’ campaign to woo black and ethnic minority voters hard to believe. Others of my age and background may find it almost funny, too."
Document TIMEUK0020140306ea36000pk
