{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"516"}
____
  
Politics
Davis the kingmaker plots next leadership challenge
Francis Elliott, Political Editor   
556 words
9 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Davis is exploiting Tory MPs’ anger over the return of the expenses scandal as he seeks to position himself as a kingmaker in a leadership election to replace David Cameron.
Backbench Conservatives say Mr Davis, who was defeated by Mr Cameron in the 2005 leadership race, is making clear his support for a move to a daily allowance system to spare MPs from having to file expense claims.
The switch to “per-diem” payments is popular among many MPs who complain that the current system, introduced after the expenses scandal in 2008, is cumbersome and intrusive.
The former Shadow Home Secretary has made a series of interventions in recent weeks, including a call for Mr Cameron to start preparing to negotiate a British exit from the EU.
His statement in a Sunday newspaper that Britain had nothing to fear outside the EU, together with recent remarks on immigration and marriage tax allowances, has prompted claims that he is positioning himself to exploit Conservative jitters should Ukip triumph in next month’s European Parliament elections. Mr Davis’s allies deny that he is canvassing Tory MPs before another leadership bid. They admit, however, that he is seeking to rally support for a candidate who would unite the party’s right wing should the Conservatives be defeated at the polls next year.
“This is about a new idealism, an attractive set of Conservative policies that will take back political space from Ukip,” said one figure close to the former Tory chairman.
Downing Street will note, however, that Mr Davis’s burst of activity comes prior to a period of vulnerability for the Prime Minister. With the Conservatives expected to be beaten into third place behind Nigel Farage’s Ukip and Labour next month, Mr Cameron is already braced for rebellion — with Europe being his most exposed flank.
“David Davis has a singular sense of when the leadership is in trouble,” said one Cameron loyalist. “He may find that he doesn’t have the support he thinks he has, especially among Tories elected in 2010 who regard him as a figure from the past.”
Past feuds with other senior Conservatives on the Tory Right, such as Liam Fox, and those on the socially conservative wing meant it was more likely that Mr Davis was seeking to be a kingmaker than a candidate, agreed one ministerial source.
Nevertheless, the return of the expenses row has also complicated calculations of those, including George Osborne and Boris Johnson, who could run in a post-election leadership race and face taking a position on how the system should be reformed.
Mr Cameron’s defence of Maria Miller has caused resentment among many Conservative MPs, who contrast his “warm support” for the Culture Secretary with his ruthless treatment of those caught in the initial scandal in 2008. The Prime Minister is also blamed for helping introduce the current system policed by the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority.
Replacing it with a per-diem payment, although popular among some MPs, could be controversial. Although it would spare MPs from having to justify complicated expense claims, it would expose them to accusations of “clocking on” similar to those that dog the House of Lords, which pays peers a daily attendance allowance of about £300.
Document TIMEUK0020140408ea49003t6
