{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3627"}
____
  
UK News
The Times Diary (TMS): Paxo stirring in the valleys, Drenge, honours and bloopers
592 words
24 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Poor Huw Edwards. Not only has the BBC news anchor been denied the chance to run election night, with David Dimbleby to front his ninth general election in 2015. (Many suspect he’ll keep going until Plaid Cymru get in.) Now he gets a sock in the eye from Jeremy Paxman, who wrote in a weekend book review that Edwards “can come across like some evangelical preacher on a wet Sunday morning in Merthyr Tydfil".
Paxman is entertainingly grouchy all round in his review of Andrew Pettegree’s The Invention of News, slamming “reporters in rehab" who pose as professors of media studies, complaining that most books on the media are “notably unreadable" and even turning the fire on his own show. “In one of Newsnight’s more troubled phases, we used to joke that our slogan ought to be ‘If it’s news, it’s news to us’." Perhaps he’s just missing his beard?
The NHS is seeking an interim senior communications manager for one of its London agencies. The advert says they want someone to “boost the external prescience of the organisation". Surely foresight is what all press offices need.
Drenge on the playlist
Ed Miliband may not have heeded the advice given last year by Tom Watson in the former election co-ordinator’s resignation letter to listen to a rock group called Drenge — they didn’t appear on his Desert Island Discs — but someone in Government did. Drenge have just been awarded a grant of up to £50,000 by UK Trade & Investment’s Music Export Growth Scheme to promote their music overseas. It seems appropriate that a socialist MP should like a group that is subsidised by the taxpayer.
One of TMS’s bewigged readers was doing his barristering at Leicester Crown Court last week, where a man was acquitted of various sexual offences. At one point, the jury heard evidence of the unorthodox use of a bicycle pump at which the defendant’s elderly grandmother was heard to say in confusion: “I don’t understand this. He doesn’t own a bicycle."
Question of honours
Dominic Raab, the Tory MP, annoyed Downing Street recently by leading a rebellion over immigration. Now he is asking questions about honours. Any hope that this would embarrass Tony Blair, with all those gongs for dinner ladies, vanished when the answer came back that, apart from in 2000, more honours have been handed out in each of the past two years than any other since 1995.
The number has increased by a third since 2005, with more than 2,400 honours awarded last year. So far in 2014, 1,202 people have had one. There will be a national shortage of ribbon at this rate, but it remains some way shy of Lloyd George’s record of 25,000 OBEs and 1,500 knighthoods in six years.
Toe-curling bloopers
Now the Winter Olympics are over we can forget about curling for four years. The BBC’s voice-recognition software never knew it existed. In the men’s final the subtitles declared that Britain was “going for a gold in the killing". Just as well they only got silver.
Ian Moorcroft e-mailed in another curling blooper last week, when an effort by Britain in the semi-final was described as “a great recovery frock". For the life of me, I have no idea what was actually said. Maybe it was a fashion statement.
Document TIMEUK0020140224ea2o000q5
