{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1428"}
____
  
Columnists
The Britons who would have stood with Hitler; Notebook
Oliver Kamm   
612 words
4 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Who would have served in government if Britain had been occupied by Nazi Germany? As Ben Macintyre recounted in The Times last week, Britain had many fifth columnists. A collaborationist government, however, would probably have been drawn from establishment figures — like the Vichy regime in France. Many might have come from the left.
Nazi sympathisers could be found on the Conservative benches in the 1930s, all right. Captain Archibald Ramsay, a Scottish Conservative, founded an organisation called the Right Club in 1939 “to oppose and expose the activities of Organised Jewry". He was the only MP to be interned during the War, and continued to submit parliamentary questions from Brixton Prison.
Yet some on the left also saw justice in German expansionism. George Lansbury, the Labour leader from 1931 to 1935, led a peace mission to Berlin. He said: “I think history will regard Hitler as one of the great men of our time. He appeared to me to be free of personal ambition."
Lansbury, who died in 1940, had followers. Wilfred Wellock, a Labour MP, said of the Munich Agreement: “The root of the trouble in Czechoslovakia is the vast economic monopolies owned by the financiers of Britain and the other powers."
Financiers? Guess who he had in mind. Yet potential collaborationists included people who would have disclaimed any suggestion of anti-Semitism. As late as the liberation, Vera Brittain, the prominent pacifist campaigner, argued that the discovery of the death camps was being reported “partly, at least, in order to divert attention from the havoc produced in German cities by allied obliteration bombing".
The errors of campaigners who are so concerned with the flaws of their own society that they excuse the evils of others are historically durable.
Beneath the black shorts
You wouldn’t have thought there was light relief in the allied bombing campaign. In Frederick Taylor’s book Dresden, however, you find the unimprovable vignette that Martin Mutschmann, the Reich governor of Saxony, had held “various management positions in lace and underwear companies".
P. G. Wodehouse’s character Roderick Spode was leader of an organisation called the black shorts. Spode’s dictatorial plans are at constant risk lest his talent for designing ladies’ underwear and ownership of an emporium called Eulalie’s become known. In life, as in art . . .
Danny who?
For some years, Daniel Finkelstein and I, with another friend, held informal politician-spotting contests. If we passed a famous politician, we texted each other to say where he or she had been seen. There was a twist, however: the definition of “famous" was circumscribed to mean “famous only to a political obsessive". If you tried to claim a sighting of Nicolas Sarkozy (as I once did), you had points deducted. We sought instead tireless and public-spirited party stalwarts. Adrian Slade, the former President of the Liberal Party, was an outstanding sighting — not, unfortunately, made by me.
Daniel is now a member of the House of Lords and as he can walk this contest merely by looking in the mirror, I abandon the struggle.
Fellow travellers
Nigel Farage, the UKIP leader, says he feels “slightly awkward" when on a train and failing to hear English spoken. He should relax. If there’s one language that isn’t endangered, it’s English. It is the global language that non-native speakers learn. The notion that there are large groups of immigrants who don’t speak it and don’t want to acquire it is mythical. Immigrants know the importance of English without politicians lecturing them; they (and particularly their children) learn the language anyway.
Document TIMEUK0020140304ea34000z7
