{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"807"}
____
  
Politics
Pick fruit and veg or lose your benefits, minister tells jobless
Ben Webster, Environment Editor   
418 words
26 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Unemployed Britons should be stripped of their benefits unless they agree to take the place of immigrants in harvesting fruit and vegetables, the Farming Minister has said.
George Eustice said it was unacceptable for people to refuse work on farms on the grounds that it was “unglamorous" or too short-lived to justify coming off benefits. Speaking at the National Farmers’ Union conference, he rejected a plea from farmers to resurrect a scheme that permitted foreigners to come to Britain to work on the harvest.
Mr Eustice said that he was working with the Department for Work and Pensions to get Jobcentres to promote short-term agricultural jobs to the unemployed. The Government would also make it easier for people to switch back to receiving benefits once a harvesting job had come to an end, he said.
“We don’t think it’s acceptable that people who could work don’t take work because they think there is something unglamorous about farm work," he said. “Some people would say you won’t get them to do this work [But] we need to overcome this attitude where we say it’s OK to pay people benefits and to accept that they are not going to take jobs that are on offer."
The Home Office announced last year that it was closing the Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme (SAWS), under which 21,000 Bulgarians and Romanians were permitted into Britain for a few weeks a year to pick fruit and vegetables.
Farmers fear that these workers will move to jobs in factories and care homes now that curbs on their ability to work in Britain have been lifted.
Alison Capper, a hop and apple farmer from Worcestershire and a member of the NFU’s national horticultural board, said British workers “can’t keep up with Polish workers" and that 70 to 80 per cent abandoned the job within five days, even though the pay was £7.50 to £8 an hour, well above the minimum wage of £6.31 an hour.
The Migration Advisory Committee, which advises the Government on migration issues, said in a report last year that the closure of SAWS could damage the British horticultural industry.
It said: “British workers are reluctant to live on (be tied to) the farm; and growers state that British workers either cannot or will not work at the intensity required to earn the agricultural minimum wage."
Document TIMEUK0020140226ea2q00119
