{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"966"}
____
  
Politics
Ukip candidate in scuffle with disabled protester
Laura Pitel, Political Correspondent   
535 words
20 May 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The man vying to become Ukip’s first MP was accused of scuffling with a disabled protester yesterday as tensions grew over the party’s alleged racism.
Roger Helmer, an MEP who will fight the parliamentary by-election in Newark next month, tried to take a megaphone from David Challinor, a miner who lost the use of one arm in an industrial accident.
Mr Challinor claimed that one of Mr Helmer’s aides “lunged” at him after he approached the MEP outside a café in Retford, Nottinghamshire, with a group of demonstrators. “They were shouting ‘get that megaphone!’ and then this youth jumped up and lunged at me, trying to pull it,” he told the Retford Times. “He was trying to take it from my right arm, which I’ve had five operations on and can’t straighten.”
Mr Helmer denied that he or his staff had assaulted Mr Challinor, a Labour district councillor, but said that he had tried to take the megaphone to respond to allegations about his expense claims in the European parliament.
John Mann, the local Labour MP, said that Mr Challinor made a statement to the police about the incident. Mr Helmer said that any attempt to take the matter to the police would be “vexatious”. He added: “I am certainly not apologising to him. They should be apologising to us for harassment and deliberately provocative behaviour.”
The row came as Nigel Farage was forced to back down further over remarks about Romanians, while a string of senior Labour figures broke cover to brand him a racist. The Ukip leader said that he was sorry if he “gave the impression” during an interview last week that he was discriminating against those from the eastern European nation.
He said that he regretted using the words “you know what the difference is” when asked to explain the difference between Romanians and Germans, though he insisted that there was a “real problem” with organised crime among some Romanians in London that had been “brushed under the carpet”.
Accusations of racism continued to dog the party as the founder of Ukip, the academic Alan Sked, revived claims that Mr Farage described black voters as “the n***** vote” in a private exchange in 1997. Ukip dismissed the claim by Mr Sked, who left the party almost 20 years ago, as “absurd”.
Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, yesterday defied her party leader by describing Mr Farage’s remarks about Romanians as racist. Ms Cooper, who is tipped as a future Labour leader, told ITV: “It’s not racist to be worried about immigration or to want stronger controls, but it is racist to somehow stir up fears about Romanians living next door.”
Wary of being seen to insult voters who are concerned about immigration, Ed Miliband, along with David Cameron and Nick Clegg, have repeatedly declined to call Ukip or Mr Farage racist. There is growing concern among Labour MPs, however, that the party is not doing enough to address the threat posed by Ukip, particularly in northern seats. Some MPs want their party to be more aggressive in its attacks against Ukip.
Document TIMEUK0020140519ea5k003k1
