{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2482"}
____
  
Scotland
Wilson: We need to stop families going South
Mike Wade   
431 words
5 March 2014
00:42
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Strict immigration policies rather than border checkpoints will ensure an independent Scotland is not a soft touch for incomers whose real destination is England, it was claimed yesterday.
Introducing a policy briefing in Edinburgh, Gordon Wilson, the former SNP leader, admitted he had sympathy with English people who complained of “congestion" caused by large numbers of immigrants, though he insisted his opinions were “poles apart" from those of Nigel Farage, the UKIP leader.
Mr Wilson said that a buoyant independent economy after 2016 would lure some emigrant Scots back to their roots as well as attracting people from the rest of the UK and the EU. Foreign nationals from further afield should be subject to some immigration controls, he said.
“If you went out of the way to take in 5,000 people, before you knew it, within two years, 90 per cent of them would be in London: no benefit to us, and limited benefit to London," said Mr Wilson. “You don’t have border controls, you have a border policy.
“We would advise a points-based system. We have to be hard-headed about this — we want people who will create jobs as well as occupy jobs. Technology, technical skills are essential."
He suggested that Mr Farage and his party were thriving because “English people are objecting to vast numbers of people coming in and affecting their communities. We don’t have that, we have too few people, emigration is our problem not immigration".
In the 30 years since 1971, Scotland’s population has declined, though it increased by 233,000 in the decade to 2011, largely because of immigration. Current trends show numbers rising by 4 per cent by 2062 compared with 23 per cent for Britain as a whole, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Mr Wilson said “the last thing Scotland could handle" was “another 30-40,000 people arriving in a year".
In his Options for Scotland report, he argued that the Scottish education system was “subsidising" the English economy by £30 billion a year through Scots moving south.
Tax breaks, family support grants and help with childcare “are essential to keep families from quitting the country", he said. “Without children, the nation dies. No country can continue with the economic debilitation which loss of population on a huge scale causes.
“This illustrates the need for Scotland to take control of its own economy to ensure that population growth in an independent Scotland has a key priority, which under Westminster it has not."
Document TIMEUK0020140305ea35000xd
