{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2045"}
____
  
Opinion
To Birmingham and Beyond
736 words
28 April 2014
13:39
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The case for new high-speed rail links between London and the north is strong.The interests of a few must not derail it
More than 30 Conservative MPs are expected to oppose the government today when the House of Commons votes on the second reading of a bill to authorise the HS2 high-speed railway line. Most of the rebels represent constituencies along the proposed route. They will break ranks because they fear their constituents’ wrath in next year’s election, and because they know it will not prompt a crisis for their party: with Labour’s support, the ayes will almost certainly have it.
Even so, the rebels are wrong. They are putting narrow sectional interest above the national interest. They are prioritising fears about what might happen if the line is built over what we know will happen if it is not.
Infrastructure projects on this scale are expensive, disruptive and controversial, and take decades to complete. Their economic returns may have to be measured over yet more decades. They cannot necessarily be left to the private sector, but this does not mean they can be left on the drawing board. Modernising Britain’s transport network for future generations is a central role of government — a role the rebels have chosen to forget.
The number of passengers using the rail network has doubled in 20 years, to 1.5 billion. Combined passenger and freight useis expected to grow by another 30 per cent by 2024. Rail users are already enduring delays and overcrowding that few other advanced economies would tolerate. As Sir David Higgins, the chairman of HS2 Limited, has forcefully argued, these facts present Britain with a stark choice.
It is a choice between ever-increasing pressure on the existing rail network, relieved only by piecemeal modernisation bringing marginal improvements at great cost, and a massive increase in overall capacity such as that offered by HS2.
The project is currently budgeted at £50 billion. Of that, an estimated £12 billion would go towards compensating those forced to move. The disruption to their lives is regrettable and their opposition to the line inevitable. The role of government in this case is to listen carefully and mitigate the damage to homes and the environment as far as possible, but above all it is to make the case and see it through.
So far Sir David is doing a better job of this than the coalition. His most recent published report recognised that a significant failing of HS2 planning so far was not excessive ambition, but a lack of it. He has unwisely called for the shelving of plans for a link between the HS2 line and the existing high-speed Channel Tunnel rail link, even though without it high-speed travellers from the north who are bound for Europe will have to slow to a crawl while changing trains in London. He has, however, proposed speeding up the construction of HS2’s second phase, north of Birmingham, so that it reaches a new hub in Crewe by 2027. The previous target date was 2033, so far in the future that it risked leaving millions of potential beneficiaries unenthused.
Today’s revolt is by MPs who don’t want high speed at any speed. Cheryl Gillan, the former Tory Welsh Secretary, has said that rather than investing in new track and state-of-the-art trains, the government should focus on filling in potholes and giving passengers on-board wi-fi. She posits a false choice of stunning timidity. Of course Britain must fill its potholes. It must invest boldly, too.
New infrastructure is not desirable for its own sake. Spain’s high-speed rail network, for instance, would never have passed a proper cost-benefit analysis. Britain in 2014 is different. Its economy is growing. The country is overcrowded and in danger of grinding to a halt.
Rebels attract headlines, whether they oppose new railway lines or EU membership or immigration. This does not make them right. The government must seize on its majority today, and build.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
This article has been chosen as today’s Talking Point by The Times community team for the quality of the comments left by readers. Vote for your favourite comments by clicking on the ‘Recommend’ button and get involved in the debate below (read our house rules  if you’re new to commenting).
Document TIMEUK0020140427ea4r001xj
