{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"483"}
____
  
Law
Lawyer of the week Emma Norton
Linda Tsang   
466 words
13 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The solicitor for human rights organisation Liberty represented the sisters of Cpl Anne-Marie Ellement at the inquest into her death, where the coroner ruled that an alleged rape and bullying were factors in her suicide in October 2011 and called for the Ministry of Defence to review its care for vulnerable soldiers.
What were the main challenges in this inquest? The biggest challenge for me was not a legal one — it was the process of uncovering what this young woman had been through. She believed she had been the victim of a horrifying rape, it was not properly investigated and she was then ostracised and bullied. The lack of remorse shown by some of the soldiers was shocking. The case has exposed the shocking way the military deals with sexual assaults and has shown that bullying remains a very real problem.
What was your worst day as a lawyer? Failing to persuade the Home Secretary that she shouldn’t extradite a vulnerable victim of domestic violence to face her abuser in a US court — for having left with her children almost 20 years previously.
What was your most memorable experience? Getting “Mini" Cooper, a child arsonist who had featured in a television documentary, his parole; and then, seven years later, being invited to attend his book launch at the Groucho Club.
Who has been the most influential person? The late Professor Martin Lynn, my African history tutor at Queen’s University, Belfast. Very clever and kind. As well as teaching me a lot of history, he remained a wise mentor to me for many years.
Why did you become a lawyer? I used to work at Amnesty International. I got tired of watching the British public show sympathy for people suffering human rights abuses abroad, until they got to our shores when all of a sudden they were derided as scroungers and scum. I thought I would be an immigration lawyer but it didn’t turn out that way. Also: I am quite bossy and a bit of a control freak, which are good skills for a solicitor.
What would your advicebe to anyone wanting a career in law? Pay attention. Work hard. Don’t moan.
If you had not become a lawyer, what would you have chosen? Dog-sitter. I am trying to convince Liberty director Shami Chakrabarti that we should have a Liberty dog but she won’t let me. She is not a dog person.
Where do you see yourself in ten years? Hopefully looking back on the Tories’ pledge to repeal the Human Rights Act as a doomed, self-serving piece of political posturing that got them nowhere. Without that act, this inquest would never have happened.
l_tsang@hotmail.com
Document TIMEUK0020140313ea3d000ef
