{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1306"}
____
  
Political Sketch
Fruitcakes go barmy for leader with the winning smell
Ann Treneman, Political Sketch   
601 words
1 March 2014
00:17
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
I suspected that I’d found the UKIP conference in Torquay when I saw a man in the car park dressed in a three-piece wine red corduroy suit, accessorised with obligatory £1 UKIP badge. They do like to do dapper at UKIP. But it was the man with the fruitcake that clinched it.
“Have some fruitcake!" urged Herbert Crossman, beaming with pure happiness as he handed me something crumbly. “The only fruitcake here is on the tray!" This is not quite true, but as someone who has covered UKIP for many years I can report that yesterday’s shindig at the Riviera Centre in Torquay was, definitely, UKIP’s first post-fruitcake conference.
The party leader, Nigel Farage, has spent the past year ruthlessly culling the party of (most) of its major screwballs. “We’ve got rid of them!" he shouted yesterday. Badgers aren’t the only thing endangered here. The transformation of UKIP to NewKIP is almost complete.
Of course, more than any other party, this one IS its leader. Nigel Farage, rhymes with barrage, arrived on the stage festooned with signs that said “Love Britain, Vote UKIP", his marvellously cartoony rubber face morphing into a look of wonder as he gazed out at the crowd.
“NIGE!" a woman near me cried.
It was a riveting performance and, as I watched him, I saw that “Nige" is a party leader with more than a touch of the demagogue about him. The speech was a barnburner and at the core of it was a message on immigration delivered with the precision of an Exocet.
“The fact is that in scores of our cities and market towns, this country, in a short space of time, has frankly become unrecognisable!" he cried.
How they loved it! Every one of the 700 or so people crammed into this hall clapped.
“It’s a fact that in many parts of England you don’t hear English spoken any more. This is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren."
I looked around. The faces of the NewKippers were rapt.
“Did you see the immigration figures yesterday?" asked Nige to a room of despairing nods (the figure showed a large increase, almost all from Europe). “If the eurozone goes as badly over the next few years as I believe it will, we face the prospect of the largest migratory wave that has ever come to this country and we have three political parties who are not prepared to do anything."
It was UKIP, he said, that had made it possible to debate immigration. “Remember ten years ago? You couldn’t talk about it. If you did, somehow, you were a terrible, bad person. We proved the point. It is not extremist to talk about immigration, it is responsible and right!"
He made forays into other subjects — quangos, floods and the foreign aid budget to name a few — but then exhorted his groupies (sorry, audience) that the message for the next 84 days (he knows, he ticks off every day until the Euro elections) must be about Europe.
“This is the moment that we waited for!" he barked, his voice overpowering the microphone and the room. “This IS it! This is the big one for UKIP. Together we can achieve something remarkable in these European elections. We can top those polls."
He received an instant standing ovation. As he toured the room, pressing the flesh, I could almost smell how much he wants to win.
Document TIMEUK0020140301ea3100109
