{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2936"}
____
  
Education
Students are absolutely ignorant, says Nobel winner
Tom Knowles   
327 words
31 March 2014
11:06
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Students are boring and “absolutely ignorant” until they have matured, according to a Nobel-prize winning scientist who is Regius Professor of Physics at the University of Manchester.
Sir Andre Geim said it took two or three years of a PhD until he found students interesting enough to be treated like a colleague.
The Nobel-winning physicist, who was interviewed by Kirsty Young on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs, said: “I don’t like students very much. They come absolutely ignorant and they are not grown up yet as interesting people.
“But sometimes over two or three years of their PhD, they grow exponentially fast, pick up experiences and then they become real persons and after that we become ... not like a professor and a student, we become like colleagues, and that is a really enjoyable experience.”
Sir Andre, 55, believes that students should be exempt from new immigration laws. “As a nation," he said, “we have to be pragmatic rather than populistic.
“We should try and draw from the resources outside this country, try and bring the brightest minds to compete in the future world and the future of the country is where the brains are. So if you tap into foreign talent it is very appropriate.”
Sir Andre was born in the Soviet Union and spent his early years in Sochi with his grandmother, a meteorologist who had a small weather station on the beach. He described her as the “the closest friend he ever had” until he was 28 or 30.
He was awarded the Nobel prize for his groundbreaking experiments on the material graphene, alongside his Manchester University collaborator Sir Konstantin Novoselov.
As a student himself, he said he did not attend lectures but had a reasonably high IQ and tried to get “maximum percentage from minimum effort”. He also won the chemistry Olympiad for memorising a thousand-page chemistry dictionary.
Document TIMEUK0020140331ea3v0005l
