{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3669"}
____
  
Columnists
I want to leave the EU. But should I vote Ukip?
Tim Montgomerie   
1,112 words
22 May 2014
14:32
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
This is the last chance to fire a shot across Cameron’s bows. But Farage’s party comes with so much baggage
Regular Times readers may remember that I want to leave the European Union. MPs elected by the British people should control the nation’s borders. I don’t think most Britons would have a problem with immigration if we could close the door to low-skilled Bulgarians but put out a welcome mat for highly skilled computer programmers from India and to some of the godforsaken refugees from Syria. What we don’t like is that EU membership forces us to have open borders with the rest of the continent.
I’d like to stop sending £8.6 billion (net) to EU coffers a year. British taxpayers could do with that money back here. I also want to leave the common agricultural policy that inflates Ed Miliband’s £70 weekly grocery bill by up to 17 per cent.
So for whom do I vote today? For the first time since 1989, when I voted for the first time, I may not vote Conservative. I contacted the six Tory MEP candidates in my region (South West England and Gibraltar) to ask their views on EU membership. Two said that they might consider voting to leave if David Cameron could not negotiate better membership terms, but none are Bennite on the issue. I’m afraid I am.
Like the late Tony Benn, I believe that voters should be able to change the laws of the land at general elections. At the moment we can’t — and we can’t call ourselves a true democracy until that changes. The exact proportion is hotly disputed, but many of our laws originate from Europe. Some estimates suggest 40 per cent. Some say it’s more like three quarters.
And please don’t try to convince me that we can exercise control via the European parliament. Most of Europe’s big decisions are taken behind closed doors in Brussels — at meetings of ministers from the 28 member states. We can veto some of those decisions but treaties, super-bureaucrats and judges limit our scope ever to reverse Brussels’ edicts.
If you want a say on Britain’s EU membership you have to vote Tory at next year’s general election (as I certainly will). Only Tory candidates stand a chance of becoming MPs and are committed to a referendum. But today? In the European parliament elections. There seems only one way for Eurosceptics to send a clear, unambiguous message about wanting to leave Europe and that’s to vote Ukip. But, hang on, Ukip?
Nigel Farage’s party comes with so much baggage. So many Ukip MEPs have misused their expenses; they seem addicted to the EU gravy train they criticise. And there was that speech in the European parliament when Mr Farage behaved like a lout in his remarks about Herman van Rompuy? And his admiration for Vladimir Putin? Even Prince Charles has seen through Russia’s president.
So does it have to be Conservative after all? I’m still not sure. I worry how Mr Cameron will interpret a large Tory vote. I remember him rejecting an in/out vote only a few years ago. He now insists that he’s deadly serious about renegotiating Britain’s membership, but there’s not much evidence that he’s building EU-wide alliances in support of a different kind of Europe. I don’t know anyone who thinks he’ll ever campaign for an “out” vote. Will he get many concessions from other heads of government if they know he’ll stay in the European club regardless?
The next year may be a good one for the prime minister. The economic recovery will reach more corners of the country. The more Mr Miliband appears on the TV the lower Labour’s ratings will be. The Ukip vote will start to erode, perhaps quite quickly. Today might be a last chance to send Mr Cameron a message. A big vote for Ukip might shake him up.
But I’m still not convinced. I support gay marriage, the foreign aid budget and building more homes. The nimbys in Ukip don’t. It insists it’s not a Little Englander party but there’s a lot of evidence that it is indeed a party of Britain’s past rather than its future — contaminating the case for “out” in the process.
But, but, but. There’s something wrong with our big political parties. Labour doesn’t speak for its heartland voters any more or about the impact that immigration has had on working-class communities. As the academics Matthew Goodwin and Robert Ford have testified, Ukip is representing the anger of the working classes in a way that the other parties do not. Most of the establishment seems to be in denial about this.
For too many in Britain’s elite it’s easier to accuse Ukip of fascism than to worry about how our immigration, tax and housing systems protect the haves rather than the have-nots. Those shouting “bigot” at Ukip should go to continental Europe and meet some real racist parties. For every racist in Ukip’s ranks are ten patriots who want to be able to choose how they are governed and ten more angry at the coalition parties’ broken promises on immigration and tuition fees.
I still don’t know for sure. On my way to the polling station, I’ll think about Martin Callanan in the North East region. The European parliament will certainly be poorer without people like him.
But I’ll also think about why Ukip can win lots of votes from disillusioned Labour voters and Tories can’t. I’ll regret that the Eurosceptic right is so divided. A Tory-Ukip pact wouldn’t work; it would frighten too many in middle Britain. Yet Mr Cameron has to find a way to appeal to Ukip voters, the angry, working-class casualties of the globalisation experiment, the benefits of which are not equally distributed.
I might have to take the long way round to the polling station, but my guess is that tribal tugs will be too strong and, without much enthusiasm, I will vote Conservative.
This article has been chosen as today’s Talking Point by The Times community team for the quality of the comments left by readers. Vote for your favourite comments by clicking on the ‘Recommend’ button and get involved in the debate below (read our house rules if you’re new to commenting).
Document TIMEUK0020140521ea5m00361
