{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"689"}
____
  
UK News
‘Spanish nanny’ hired to care for Prince George
Valentine Low   
386 words
11 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
It is, almost, official: the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge are part of the “wealthy metropolitan elite".
Days after half the Cabinet was forced to come clean about its foreign cleaners and nannies, the Duke and Duchess are reported to have hired a Spanish nanny.
In a break with the Royal Family’s tradition of recruiting only nannies who are solidly British and, preferably, middle-aged, the couple are said to have taken on a woman in her mid-30s.
As, wisely, the couple have yet to express any opinion about immigration policy, their decision is unlikely to leave them open to charges of hypocrisy.
Due to its timing, however, right in the middle of a coalition spat over migration, their choice will now be subjected to the same scrutiny as David Cameron’s Nepalese nanny or Danny Alexander’s Portuguese cleaner.
According to Hello! magazine the woman, their first full-time nanny, was hired before the Duke and Duchess went to the Maldives on holiday.
Until now the couple have relied for childcare help on Carole Middleton or William’s former nanny, Jessie Webb.
The magazine says the new nanny has spent 20 years living, studying and working in the UK.
Friends of the woman, who was photographed last week taking George for a walk in Kensington Gardens, told the magazine that she lives for her job.
Kensington Palace refused to comment on the report. It is believed that the Palace will release details about her before the couple embark on their tour of New Zealand and Australia next month. The nanny will accompany the couple on the trip to look after seven-month-old George.
Westminster attention focused on migration last week after James Brokenshire, the Tory Immigration Minister, said that a “wealthy, metropolitan elite" of middle-class households had helped to support mass immigration by demanding cheap labour and services.
Theresa May has acknowledged that rising numbers of EU residents living in Britain made it “more difficult" for David Cameron to fulfil his promise to reduce net migration to below 100,000 by next year. The Home Secretary faced questions over Mr Cameron’s pledge after figures showing that the total for this year is on course to be 212,000.
Document TIMEUK0020140311ea3b000do
