{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2921"}
____
  
Columnists
Finally, a test to recognise the best teachers
Libby Purves   
969 words
31 March 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
An assessment of four-year-olds’ skills could identify the primary schools that help the most disadvantaged children
If you are now approaching 30, you belong to the most evaluated educational generation in British history. You were the first to be formally tested at seven years old under a weirdly complicated 1991 system, which was — with no apology to the poor teachers who had to inflict it — simplified a year later. You hit the equally new test for 11-year-olds and another one three years later, then became the first generation to have its sixth-form experience wrecked by AS levels. You had an unprecedented three summers running of formal national exams. Parents like us watched this and muttered the old farming saw “You can’t fatten a pig by weighing it.”
Various tests have since been abolished or changed, sometimes with an element of fiasco: they have been criticised over the years for having less to do with individual learning than with governmental mistrust of teachers, the construction of league tables and a jeering name-and-shame culture. The latest word is that SATs at 11 will be tougher, and that 2016 will introduce a brand-new “baseline test” at four years old, as a child first enters school. This has already been condemned by the Pre-school Learning Alliance as a “schoolification” of the early years, undervaluing “childhood, and the basic right of our young children to play, explore and experience the world”. One teachers’ leader even emoted about “exam hall conditions”, as if anyone had the slightest intention of doing it that way.
Usually I am right there with the objectors. Elements of the prescriptive “early-years foundation stage” curriculum have added nothing but stress to many amiable, relaxed nurseries. It cannot be pointed out too often that an infant in a sandpit with a bucket of water is already doing physics, maths, resistant materials technology, art and design, hydraulics, earth science and (if babbling to him- or herself) expressive language. Bury Teddy in the sand and you add ethics and drama. Up-end the bucket on your head and you are training for a lucrative career in comedy. Letting babies play at their own speed is not neglect (parking them in front of CBeebies for hours while you update Facebook and snark on Mumsnet probably is, but that’s for another day).
But this latest proposal, the informal but nationally recorded “baseline test” at the age of four is a good idea. It’s not a new idea: reception teachers, for heaven’s sake, have been assessing small, bewildered people for years, finding out who knows letters, colours and numbers, who can hold a conversation, get dressed, listen, play co-operatively, and all that. You may well ask why such things should be recorded by a government agency, but there could be advantages for all, because if you know what state a cohort of children were in at four, you get a clearer picture of whether schools are doing them good. And many, without much credit, are.
Inevitably, the schools minister David Laws uttered the usual anti-teacher snarl — “The new system will mean no hiding place for under-performing schools.” But he did add that it could also mean “credit being given to schools and colleges that may have challenging intakes but which improve their pupils’ performance.” Laying aside that ghastly use of the word “performance”, that is where the gold lies. For it is a truth insufficiently acknowledged that schools today are often asked to do something for which they were not originally designed: not just to teach, but to alleviate intense social problems. There are schools in which more than 80 per cent of the intake have serious behavioural problems, and which receive into their care children who have never been properly cared for or loved, eaten a meal at a table or been read a story; who cannot listen to instructions or hold a conversation, because at home it was all shouting. There are homes wrecked by alcohol or drugs, serially fractured families, mothers and children brutalised by a series of resentful boyfriends. Some four-year-olds can’t yet dress themselves and are barely toilet-trained.
Even without physical or sexual abuse, such infants at four years old need much more from their schools than a lovingly tended child. So do those who speak little English, with traumatic refugee or immigrant backgrounds. Even some from homes that seem more careful may have spent far too long untended and unheard in front of the TV.
Ask any reception teacher in a tough area and you will hear about such children, and how much effort goes into calming and socialising them before what we call “education” can begin. And at least, if their state was recorded at four, in a form that the government could accept, schools would get credit for their progress later rather than being named, shamed and threatened with closure.
Years ago I went to a teaching conference where heads were lectured by Apprentice-style business leaders on how to become effective managers. At the coffee break, one head reflected that the single lesson he wished he could put into practice was stock control — of children. Unreliable suppliers on the local estate kept sending him damaged, misfiring products with vital bits needing urgent repair and, unlike the business gurus, he couldn’t sack them and source better-quality kids from the other end of town. “Plays havoc with your business model, that,” he said.
He laughed, because really he was proud of what his school achieved. But it would be better if he, and others like him, got proper credit instead of being forever accused of failing.
Document TIMEUK0020140331ea3v0001e
