{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2591"}
____
  
Columnists
It’s the great Lib Dem-Tory economic love-in; If there had only been only one party in power, there would have been more differences that in the present coalition
Rachel Sylvester   
1,141 words
18 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
There is a tradition of maintaining a vow of silence in the run-up to a Budget, but this year purdah has been replaced by a strip tease. The Tories and the Liberal Democrats are rushing to unveil their secrets ahead of the Chancellor’s statement tomorrow. Indeed, the coalition parties seem to be competing to expose their policies early so they can claim credit for the most popular ones.
George Osborne and Danny Alexander have been jostling to take ownership of an expected rise in the threshold at which people start to pay income tax. The two sides have been boasting of a new garden city, help for bingo halls and a fuel tax freeze. Today David Cameron and Nick Clegg — willing to share the glory on this one — will make a joint announcement on tax breaks for childcare, which at a cost rising to £1.5 billion and going to parents of children up to 12 are far more generous than expected.
Across Whitehall the stage whisper differences between the two coalition parties are getting louder: there have been theatrical “he’s behind you" rows over education, immigration and welfare reform. The rivalry will only grow as the general election nears. Already senior Tories are boasting that they will be able to ambush the Lib Dems with announcements at their party conference this year — unusually, the Conservative event will be first because the Lib Dem one has been pushed back by the Scottish referendum.
The really striking theme of this Government, though, is the extraordinary unity between the two tribes on the economy. “The disagreements are like fireworks rather than a bomb," says one Downing Street source. “They burn brightly but they don’t do any real damage. They look more dramatic than they actually are."
A Lib Dem strategist agrees that there is absolute unanimity over austerity. “We have our differences with the Conservatives but where there has been no disagreement in this Government is on overall economic strategy," he says. “The Lib Dems have stuck to our guns when people said we should be changing course and we are now reaping the reward. It would be madness of the highest order to now start saying that we have a different take on things."
This is perhaps the most surprising aspect of the Government, given how controversial some of the cuts have been. Had there been a single party in power there would almost certainly have been more tensions over this most important of issues, but there is too much at stake for the economy to be the subject of a differentiation strategy between the Conservatives and the Lib Dems.
The two coalition parties are tied together in austerity, for better or for worse. For the Tories, electoral success depends on proving economic competence and raising fears about Labour profligacy. For the Lib Dems, their very survival depends on demonstrating that coalitions can work and that they can be a party of power able to deal with the nation’s finances. If growth returns, they cannot, as one Treasury source puts it, afford to look like “reluctant passengers on a successful Tory ship". It is no coincidence that the biggest disagreements in the run-up to the Budget have been within the parties — with Nigel Lawson and Norman Lamont, two former Tory Chancellors, urging their successor to reduce the number of middle-class families paying 40p income tax.
George Osborne and Danny Alexander are now the closest ministerial pairing in the Government, so much so that other Lib Dem ministers grumble that the Chief Secretary has “gone native" at the Treasury. Vince Cable, who has in the past criticised the pace and scale of the fiscal tightening programme, has been put firmly back in his box.
“Vince sometimes says things with his economic commentator hat on, rather than as a Cabinet minister," says one ally of Mr Clegg’s. “Vince is Vince," they sigh in No 10.
There have been shifts in economic strategy, of course — the date at which the deficit will be eliminated has repeatedly slipped back and only yesterday the Government announced significant changes to its plans for high-speed rail, following an assessment by Sir David Higgins, the incoming chairman of HS2 — but these have been forced by circumstance rather than internal dissent within the coalition. Privately, Lib Dem Cabinet ministers describe the Chancellor approvingly as their “flexible friend".
Now, though, the two parties are bound together on a common path. In the autumn there will be a Commons vote tying both sides of the coalition to a timetable for fiscal consolidation that extends well into the next parliament. The Lib Dems will have to troop through the division lobbies with the Conservatives in support of a new Charter for Budget Responsibility that promises to eliminate the deficit by 2017-18. Their hands will be dipped in the blood of austerity just six months before the nation votes.
This has consequences, of course. It will be harder for the Lib Dems to appear genuinely “equidistant" between the two main parties on the economy at the next election. Ed Balls and Ed Miliband have promised to balance the books over the course of the next parliament, but have so far refused to endorse the Government’s stricter timescale. This could have consequences for any coalition negotiations if there is another hung Parliament. Although Lib Dem and Labour policies are merging on qualifications for teachers, scrapping pensioners’ perks, voting at 16 and a mansion tax, there is still a fundamental rift on the issue that will be central as the country comes out of recession.
Mr Clegg argues that he has agreed the deficit reduction timetable, but not the detail of how to achieve it. Like Labour, the Lib Dems want tax rises (including a mansion tax) to take the strain, whereas the Tories would close the gap by squeezing public spending, particularly welfare.
“We will differentiate from both the Conservatives and Labour but in different ways," says an aide. The Shadow Chancellor has left himself room for manoeuvre on timing, which could make it easier to get a deal. A senior Labour source argues, however, that Mr Clegg’s party has been “complicit" in the coalition’s austerity drive. “The Lib Dems are desperately looking to be revalidated but they acted as a prop, not a brake. They should be held to account."
There will be peripheral changes between now and May 2015, but the fundamentals are already set. If there is another hung Parliament would Ed Balls be as willing as Mr Osborne to be the Lib Dems’ “flexible friend"?
Document TIMEUK0020140318ea3i000l2
