{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"635"}
____
  
Thunderer
Lib Dem ministers want the red box but not the blame; The party has an à la carte approach to government
John McTernan   
454 words
10 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
‘A big boy did it and he ran away." That’s Nick Clegg’s story — and he’s sticking to it. The Liberal Democrat leader closed his party’s spring conference with a call to arms. There was a delusional moment when he described the European elections as a battle between UKIP and his party. That’ll be news to Ed Miliband, whose poll support is currently four times Mr Clegg’s in those elections.
That was nothing compared with Mr Clegg’s pitch for the general election. Apparently, everything that has gone well since 2010 is solely down to the Lib Dems. And the bad things? You’ve guessed it — done by the Tories when he wasn’t looking.
Unbelievable. It’s an à la carte approach to government. “I’ll have the tax allowances with a serving of apprenticeships and a side order of increased pension . . . And, no thanks, no bedroom tax or tuition fees today." It was there this weekend in Danny Alexander’s evasive words on foreign labour on the Today programme. He had to be asked three times before he admitted that he employed a Portuguese cleaner. No crime there, you might say. But Mr Alexander is a member of a government that has set a cap on net migration. One of his ministerial colleagues, James Brokenshire, claimed that the middle-class appetite for domestic labour was to blame for the coalition missing its targets on immigration. Once that was said, every member of the Government was fair game.
Collective responsibility is what’s at stake here. The way government works is that you get the ministerial office, the car and the red box. And you get the blame as well. What the Liberal Democrats are trying to do is to decouple themselves — not from the Tories, which is understandable, but from their real record in office.
The strange thing is that, in press terms, they seem to be getting away with it. It’s all looked on remarkably leniently by commentators who are fascinated by the strategies behind it.
Voters, however, won’t be so easy to fool. This is hypocrisy plain and simple. A big boy did do it — but he had a getaway driver. Without Liberal Democrat votes there would have been no tuition fees and no bedroom tax. This is Murder on the Orient Express: all ministers, Tory and Liberal Democrat, had a hand on the deadly weapon. Forgive the electorate if they spot the blood-stained palms.
John McTernan is a former political adviser to Tony Blair and Gordon Brown
Document TIMEUK0020140310ea3a000u7
