{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3172"}
____
  
Columnists
Richard Morrison: For better or worse, the Georgian era is back
Richard Morrison   
1,151 words
11 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Scenery and costumes have changed but London of the early 18th and early 21st centuries is essentially the same place
Britain has gone 18th-century crazy. It’s a surprise, to say the least. This was supposed to be a year dedicated to solemn contemplation of the First World War. Yet it’s another anniversary that has captured the imagination — or at least the attention of the people who run museums, festivals and broadcasting networks. It’s the tercentenary of the Hanoverian Succession: the ascent of George I to the British throne (closely followed by those rather livelier sequels: Georges II, III and IV).
What’s so attractive about jumped-up German aristocrats? Not much, but they were lucky enough to have their collective moniker stamped on an era that comprehensively rewrote Western civilisation. For the Georgian era coincided with the Age of Enlightenment, the Industrial Revolution, the birth of Newtonian physics and modern science and glorious achievements in art, architecture, literature and music.
We are certainly getting an eyeful and earful of that in the coming months. BBC Four is presenting an entertaining series called Rule Britannia! Music, Mischief and Morals in the 18th century and BBC Two is recreating the story of the connection between Handel’s Messiah and the 18th century’s greatest charity, Thomas Coram’s Foundling Hospital. The V&A is celebrating William Kent, the go-to designer for 1720s aristocrats. You will find Georgian shows at the Foundling Museum, the Queen’s Gallery at Buckingham Palace and the Historic Royal Palaces clustered round London. The Lufthansa Festival of Baroque Music, held next month in St John’s, Smith Square (itself dating from 1714), is a feast of 18th-century masterpieces.
And if you go this summer to Waddesdon Manor, the humble little Rothschild hovel in Buckinghamshire, you can see a quirky exhibition exploring the notion of celebrity in 18th-century England through the figure of Alexander Pope, the foremost poet of the age. As Pope wrote, a little learning is a dangerous thing — but with such an array of exhibitions and documentaries to savour we will all be able to “drink deep . . . the Pierian spring” of 18th-century culture.
Are we drawn to the Georgians merely because they produced stunning paintings, gardens, buildings, poetry and music, amassed the greatest empire in the world and revolutionised manufacturing? Well, there are echoes of “What did the Romans ever do for us?” about that question, yet I suspect that even that list does not fully explain our fascination with the 18th century. If I was allowed just one trip in the Doctor Who Tardis it would be to London in about 1720 and not just because I could meet five of my greatest heroes: Wren, Handel, Newton, Hawksmoor and Hogarth. It would also be to test a thesis I’ve nurtured for several years: that although the scenery and costumes have changed almost out of recognition, the Londons of the early 18th and early 21st centuries are essentially the same place.
In both, you find ostentatious wealth paraded alongside severe deprivation. You see highly motivated immigrants (yes, even in the 18th century) putting natives to shame with their zest for hard work and their resolve to better themselves. In both centuries you see ruthless property developers remaking whole districts with taller, grander and more ostentatious edifices than anywhere else in Europe.
City financiers were every bit as cynical and cut-throat in 1714 as in 2014, and (as the South Sea Bubble was about to show) there were as many gullible fools taken in by get-rich-quick investment schemes. As for hedonistic excesses, well, if Hogarth or Swift came back to London today they would find no lack of Gin Lanes, rakes, rogues and harlots to portray in their prints and prose.
The Victorian age was too earnest, moralistic and hypocritical — Dr Johnson would never have said “the man who is tired of London is tired of life” if he’d lived 100 years later — while 20th-century London was too scarred by tragic history and urban-planning disasters. We see no mirror of ourselves in either of those centuries — but the Georgians? We completely understand their pragmatism, greed, flamboyance, opportunism, scepticism, wit and irreverence because we see it all around us once again. For better or worse.
Memo to Sajid Javid
Less than 24 hours after Sajid Javid was appointed culture secretary, the poet Michael Rosen bombarded him with a vitriolic open letter demanding that he do something about the “terrible crisis” in libraries, the “awful conditions backstage in many theatres” and “crap wages” in the arts, while questioning the former banker’s credentials to take up his new appointment at all. “It’s very difficult to see . . . how you’re qualified to do this new job,” the former children’s laureate fumes before declaring that “the fact that people like you got up to all sorts of greedy lending and fiddling is why we’re in this crisis”.
How to win friends and influence people! Javid certainly needs to have the arts world’s concerns brought to his attention, but preferably in a way that makes him eager to help. Here’s what I would put at the top of his in-tray:
a) Budget cuts for local authorities have inflicted disproportionate damage on theatres, concert halls and (as Rosen says) libraries. The rot must be stopped. Giving national acclaim to councils that uphold their cultural responsibilities would be a good start.
b) Britain’s orchestras, theatres and dance companies do world-class work, yet get a fraction of the ministerial praise lavished on medal-winning athletes. Their chances of wooing business sponsors and philanthropists,and hence becoming even less dependent on taxpayers, would be greatly improved if the culture secretary attended their shows often and enthused publicly about what he’d seen. He would have a lot more fun in the job too.
c) The huge issue of arts and music teaching in schools, or the lack of it, is too important to be left to the education department and the whimsical Michael Gove. Javid should wade into that debate. He should chastise top universities that declare arts A levels to be worthless and praise state schools that place the arts at the heart of their curriculum.
d) And finally, the Tories have precisely 13 months to stop the entire arts world from campaigning vociferously for the return of a Labour government, as they did so successfully in 1997. A few more artful concessions from George Osborne, along the lines of the theatre tax relief announced in the last Budget, would cost peanuts and could radically alter the perception of the Tories as a bunch of unrepentant philistines. Javid should make that case loudly and often to his colleagues.
Document TIMEUK0020140410ea4b0036n
