{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"62"}
____
  
Politics
Tory ‘immigration obsession’ won’t stop Ukip defection, warns MP
Michael Savage, Sam Coates   
591 words
25 March 2014
20:30
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Conservative Party’s “obsessive” focus on immigration is destroying the party’s appeal to a growing group of voters from ethnic minorities, a Tory MP has warned.
Mark Field, the Conservative MP for Cities of London and Westminster, said that the Government needed to drop its attempts to reduce migration dramatically and instead start talking about its positive impact on Britain.
He warned that the target of cutting migration to the “tens of thousands” was simply not going to be met and would undermine public trust in politics.
Official figures released alongside last week’s Budget showed the Treasury expects net migration to run at 150,000 next year, meaning the Government will miss its target by a big margin.
Mr Field’s intervention is the boldest attempt by a Tory to soften the party’s approach to immigration, which has toughened following the electoral threat from Ukip.
At the launch of his Conservatives for Managed Migration group today, he warned it was an electoral disaster to suggest “the presence of settled migrant communities is somehow a historical mistake”.
“The relentless focus on immigration by the Conservative Party appears too often to outsiders to border on the near obsessive,” he said. “The implicit message to the electorate is that my party is fundamentally hostile to those who were not born here.
“This is in spite of the fact that many immigrants to Britain demonstrate just the sort of values to family and enterprise that should make them natural Tory voters.
“The harsh truth that my party must face is that the number of immigrants on the electoral roll gets markedly bigger, year on year. What really is the Conservative message to these voters?”
While Mr Field said that many of his fellow Tory MPs agreed with his position, he conceded that it had been difficult to persuade them to publicly back him because they had “Ukip in their patch”. No other Tories were at the launch of the group.
The Ethnic Minority British Election Study found that at the 2010 election, 68 per cent of black and minority ethnic voters backed Labour, with just 16 per cent backing the Tories.
Mr Field said that immigrants regarded the UK “as a magnet” because of its success as a growing economy.
“To make that case in a more robust way would pay more dividends,” he said. “A good dose of authentically ‘telling it like it as it is’ would be a better approach, rather than trying to second guess where Ukip are.”
Ukip is expected to perform well in May’s local and European elections, with some predicting the party will top the poll for the European Parliament.
Tomorrow night Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, will go head to head with Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrat leader, in the first of two debates about Britain’s membership of the EU.
Senior Lib Dems sought to downplay their expectations for the result, saying Mr Clegg is likely to lose in instant polls which are done in the hours after night’s debate at 7pm on LBC radio and Sky News.
“Nick is the underdog,” said. “His arguments are hardheaded but it’s the more difficult argument to take -just look at the polling on the kinds of positions he is supporting.”
Anthony Wells from pollsters YouGov said that the debate could be “win-win” for both participants, since they are not seeking to take votes off one another.
Document TIMEUK0020140325ea3p001uq
