{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"636"}
____
  
Opinion
Beyond the Fringe; Ukip has become an important party in a fragmented British political scene. The more the light is trained on the party, the odder it is starting to appear
712 words
10 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Fringe parties rarely matter in British politics. Small parties find it hard to break through an electoral system that gives them no help. For many years the United Kingdom Independence Party (Ukip) has been in that category but it is no longer. The time has arrived to take Ukip seriously and it is already clear that Ukip will not come out of the encounter well.
There are two reasons that Ukip has begun to count. The first is substantive, in that its appeal, largely in urban working-class areas, has little to do with its signature tune of hostility to the European Union. The appeal of Ukip is essentially about those people who feel they have little to gain from immigration. The influx of labour into Britain has clear economic benefits at the national level but not everybody gains and Ukip, albeit in a rather strident voice, has articulated their concerns. As a result the party’s leader, Nigel Farage, expects to come top of the poll in the European elections on May 22.
The second reason that Ukip now matters is arithmetical. Back in 1950 the Conservatives and Labour between them could expect to win more than 90 per cent of the popular vote. In 2010 the two main parties shared just 66 per cent of the vote. Despite the fall in support for the Liberal Democrats, both Labour and the Conservatives are struggling to command the support required to get over the line beyond which majority government lies. Before they went into coalition, the Liberal Democrats were a home for people who wanted to protest. Now those people go to Ukip.
This is the context in which the scrutiny of Ukip is now more intense than ever before. Already, the party has threatened to fall apart. Not many of its candidates, or indeed MEPs such as Godfrey Bloom, survive long in the sunlight. Even without quite endorsing the Prime Minister’s unflattering account of Ukip as “fruitcakes", it is the fate of smaller parties to attract the eccentric and the egotistical who would be lost in a larger party. Perhaps the most telling detail about Mr Farage is that he tried six times to be a Conservative MP. Of 21 Ukip MEPS elected since 1999, two have ended up in prison and 7 have either defected or resigned. Even Mr Farage’s wife has referred to the party as “a freak show". A former RAF pilot who was hired ostensibly to make the party more professional resigned in frustration.
If a lack of seriousness were the only concern about Ukip, that would soon be sniffed out by the voters. On Saturday, however, we exposed accusations of a lack of propriety. MEPs from Ukip were already notorious for their poor attendance record in a parliament they are committed to abolish but which provides the party with funding. It might be cynical to fill the party coffers in this way but there is nothing overtly improper about it.
However, a whistleblower from within the party ranks told The Times that Ukip staff who worked exclusively in the UK were sending invoices to Europe of Freedom and Democracy, a political grouping in the European Parliament. Such an arrangement would be a clear breach of parliamentary rules and would mean that taxpayers’ money was going straight to the Ukip political operation. The Vice-President of the European Parliament, Edward McMillan-Scott, has said that he will refer the matter today to its governing body. Today, we report that Ukip’s MEPs have been encouraged to divert public funds to their party in another way, by paying a “tithe" from their generous salary and expenses package.
It may well be that Ukip has done nothing wrong. This had better be the case, however, and not just for legal reasons. The appeal of Ukip is that of the outsider, the party that dares to tell it as it is, unlike the professional politicians. The cost to Ukip of greater scrutiny looks likely to be that this pretence of superiority starts to fall to pieces.
Document TIMEUK0020140310ea3a000ue
