{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"809"}
____
  
Banking and Finance
Immigrants to feel force of banking crackdown
Patrick Hosking, Financial Editor   
402 words
26 February 2014
00:05
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
British-based branches of foreign banks that take deposits from thousands of people in immigrant communities are facing the brunt of a regulatory crackdown being announced today.
Banks outside the European Economic Area that offer current or savings accounts are being warned that they need to change their structures radically or stop taking deposits.
The Bank of England’s Prudential Regulatory Authority says that branches will not be able to continue trading in their present form unless there is “a very high level of assurance" from the regulator in their home country that they are capable of being resolved safely in the event of their failure.
In most cases, that is expected to lead to them being forced into a costly restructuring, creating a subsidiary in the UK — a legally separate entity with its own ring-fenced capital and liquidity and a robust board, and one reporting to UK regulators.
Bank of India and State Bank of India are two groups thought likely to be caught by the new rules. Each has a string of local branches serving communities originally from the sub- continent, such as in Southall in West London and Leicester.
The UK has licensed 49 bank branches from outside the EEA to take deposits. Four have a deposit base of more than £500 million and 25 each have deposits of more than £100 million.
Turkey’s Isbank has a branch taking deposits in the UK, as does Arab Banking Corporation, from Bahrain. The new regime may also affect Australian and Canadian banks, although some have UK subsidiaries as well as branches, or do not take retail deposits.
The PRA wants to minimise the chances of Britain having to pick up the tab if the parent bank of a UK branch fails.
Andrew Bailey, the head of the PRA, said that he wanted the UK to continue to be open to foreign banks. “It is important that we get the right balance between maintaining our place as an open financial market while delivering our statutory objective of promoting safety and soundness in the firms we supervise."
Those conflicting objectives were underlined last year when George Osborne appeared to put pressure on the PRA to lighten the regulatory burden on Chinese banks operating in Britain. The latest ruling would prevent them taking retail deposits as a branch.
Document TIMEUK0020140226ea2q0011p
