{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"114"}
____
  
Columnists
The Left’s bogeymen have never gone away
Tim Montgomerie   
1,021 words
3 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The next election will be tight, so the awkward squads will hold sway. For Labour that means Abbott, Corbyn, Skinner . . .
Some Conservatives cannot fathom Ed Miliband. Why on earth hasn’t he apologised for the overspending of the Brown-Blair years? Why hasn’t he backed some of the coalition’s difficult cuts to establish his credentials as a leader who can take tough decisions? Again and again he has taken positions that don’t make sense to a majority of voters. Yet, truth be told, Mr Miliband has acted entirely rationally for nearly all of his time as Labour leader.
Gordon Brown’s successor has avoided what many people expected after Labour’s calamitous defeat at the last election — a massive meltdown of his party. There have been no great splits. His attacks on austerity and on Tory toffs and some impressive party management has kept the Labour family together. Unlike his brother, who would have provoked enormous internal tensions, Miliband Jr understands that much of the British Left has little appetite for another period of Blairite centrism.
Wherever Ed Miliband looks he sees the dangers of upsetting the Left. In the pages of the Daily Mirror and The Guardian he reads endless calls to oppose every spending cut and welfare reform. He looks at his party’s bank account and notes that money from public sector unions keeps him in funds. Most of all, he looks to Australia, Canada and Germany and notes that there conservative governments are dominant because the Left is divided. Green, socialist, Labour and Social Democrat parties are at war with each other, rather than united against right-wing parties.
Mr Miliband knows that in Britain the Green Party is a coiled spring. Any move towards the centre and any number of Labour activists and voters would defect, as Australian, Canadian and German leftists have done. Just look at the manifesto that Caroline Lucas, Natalie Bennett and Jenny Jones, the three women at the top of the Greens, are dangling before Labour eyes.
The Green Party of England and Wales is against fracking; in favour of an even higher top rate of tax; against any tuition fees; for lifting the minimum wage to the level of the living wage; for nationalisation of the railways and ending the right to buy council housing. No badger cull; less control of immigration policy. Given the chance, the Greens could become the Ukip of the Left — a home for all those who shall not be overcome, moved or sold out. Singing the red flag, wearing a green rosette.
A more far-sighted Labour leader would not have spent so much time looking over his or her shoulder. He or she would have begun building a new Labour coalition, recognising that austerity was not a short-term phenomenon and that the number of people receiving their income from the State was set for long-term decline. But Mr Miliband can be forgiven for preferring tactics over strategy. Tory weakness in Scotland and in the North, in addition to the potentially historic split on the Right caused by Ukip, mean that it’s never been easier for a Labour leader to get the keys to No 10. Mr Miliband doesn’t need to convince a majority of Britons — little more than a third will do, hence his “35 per cent plan”.
Voters need to know about this strategy, because a government elected by 35 per cent of voters will try to govern for that 35 per cent. A party that gets elected by keeping public sector interests and left-wing newspapers happy will govern by trying to keep them happy. And don’t think Mr Miliband will be able to ignore them. If he wins, all opinion polls suggest it will be a narrow victory. He won’t get legislation passed unless Diane Abbott, Jeremy Corbyn, Paul Flynn, Dennis Skinner and the 20 or so other members of his party’s awkward squad are kept on side.
While it’s true that these people were MPs when Tony Blair was in power, they were rarely needed to provide the 326th vote in the 650 member House of Commons. Mr Blair enjoyed large majorities. Whoever wins the next election almost certainly won’t. Mr Miliband won’t. Mr Cameron won’t. If there’s one big loser in the Farage v Clegg debates, it’s the two-party system. A few decades ago 90 per cent of us voted for Labour or the Tories. Now it’s barely two thirds. Until Labour can find a way to reconnect with southern, aspirational voters or the Conservatives can persuade poorer Britain that they are on its side, we’ll have minority governments, coalitions or governments with slim majorities.
This is a world that suits Mr Clegg. It’s a world in which his party will often be the kingmaker but it is also a world in which the fringes of political parties matter a lot more. So here’s the central question: who would you prefer as the 326th vote in British politics? You can have Diane Abbott or Peter Bone in Parliament. Len McCluskey or wealthy businessmen as funders. Polly Toynbee or Nigel Lawson as intellectual influences. When elections are as close as the 2015 election looks set to be, you aren’t voting only for the party leadership, but for its overall balance. You are choosing between the Tory Right and the Labour Left as much as between a Cameron and a Miliband.
Because the Conservatives have been in power, rebellious Tory backbenchers have enjoyed most of the spotlight. That would change quickly if Mr Miliband squeaked home. I don’t hesitate to give my answer. While the Tory rebels may be infuriating to some, their views on immigration, Europe, green policies and crime generally take their party closer to public opinion. The Labour rebels’ views on spending, welfare and tax take their party, and the economy, in the wrong direction. The time to choose is coming for all of us.
Document TIMEUK0020140402ea43002xm
