{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2809"}
____
  
Leading Articles
Numbers Up; Merkel is right: freedom of movement is a core achievement of the EU. Cameron must preserve it while mitigating its costs
672 words
28 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The most remarkable thing about the failure of David Cameron’s pledge to cut net migration down to “the tens of thousands" is the fact that he ever made it at all. Yesterday new figures from the Office for National Statistics revealed that net immigration has soared to more than 200,000. Britain certainly can control immigration from many nations, and it should do so. What Britain cannot control are the numbers who come here from the rest of the European Union to work.
This is not a bad thing, though politicians are reluctant to acknowledge it. Instead we hear much — as yesterday from James Brokenshire, the Immigration Minister — about “abuses of free movement", such as benefit tourism. In fact, the numbers of people determined to swap their lives on welfare in Sofia or Krakow for lives on welfare in Blackburn or Leicester are so minuscule as to be undetectable, perhaps in part because arrivals from the rest of the EU can already claim no benefits for the first three months. Extending this, as all parties wish to do, will make little difference. The vast bulk of migrants come here because they want to work, often to the benefit of the British economy. High net numbers are thus not a function of a system of free movement being abused, but one working as it is supposed to.
For some, free movement across the EU is the most pressing reason why Britain should leave it. Their concerns should not be dismissed. Though immigrants are vastly less likely to be a burden on the taxpayer than native Britons and more likely to be net contributors, short-term economic considerations are not the only ones that matter.
Alongside its cultural impact, poorly managed immigration can have long-term economic costs. Every Polish master builder employed at a knock-down rate in the UK is a local apprenticeship that never happens. When British workers fail to land jobs at the lower levels of the employment ladder, they find it harder to climb it. Yes, cheaper immigrant labour is a boon for businesses and customers. But the savings they make over the longer term are translated into higher costs borne by the British taxpayer in welfare benefits.
Despite this, curbing the free movement of labour that the EU enjoys would be a regressive and economically illiterate step. Mr Cameron is right that different rules, at least in a lengthier interim period, could be required of big, relatively poor, future accession states, such as Ukraine. Speaking in London yesterday, Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, described freedom of movement as a cornerstone achievement of the EU. It is a notorious fallacy to suggest that any one country has a static lump of jobs which people compete to fill. The arrival of hard-working migrants creates new demand and new jobs, which in turn increases the wealth of all.
This does not mean that the costs of immigration should be ignored. Any government must be realistic about numbers and implications. Strains on local services are real, as is a sense of alienation among some communities that feel they are being overrun. In terms of much casual labouring work, many British workers find an unlevel playing field thanks to gangmasters.
Most importantly, this country must address the worrying implications behind the undeniable truth that many employers would pick an immigrant over a British worker. These employers claim migrants are imbued with a work ethic that means they try harder and cost less. If Britain does not want to expand its indigenous population of Neets (Not in Education, Employment or Training), with all the consequent social and financial costs, government must do all it can to provide incentives to make work pay. It also requires our education system and our culture to create a climate in which acquiring skills and a desire to work becomes second nature.
Document TIMEUK0020140228ea2s0012n
