{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2982"}
____
  
Politics
Cameron paves way for TV debate with Nigel Farage
Philippe Naughton   
827 words
9 May 2014
18:20
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron said today that he would be willing to go head-to-head with Nigel Farage in a televised debate before next year’s general election but only if the leader of the Greens was invited too.
The prime minister confirmed that aides were examining an option under which he would debate one-on-one with Ed Miliband before a subsequent debate bringing in all five party leaders including Natalie Bennett of the Greens and Mr Farage for Ukip.
Another proposal being considered is for there also to be a three-way debate involving the Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg, but Mr Cameron said that he was keen that all the debates are held before official campaigning begins for the May 7 poll to avoid sucking the life out of the campaign.
“I’m very keen to examine all the different formats we can have and I’ve suggested we can have, perhaps we should have one debate with all the parties in so that everybody can have their say and perhaps we need a debate where the two people who could actually be Prime Minister debate directly with each other,” Mr Cameron said.
“I’ve said that you could have a debate where you have all of the parties. I don’t think you can have a party like Ukip without an MP if you don’t have the Greens who have got an MP.
“So there are quite a lot of issues that need to be ironed out. But I helped make the debates happen last time; I am pro-TV debates. We’ve got to find the right format but I’m sure if our teams sit down, they can come up with some sort of formula.”
Mr Cameron was speaking on a campaign visit to Bristol ahead of European parliamentary elections on May 22 at which Ukip is expected to win the largest share of the vote. A YouGov survey last week for The Sunday Times put the party on 29 per cent support, a point ahead of Labour and seven points clear of the Tories.
The Conservative leader has previously invited accusations of arrogance with his mockery of Ukip as “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists” but is now careful to refrain from such attacks.
He did, however, urge voters to consider the competence of Ukip candidates before choosing to elect them as their representatives in the European Parliament and councils.
“Remember, when you vote, you are sending people to run your local council, set your local council tax, you are sending people to the European Parliament who will legislate on the regulations faced by British business and the bills paid by the British taxpayers,” he said.
“We need the politics of the answer. We need parties who have a plan, as we have a plan in the Conservative Party, to deal with these things. “Just sending a message or making a protest doesn’t actually, I think, achieve what people want.”
Asked if he regarded Ukip as a racist party, Mr Cameron said: “During this election we have seen some extraordinary statements — in many cases very, very unpleasant statements — by Ukip financial backers and candidates, and I think it does go to the issue of the competence of the party.
“What on Earth are they doing selecting people and allowing people like this to be in their party? It does go to my core point, which is that you have got to, when you think of voting, think about the competence of the people you are going to send to Brussels or Strasbourg, the competence of the people who are going to run your local council. If they can’t control what they are saying, that does raise a very big issue of competence.”
Mr Cameron’s warning contrasted with Mr Farage’s own prediction — in an opinion piece for The Times today — that ethnic minority voters will flock to Ukip over the next five years.
The Ukip leader suggests that his party will be twice as popular as the Conservatives among non-white voters by 2019 and argues that Tories are lagging with black and Asian voters because they are seen as “a snooty party of and for the establishment”.
Mr Farage writes: “I have been noticing for a few months something very encouraging: a surge of support and new members from Britain’s ethnic minority communities.
“In one of my debates with Nick Clegg (bless him) a young woman from an Asian background asked a question about migration and I noticed her nodding as I set out the absurdity of Britain’s current immigration policy: to have a open door to more than 400 million people, many unskilled, from more than two dozen countries, while imposing restrictions that made it difficult for a New Zealand surgeon or an Indian engineer to come and make a positive contribution.”
Document TIMEUK0020140509ea59000rt
