{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2616"}
____
  
Leading Articles
Household Budget
685 words
19 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The link between economic growth and political fortune is out of synch. The Chancellor must help people feel better off
Every Chancellor of the Exchequer in living memory has been described as intensely political. It has always been assumed that the principal political events in any cycle were about the state of the economy. A Budget date has always been a political moment. The peculiar character of this long Parliament of five years is that this relationship does not seem to be holding.
The British economy lapsed back into recession and lost its Triple A credit rating but a period of austerity, always a painful process to visit on a nation, has never produced a significant lead for the Labour opposition. The party’s poll rating has only peeped above 40 per cent and it has done so occasionally and fleetingly.
Labour’s lead over the Conservatives has, however, remained solid. After a small narrowing of the gap, the lead has remained unaffected, at a running average of about six percentage points. This is in contrast to when people are asked who they most trust to run the economy. Ed Miliband and Ed Balls trail David Cameron and George Osborne by a substantial margin. That measure used to be a reliable indicator of political fortunes. It does not seem to have the same predictive power at the moment.
Recovery from recession was a long time coming but now that the British economy has had four quarters of aggregate recovery it would be usual for a political dividend to follow. After a brief recovery, the position of the Conservative Party in the opinion polls has stalled. Indeed, Tories are even starting to worry that too much good news will inure the electorate to the economic damage that a left-leaning Labour government would do.
To some extent, the failure of political fortunes to track economic reputation illustrates a disillusionment with politics which is being felt by all the mainstream parties. The most notable fact in the political landscape today is that one fifth of the electorate is declaring a plague on all three of the main parties. The main beneficiary of this revulsion with traditional politics has been Nigel Farage and Ukip. Though support for Ukip does reflect substantive concerns, chiefly about immigration, it is still largely a protest vote. Now that the Liberal Democrats, the usual repository for protest, are in the coalition, that mid-term anger has to go somewhere.
It would be foolish to suppose that this was a full explanation. The political lag on good economic news is also a product of austerity. Although the intention to cut is old news and the debate about the need to reduce public spending has been decisively won, the actual experience of cuts is only now being felt. People who might, in another political cycle, be inclined to credit the coalition with the economic recovery are instead finding the conditions of their own lives affected by the medicine that the country was forced to take.
This extends into the household budget. The Government’s move to offer a tax break on child care that will be worth up to £2,000 for each child is a recognition that macro-economic growth is not yet appearing in the pay packet. Food prices have risen 15 per cent since 2010, childcare costs by 27 per cent and energy costs by 35 per cent. The Office for National Statistics yesterday recorded that people are starting to feel wealthier and happier but this will not translate into political gratitude until household inflation is quelled.
That is the conundrum facing Mr Osborne when he delivers his Budget today. He knows, as none of his predecessors have, the precise date of the next general election. This means that after this Budget he is likely to have only the Autumn Statement between him and the Conservative Party election manifesto. The task before Mr Osborne is to reunite the political and the economic so that the pound in people’s pockets feels as if is worth more than before.
Document TIMEUK0020140319ea3j0001s
