{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1857"}
____
  
Politics
Immigration Minister accuses Cable of peddling ‘falsehoods’
Richard Ford, Home Correspondent   
511 words
6 March 2014
14:53
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Immigration Minister today accused Vince Cable, the Business Secretary, of peddling “falsehoods" over migration in a scathing attack on his government colleague.
James Brokenshire, a Home Office minister, also said the Business Secretary and other members of the Metropolitan elite had benefited at the expense of the working classes from immigration.
But asked about the Prime Minister hiring two foreign-born nannies and whether people should stop using Polish plumbers, he said he was not giving guidance to any one in particular.
“I am not trying to give any guidance to any particular individual," Mr Brokenshire said.
He later disclosed that he and his wife run their household themselves without employing nannies or cleaners.
Mr Brokenshire said big business and a Metropolitan elite had benefited from immigration at the expense of the low-skilled, low-paid, working classes and minority ethnic communities.
Mr Brokenshire accused the Business Secretary of making comments about immigration that were “simply incorrect".
He said that although Dr Cable had insisted immigration was good news, it could force down wages, displace local people from the job market and put pressure on social cohesion.
“The winners are the haves, like Vince, but the people who lose out are from working-class families, they’re ethnic minorities and recent immigrants themselves. Try telling them rising immigration is good news,"Mr Brokenshire said.
He said Dr Cable was wrong to say net immigration was rising because fewer British people were emigrating and wrong to say that because nine in every ten new jobs created were going to Britons, the Conservatives pledge to cut net migration to the tens of thousands was unworkable.
Mr Brokenshire said that he was also wrong about student visas.
He added: “He must read these statistics, so you have to wonder why he keeps asserting these falsehoods.
“Rather condescendingly, on Monday, about immigration he wrote “politicians should start by sticking to the facts". I suggest to Mr Cable that he might reflect on his comments and start doing this himself."
As he spoke the Government published an official study which said there “relatively little evidence" of foreign migrants putting British workers out of jobs during period of economic growth but there is evidence of “some labour market displacement" during the recession.
It also found there was little evidence of an impact from European Union migration on the employment of British workers, although it was a “relatively recent phenomenon" and “this does not imply that impacts do not occur in some circumstances".
Ministers have repeatedly cited research by the Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) published in 2012 and covering the period from 1995 to 2010 that found 23 British workers were left unemployed for every 100 new arrivals from outside the EU.
But the new analysis, carried out by the Home Office and Department of Business, said “when data from part of the period of economic downturn (2009 and 2010) were omitted, the impact of non-EU migration was not found to be statistically significant".
Document TIMEUK0020140306ea36003s9
