{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1000"}
____
  
Politics
Farage insists: Ukip is ‘not a racist party’
Philippe Naughton   
920 words
19 May 2014
14:09
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage insisted today that Ukip was “not a racist party” as he tried to limit the damage caused by his controversial suggestion that he would be worried if a group of Romanians moved in next door.
The Ukip leader took out a full-page advertisement in The Daily Telegraph to publish an open letter explaining his comments and warning of the risk posed by organised criminal gangs from Romania.
Three days before European parliamentary elections at which Ukip is hoping to win the greatest share of the vote, Mr Farage wrote that his comments had caused a “predictable storm of protest and accusations of racism”.
“Let me be clear — Ukip is not a racist party, and our immigration policy, far from being racist, aims to end discrimination against non-Europeans,” he added.
“The vast majority of Romanians who have come to the UK wish to better their lives and would make good neighbours.
“But there is a real problem, an unpalatable truth that our political class would rather not discuss. Since the welcome fall of Communism and the awful dictator Ceausescu, Romania has struggled to complete a full transition into a western democracy.”
The Ukip leader made the comment during a no-holds barred interview on LBC radio and had initially stood by his remarks. Last night he started to backtrack, saying: “Do you know what, in life sometimes people get things wrong.”
He told BBC News: “I regret the fact that I was completely tired out and I didn’t use the form of words in response that I would have liked to have used.
“I should have just hit back immediately and said: ‘Look, understand there is a real problem here — you can’t deny it — too much criminality from these gangs has come to London’.”
In the run-up to Thursday’s European and local elections, Ukip has used the prospect of unbridled immigration from new EU member states in eastern Europe to press its case for Britain to leave the European Union.
Last week the Labour MP Keith Vaz demanded an apology from Mr Farage when it transpired that his warnings last year that Britain was to be submerged in a flood of Romanians and Bulgarians after the lifting of labour market restrictions on January 1 had proved wrong: in fact figures showed the number of workers from both countries falling in the first three months of the year.
Mr Farage said that European Union free movement rules meant that there was “nothing the UK authorities can do to stop such people from entering our country”.
He said: “We should not be in a political union with Romania, with an opened door to all of their citizens.”
He quoted Metropolitan Police crime statistics suggesting that 92 per cent of all cashpoint crime was carried out by Romanians and that 28,000 Romanians had been arrested in the London area in the past five years.
By leaving the EU and “taking back control of our borders” the “necessary checks” could be done on would-be immigrants, Mr Farage said.
“When this happens my answer to the question ‘Should people be concerned if a group of Romanian men moved in next door?’ will be ‘No’.”
Asked about Mr Farage’s comments, David Cameron said that the Ukip leader had said some “really pretty unpleasant things" but stopped short of calling him a racist.
“I think he has said in recent days some really pretty unpleasant things and he has even himself had to admit he got it wrong.
“I will leave others to judge but what I have heard from some of the candidates, some of the donors to the party is a succession of pretty appalling things.
For his part, Nick Clegg said that that Mr Farage had revealed his “divisive, nasty approach” to politics.
“I think the mask is starting to slip and I think what’s being revealed that sort of behind the beer-swilling bonhomie is a rather nasty view of the world,” the deputy prime minister said.
“Anyone who singles out one community, one nationality, and says ‘I don’t want to live next door to them’ ... I really think that’s the politics of division and I think it really should have no place in modern Britain.”
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, described Mr Farage’s original comment on Friday as a racial slur that was “completely out of order”.
Mr Miliband said he could understand why people supported Ukip because they are not happy with the political system, but he emphasised that Mr Farage’s party does not have the solutions.
“I think, though, our politics is sort of disagreeable enough without political leaders saying about other political leaders ‘They are a racist’,” he said. “I think it was deeply offensive, I think it was wrong what he said.
“I don’t know Nigel Farage very well, I think he made one remark which was completely wrong, completely out of order, and was a slur. Apparently he’s said he got it wrong, he should certainly say he’s got it wrong.”
Asked whether he understood why people would vote Ukip, Mr Miliband said: “I can understand why people feel deep discontent with the political system and why people would look at other alternatives, of course I can.
“My view is that Ukip might be siding with the discontent that people feel. But they don’t have the solutions.”
Document TIMEUK0020140519ea5j0015s
