{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3135"}
____
  
Crime
Police arrest 40 to stop flow of would-be warriors from Britain
Sean O’Neill, Crime and Security Editor   
528 words
24 April 2014
10:56
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Anti-terrorist police have made 40 arrests and conducted hundreds of searches in the first three months of this year, stopping Britons travelling to or from Syria.
The level of police activity has increased sharply since last year when there were 25 arrests. It signals growing concern among security officials over the danger to the lives of young men travelling to the conflict and the potential threat posed by Britons who have fought in Syria.
There were police raids at six addresses in London and the southeast yesterday which Scotland Yard said were carried out under the Terrorism Act. The latest arrest figures were disclosed last night before an appeal today to Muslim women to prevent their sons, husbands and brothers travelling to the war-torn country.
They came as US authorities revealed that a British citizen has been charged in the UK and is awaiting extradition to the US for his part in an alleged operation to smuggle chemical laboratory equipment into Syria for possible use by the Assad regime.
A federal indictment unsealed in the US yesterday gave details of the alleged conspiracy to export lab equipment and items designed to detect chemical warfare agents.
Ahmad Feras Diri, who lived in Muswell Hill, north London, was arrested by Scotland Yard officers in March last year, the indictment said, but his brother, named as Moawea Deri “remains at large and is considered a fugitive”, US immigration and customs enforcement said.
According to the charges, the men conspired to export items from 2003 to 2012, shipping them from the US through Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the UK to Syria
“We are increasingly concerned about the numbers of young people who have or are intending to travel to Syria to join the conflict,” said Helen Ball, the deputy assistant commissioner and senior national co-ordinator for counter-terrorism policing.
“We want to ensure that people, particularly women, who are concerned about their loved ones are given enough information about what they can do to prevent this from happening. We want to increase their confidence in the police and partners to encourage them to come forward so that we can intervene and help. This is not about criminalising people; it is about preventing tragedies. We want to inform those who wish to genuinely help the Syrian cause how they can do so safely and legally.”
Ms Ball’s comments echo the remarks of Cressida Dick, the assistant commissioner, who told The Times earlier this year that counter-terrorism police were working with a number of families to stop loved ones from travelling to Syria. The appeal to women is designed to counteract the language of martyrdom, duty and sacrifice used by men who are raising money and recruiting for jihad in Muslim communities.
Families are known to have confiscated the passports of relatives or to have contacted police in attempts to stop them going to join the conflict. However, there is also a deep reluctance among families to pass information that might lead to loved ones being arrested and jailed.
Document TIMEUK0020140423ea4o003kp
