{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"804"}
____
  
Theatre
The A-Z of Mrs P at Southwark Playhouse, SE1
Donald Hutera   
465 words
26 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Star Rating: 4 stars
Phyllis Pearsall is often erroneously cited as the inventor of London’s famous A-Z street atlas, a myth that the painter turned businesswoman propagated herself. That is perhaps why this engaging new musical — a genre ideal for playing loose with facts — dubs itself a fable. Written by Diane Samuels, and with music and lyrics by the singer-songwriter Gwyneth Herbert, it’s a small-scale entertainment of some charm. And, much to its credit, in the second act it acquires considerably more texture and emotional depth.
The script’s timeline is fuzzy, but acceptably so. I suspect that Pearsall, whose long life spanned almost the entire 20th century, wasn’t easy to get to know. As played by the wide-eyed but determined Isy Suttie, making a highly likeable musical theatre debut, she mainly seems to get by on sheer pluck. As the show commences Pearsall is leaving a sleeping husband in Venice and heading back to London with no prospects. In the apparent absence of much personal information about the real person, and presumably trying to get a handle on what made her tick, the show’s creators mine Pearsall’s family background for all its worth. For the most part their strategy works.
The director, Sam Buntrock, scored a big hit a few years ago on both sides of the Atlantic with a Menier Chocolate Factory production of Sunday in the Park With George. Working in Southwark Playhouse’s relatively intimate main house, alongside the choreographer Nick Winston, he gives Mrs P a polished traverse staging that suits the material to a T. He’s abetted by Klara Zieglerova’s set design, an attractive jumble of objects arcing overhead, and a talented supporting cast of eight who make the most of several dozen minor characters.
The showiest roles go to Frances Ruffelle and Michael Matus as Pearsall’s conflicted, screwed-up parents. Her fetching Irish-Italian mum becomes a mentally unstable dipsomaniac, while his Hungarian-Jewish immigrant father resolutely remains a self-justifying, philandering rogue. Together they’re a very effective embodiment of tragicomedy. Suttie and Stuart Matthew Price, as Pearsall’s older brother, are quietly affecting in their reaction to Ruffelle’s decline. Even better is a climactic scene between Suttie and Matus that subtly condenses a lifetime of mutual frustrations into one final dinner-table meeting.
Last but not least, Herbert’s character-driven score is accomplished — melodious (particularly the lilting and already award-winning Lovely London Town), articulate and fun, especially in the patter songs in which Suttie and company rattle off the street names to which the elusive, complicated Pearsall owed her livelihood.
Box office: 020-7407 0234, to March 29
Document TIMEUK0020140226ea2q000xo
