{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"68"}
____
  
Leading Articles
Clegg v Farage
659 words
26 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Tonight’s debate between the Deputy Prime Minister and the Ukip leader is just what our democracy needs
A spectre is haunting British politics. It is the spectre of apathy. In fact the word “spectre” may suggest something a little too material and the word “haunting” something a little too real. There is, rather, a nagging, submarine worry that the basis of our democracy — an interaction between knowledgeable, engaged voters and a substantial cadre of committed members of political parties — is eroding beyond the point of repair.
Though the chart shows fluctuations, by and large voter turnout is falling. Though there are occasional upward bounces in party membership (invariably when the bouncing party is in opposition), far fewer of us pay membership dues to a political party than did 30 years ago. It has become a routine accompaniment to any party conference to have despairing discussions on how to “reach out” and “involve” the public.
But one obstacle to politicians engaging with the voters is, quite simply, that the former are scared of the latter. They are in the business of finely calculating the balance of advantage and disadvantage of saying anything interesting to the voters at all. Very often in interviews or television appearances the sole objective appears to be to emerge at the other end of an encounter unscathed. The result, as Newsnight’s editor said recently of a notoriously guarded opposition politician, is “boring, snoring”.
Tonight we are likely to witness a political event that is not boring, snoring. At 7pm on LBC radio and on Sky TV the Deputy Prime Minister, Nick Clegg, and the leader of Ukip, Nigel Farage, will debate the subject of Europe. They will then do it all again a week later on the BBC. Mr Clegg is our leading pro-European politician and Mr Farage is certainly our best known anti-EU campaigner. Though both are privately educated and come from well-heeled backgrounds, that is where the similarity ends. They are political, cultural and temperamental opposites. This is Godzilla versus King Kong.
The existence of these debates owes a lot to the decision of LBC and Nick Clegg to broadcast a weekly, live phone-in programme earlier this year. What they both had perhaps noticed is that for all the talk of apathy, there is a contradictory appetite on the part of the British public for live and robust debate.
This is evidenced in the number of people watching (and, via social media, engaging with) television debate programmes from Question Time to rather less sedate formats on Channel 5. It can be seen in the turn outs for public debates at the book festivals that take place almost every weekend in Britain. Where speakers promise to be forthright, committed and clear, they are likely to gain an audience.
When Mr Clegg challenged Mr Farage, it helped that neither man thought he had anything to lose. Not many Liberal Democrat voters are toying with switching to Ukip or vice versa. Mr Clegg will hope to gain simply from putting the usually timid pro-European case to a deeply sceptical electorate; Mr Farage from being seen to play with the big boys.
But if they don’t stand to lose, we the voters stand to win. It must be obvious that national, broadcast debates like this do not happen often enough. Similar exchanges could usefully be held on subjects such as immigration, the health services and intervention abroad. All that is needed is the willingness of broadcasters to schedule them and for senior politicians to take part.
It is depressing, then, that far from the party mood music suggesting a willingness to repeat the televised debates of the 2010 election, it rather hints that they may not take place in 2015. That would be a mistake. It is the exact opposite of what the country needs if it is ever to exorcise the spirit of apathy.
Document TIMEUK0020140326ea3q0001w
