{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2794"}
____
  
UK News
Rise in net immigration leaves Cameron’s promise ‘in tatters’
Richard Ford, Home Correspondent   
647 words
27 February 2014
20:14
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron’s pledge to cut net immigration to under 100,000 by next year was in “tatters" tonight after a surprise surge in migrants from the European Union.
Net immigration is now at its highest since 2011, and the Prime Minister is faced with going into an election without having met one of his key promises.
Nigel Farage, the UKIP leader, said the 30 per cent rise in net migration showed “just how out of control" the Government was on immigration.
The figures from the Office for National Statistics are a gift to UKIP,  which is already predicted to do well in the European Elections in May.
In the year to September, net migration rose to 212,000, up almost a third from 154,000 the previous year. Much of the increase was driven by an influx of people from EU states such as Poland, Spain, Portugal, Italy and France looking for work.
There was a “statistically significant" rise in Romanians and Bulgarians even though they were still barred from the UK  jobs market. Immigration from the two countries more than doubled to 24,000. EU immigration is now at its highest level in 50 years, the ONS said.
It is the third quarter in a row that the politically sensitive net migration figure — the difference between those arriving and those leaving — has increased, reflecting the difficulty the Government has in reducing numbers.
Chancellor Merkel of Germany signalled how hard it will be to curb flows in her Westminster speech today when she hailed free movement as “one of the greatest achievements of European unification".
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of Migration Watch UK, said: “Government policy is succeeding in bringing down non-EU migration but they have been blown off course by a sharp increase of 66,000 migrants from the EU.
The number of National Insurance numbers given to overseas nationals showed a 19 per cent increase to 617,000 in 2013. Many of the arrivals were from countries hit hardest by the eurozone financial crisis.
The number of Spaniards registering for a National Insurance number rose by 36 per cent to 51,000, Italians by 66 per cent to 44,000, Portuguese 47 per cent to 30,000 and French by 23 per cent to 24,000. Poland also saw a jump of 39 per cent with 111,000 registering.
Mark Hilton, the head of immigration policy at London First, said it was “game over" for the Government’s migration target. “What we need to be wary of is the Government trying to control future figures by further limiting the only number it has power over — non-EU migrants," he said. “In the past, this has hit both highly-skilled immigrants that we need, as well as foreign students, who are a huge economic asset."
James Brokenshire, the new Immigration Minister, said: “The Government is ensuring that our controls on accessing benefits and services, including the NHS and social housing, are among the tightest in Europe. We cannot impose formal immigration controls on EU migrants, so we are . . . seeking to address the factors that drive European immigration to Britain."
In December, Mr Cameron hinted that it was becoming difficult to meet his pledge to reduce net migration below 100,000. Speaking during his China trip, he said: “A lot of these things take an amount of time to be dealt with."
Three years ago, Mr Cameron said in a major speech : “Our borders will be under control and immigration will be at levels our country can manage. No ifs. No buts. That’s a promise."
This was seized on today by the Shadow Home Secretary, Yvette Cooper.  “These figures show the Government’s net migration target is in tatters, and their immigration policy is a mess," she said.
Document TIMEUK0020140228ea2r0008e
