{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2570"}
____
  
Politics
Boris and I get on fine, says Osborne as tensions grow
Laura Pitel, Political Correspondent   
504 words
17 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
George Osborne was forced to deny a rift with Boris Johnson yesterday after weeks of speculation about their rival ambitions for the Tory leadership.
A spate of infighting has broken out between supporters of the two men over who should succeed David Cameron if the Conservatives lose the next election. Mr Osborne yesterday insisted that he and Mr Johnson were on good terms.
“Sometimes you read in the papers about people you don’t, in honest truth, get on with," he said. “But I read about not getting on with Boris Johnson. That is just not true. I get on very well with him and I think we’re delivering together for the people of London in the way that the people of London would expect of their Mayor and their Chancellor."
Hostilities erupted at the start of the month when The Times revealed that Mr Osborne was said to have urged Mr Johnson to stand as a parliamentary candidate next year. The move was seen by some of the Mayor’s allies as a shoddy attempt to bind his fate to that of the Prime Minister.
Relations soured further when it was claimed that Michael Gove, the Education Secretary, had used a private dinner with Rupert Murdoch to disparage Mr Johnson and throw his weight behind the Chancellor. The Mayor’s friends reacted furiously.
Asked if he’d like to see the former MP make a return to the Commons, Mr Osborne said that the matter was “entirely up to Boris". He added: “Well, if he wants to come back in the House of Commons, absolutely — at the next election or whenever. But that’s his decision and I think he’s doing a fantastic job as the Mayor."
The tension has threatened to undermine the unity that Mr Cameron’s election guru, Lynton Crosby, has sought to impose on the party as the general election approaches. He has told ministers to limit announcements that distract attention from the core themes of the economy, immigration and welfare.
In an interview with the Financial Times at the weekend, Mr Gove said there were a “preposterous" number of Old Etonians in Downing Street. The remarks were seen by some as an attack not on the Prime Minister but on Mr Johnson, who was two years above Mr Cameron at the exclusive public school.
The Chancellor, who attended St Paul’s, a leading independent boys’ day school, said Mr Gove was simply making a point about the need to improve standards in the state sector. “He’s talking about what he is passionate about, which is improving the education in this country," he said.
He also praised Iain Duncan Smith. Relations between the two men have been under strain since a book by the journalist Matthew d’Ancona claimed that the Chancellor privately believed that the Work and Pensions Secretary was “just not clever enough" to be in the Cabinet.
Document TIMEUK0020140317ea3h000q6
