{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1261"}
____
  
Politics
UKIP embarrassed by rehash of BNP’s ‘Love Britain’ slogan
Laura Pitel, Political Correspondent   
442 words
28 February 2014
13:57
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
UKIP faced embarrassment today after unveiling a new slogan almost identical to one used by the British National Party.
The party used its spring conference in Torquay to launch the “Love Britain, Vote UKIP" motto.
It quickly emerged, however, that the words “Love Britain, Vote BNP" had previously been used by the far-Right party.
The BNP was sued in 2010 by Unilever after using a picture of a jar of Marmite in its campaign alongside the slogan.
A party spokesman said that the BNP still used the motto. “They’ve stolen our policies," he said, “and now they’ve stolen our slogan."
A UKIP spokesman said “We don’t care about the BNP."
Nigel Farage, leader of UKIP, used his conference speech to rally the troops in advance of the May European election, at which it hopes to ride a wave of Euroscepticism to secure first place.
Mr Farage said the growing support for his party posed “the biggest threat to the political establishment that has been seen in modern times" and urged voters to use the poll to “cause an earthquake in British politics".
The key issue, he said, would be migration and the “irresponsible" numbers of people coming to the UK from abroad.
Scores of market towns across Britain were becoming “unrecognisable", he claimed, because of an influx of foreign workers.
His closing remarks made a sideways reference to the slogan fiasco. He said: “I think we’ve got the message right: Love Britain, vote UKIP."
The incident is deeply awkward for UKIP, which has worked hard to avoid comparisons with the BNP. It describes itself as a non-racist party for those who support a tougher approach to immigration.
Over the past year it has been on a drive to professionalise, vetting candidates and presenting a more slick media image after a series of negative headlines about some of its more controversial figures.
Today’s conference had been billed as a chance to show off this new image. The maverick MEP Godfrey Bloom, who was blamed for ruining the party’s autumn gathering last year, has stayed away.
The party had promised that there would “new faces" on parade, including many leading female members.
In a speech to delegates, UKIP’s new director of communications, Patrick O’Flynn, urged delegates not to fall into “elephant traps set for us by the media".
The former Daily Express journalist said it was important for candidates not to stay off-message deliberately so as not to cause unnecessary difficulties for the party and for Mr Farage.
Document TIMEUK0020140228ea2s004bo
