{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1381"}
____
  
New Articles
George Osborne or Boris Johnson? Let the battle begin; nlikely as it might seem to some, the possibility of London’s Mayor becoming Tory leader during the next parliament is back on the agenda
Tim Montgomerie   
496 words
2 March 2014
20:53
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron may confound the bookmakers and win the next election but few Conservative MPs see Cameronism as the answer to their party’s long-term unpopularity. If Mr Cameron clings on to the Downing Street keys it will largely be because of the weaknesses of Ed Miliband. Zig-zagging between Big Society greenery and Ukippish attitudes to immigrants, Cameronism has not begun to build the kind of support among lower-income Britons, ethnic minorities and urban northerners that would underpin a natural Tory majority.
And that is why, unlikely as it might seem to some, the possibility of Boris Johnson becoming Tory leader during the next parliament is back on the agenda. Saturday’s Times revealed that the PM has opened the door to Boris becoming an MP at the next election and wants him to play a key part in the Tory re-election effort. The Cameroons calculate that he either helps that effort succeed or shares the blame for its failure. The invitation also gives London’s Mayor a huge opportunity. He will be able to return to the Commons without the current leadership being able to accuse him of disloyalty.
Up until now George Osborne has been keen to put obstacles in his rival’s way. Although he remains a hard sell to the public — and until recently was even regarded as a liability by the Tories’ campaign supremo, Lynton Crosby — the Chancellor hopes to move next door when Mr Cameron moves on. He has built a network of loyal supporters in the commentariat and among MPs. His most loyal lieutenant is Michael Gove. The Education Secretary is honest when he says he does not want to be leader himself but one notion is that he becomes Osborne’s running mate. He is already using private gatherings to big up the Chancellor and talk down London’s Mayor.
Boris’s challenge is to address the issues highlighted by Mr Gove and convince sceptical Tory MPs that he has the gravitas for the nation’s top job. He’ll do that with a big tent of personalities and policies.
On the personalities front he should run on a joint ticket with reassuring big beasts as his choices for economic stewardship and EU renegotiation. His big tent policies — imagine a Eurosceptic Heseltine-ism — should feature large infrastructure projects, especially housebuilding, tax reform for the low-paid and exploitation of shale gas.
But, these tactics aside, Boris will inherit the crown if he passes one simple test: opinion polls must convince Tory MPs that he’ll win more voters than Theresa May, Jeremy Hunt or any of his other possible rivals. If the polls are on Boris’s side, otherwise hesitant Tory MPs will follow quickly afterwards.
Document TIMEUK0020140303ea32000dy
