{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1307"}
____
  
Politics
I feel awkward in towns where no one talks English, Farage tells party
Laura Pitel, Political Correspondent   
540 words
1 March 2014
00:17
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Parts of Britain have become unrecognisable after being taken over by migrants, Nigel Farage claimed yesterday.
In a speech at his party’s spring conference, the UKIP leader said that there were market towns in England where only foreign languages could be heard on the streets.
“Whether it is the impact on local schools and hospitals, whether it is the fact in many parts of England you don’t hear English spoken any more, this is not the kind of community we want to leave to our children and grandchildren," he said. Mr Farage added that immigration would be the biggest issue at the forthcoming European elections.
UKIP, which wants a five-year freeze on immigration, has harnessed public concern over the issue in recent years to boost its profile and bolster its argument for leaving the EU. Its growing support has forced both Labour and the Conservatives to take a tougher line.
The timing of yesterday’s speech could not have been better for Mr Farage, coming the day after statistics showed a huge increase in net migration. The increase from 154,000 to 212,000 in the year to September undermined David Cameron’s pledge to reduce the figure to 100,000 by 2015.
Mr Farage said that a massive over-supply of cheap labour in Britain was hurting “ordinary folk".
Asked to expand on his claim that he no longer recognised some areas of the UK, he said he and many other Britons felt uncomfortable when surrounded only by foreign languages. He described a train journey home from inner-city London to Kent, saying it was only towards the end of the trip that he heard English spoken in the carriage. “Does that make me feel slightly awkward? Yes it does."
Yesterday’s gathering in Torquay was billed as an opportunity to show off a new, more professional UKIP. The maverick MEP Godfrey Bloom, blamed for ruining UKIP’s autumn conference, stayed away. The party has urged activists not to engage in “cranky" behaviour that would distract from its core message.
Nevertheless, the day was not without incident. The first blip came when it emerged that a new slogan unveiled on the conference stage — “Love Britain, Vote UKIP" — was almost identical to one previously used by the British National Party. Mr Farage sought to shrug off the parallel, but it was awkward given the party’s efforts to distance itself from the far-Right group.
A further flashpoint came at a fringe debate on Sharia when a conference delegate stood up and asked the panel: “How can you be both a Muslim and an Englishman?" He was shouted down and told by the party’s culture spokesman, Peter Whittle: “That we absolutely reject . . . We are absolutely in favour of a multi-ethnic society."
UKIP hopes to use May’s elections as a springboard for the general election campaign next year. Mr Farage said he would consider it a failure if he did not secure a representative in Westminster. Asked if that meant he would resign, he said: “Good Lord yes." UKIP later insisted that the remark was a joke.
Document TIMEUK0020140301ea310010a
