{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2327"}
____
  
Daniel Finkelstein
My contender for the stupid socialist award
Daniel Finkelstein   
1,212 words
20 May 2014
11:16
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
If Thomas Piketty thinks that today’s capitalism has failed, he needs to explain what he is going to replace it with
In 1973 Joseph-Désiré Mobutu had an idea. As part of his drive to be seen as the intellectual leader of Africa, a role for which he was spectacularly unsuited, he would embark on a vast economic experiment. Zaireanisation.
What had once been the Congo Free State was pursuing what Mobutu termed a policy of “authenticity”, and Zaireanisation would be its economic counterpart. It involved nationalising foreign-owned assets — farms, plantations, commercial enterprises, the entire industrial sector.
Mobutu was a bit hazy on detail and his favourite subjects at school had always been demagoguery and rhetoric rather then economics. So the rules governing who got the assets and who managed the industries were vague to the point of non-existence.
The result was disaster. Zaire became a kleptocracy with, as Michela Wrong records in her brilliant history of the president’s regime, Mobutu as the king thief. A new social class — the Big Vegetables — was born, handing out assets to themselves and their relatives. Prices rose, businesses shut, jobs disappeared, growth came to an end and imports of Mercedes-Benz cars hit an African record.
By the time that even Mobutu realised his error, it was too late. He called for foreign investors to come back to Zaire, but who would want to do that?
Let me explain why I am bringing this up. Over the past month the French economist Thomas Piketty has been on a world tour supporting his new book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, the title a deliberate echo of Marx. He has been advancing the idea that capitalism will produce an increasingly unequal society. And his reception has been rapturous.
The enthusiasm for his book has mainly come from the left. Not, however, exclusively. There is general agreement that he has produced interesting data that, at the very least, poses a troubling question: if returns on capital grow faster than the economy, as Piketty suggests has happened at most points in capitalism’s history, might we be heading towards a grossly unequal society based on inherited wealth?
The Frenchman says that we have only enjoyed a brief holiday from this tendency because of progressive policy and because two world wars destroyed great fortunes. We are now heading back to the past.
His data and his writing have won him positive reviews. However, even the commentators most convinced by this account of the future finish with what they see as a small admission, one the author makes too. Piketty’s solution to the problem he predicts — a global wealth tax and 80 per cent top income tax rate — is not very “realistic”. Which I think means, “is one of Baldrick’s cunning plans”.
Yet this admission is not, not remotely, a small one. It is not just an afterthought in a critique of capitalism that the author can’t think of a better idea. It is not a side point that in the 150 years or so since Marx’s Capital, every single attempt at an alternative to capitalism has been a growth-destroying, liberty-crushing, dictator-producing, starvation-creating, murderous disaster.
Stupid though it was, Mobutu’s Zaireanisation wouldn’t win the international socialist stupidity competition. I am pretty sure Mao’s Great Leap Forward, in which peasants melted down their cooking pots to make steel and then died of hunger, would edge him. And the Kims in North Korea would be justifiably miffed if their effort didn’t at least net them a “highly commended”.
When I was an undergraduate debating for hours in Florries, the LSE student union coffee shop, I used to think that one day I would grow up and work out how the great utopian schemes of my left-wing fellow students would actually work. During the Occupy demonstration outside St Paul’s in 2012 I finally realised that I was doomed to die not knowing.
The proposals that Piketty makes may not be on the epic scale of Mobutu, but they are not obviously more practical. Or desirable. I have a friend who always makes the point that all politics is autobiography, so perhaps I might explain my argument using a little family history.
I come from exactly the sort of family that Piketty writes about. The sort whose inherited fortune was destroyed by the war. My grandfather was a wealthy man. He and his brother had built a major industrial iron business, employed many people and owned factories and workshops. Stalin took it all, sent him to Starobelsk labour camp and my father and grandmother to the borders of Siberia. By the time the family arrived in London they were on national assistance.
I hope I can be excused for not seeing this as an entirely good thing. In other words, the destruction of inheritance by the war might conceivably play a benign role in a book on inequality (the social evil that Piketty entirely aims at), but it would certainly play a malign one in a book on liberty.
In any case, as it happens there was no increase in equality. My grandfather’s property wasn’t enjoyed by the people. The Soviets and the Nazis tried running the factory before closing it down; the wealth was destroyed not redistributed.
And the family home? It became a holiday apartment for communist leaders in Ukraine. The bitter truth of most schemes for redistributing large chunks of wealth is that, rather than being spread, it is held by the state and enhances the power, wealth and status of the Big Vegetables.
Piketty, I am sure, doesn’t see his policy as one of confiscation. Yet my grandfather’s property had to be removed at the point of a gun. His imprisonment was a necessary part of the deal. He wouldn’t have carried on doing business in Ukraine if he knew it would be taken from him. Who is going to build a fortune that they will not be permitted to enjoy and that will not be allowed to pass to their children?
There is one more relevant piece of family history. My father did not inherit the factory and its responsibilities. He came here penniless. But he did inherit from both his parents a belief in the power of knowledge and he had an immigrant’s work ethic. He rebuilt in this country.
Thomas Piketty’s work has many assumptions and a good deal of heroic extrapolation. It is a hypothesis. Against this is the certainty that in a free enterprise system, education for all and hard work promises prosperity and liberty under law.
A more modest claim than the great dreams of the anti-capitalists, but less likely to yield to the tyranny of the Big Vegetables.
daniel.finkelstein@thetimes.co.uk
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
This article has been chosen as today’s Talking Point by The Times community team for the quality of the comments left by readers. Vote for your favourite comments by clicking on the ‘Recommend’ button and get involved in the debate below (read our house rules if you’re new to commenting).
Document TIMEUK0020140520ea5k000xe
