{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2033"}
____
  
UK News
The Times Diary (TMS): Alex Salmond’s yo yo dieting, Baroness Trumpington’s autobiography and is Nigel Farage Hague Mark II?
Patrick Kidd   
588 words
29 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Salmond curries favour
Alex Salmond may be growing in popularity but the SNP leader wants to be less of a heavyweight. In an interview with the new GQ, Salmond boasts that by ditching his beloved lamb curry to pursue the fashionable 5:2 diet he has shed two stone from a starting weight of 17st. Very laudable, but he made exactly the same claim last October. Have six months of dieting resulted in no net loss, or has he been making the odd secret trip to the Taste of the Raj?
In choice of diet, at least, Salmond has been a trailblazer for George Osborne, who started on the 5:2 after Christmas. Salmond is no fan of the chancellor. Asked by GQ to say something nice about Osborne, he pauses before eventually, after a prod, damning him with faint praise: “He’s cleverer than [David] Cameron.”
Not everyone is thrilled that Dad’s Army is being remade as a film. Frank Williams, the vicar and one of three surviving actors from the series, may hope for a cameo but Pamela Cundell, who played Mrs Fox, is very cross. “I’m trying to get hold of Jimmy Perry [the co-creator] to tell him,” she says. “There was only one Captain Mainwaring, one stupid boy and one John le Mesurier. New ones will just be shadows.”
Too busy having fun
Coming Up Trumps, Baroness Trumpington’s autobiography of a life well lived, stretching from Bletchley Park to the Lords via tap-dancing on tables in a New York bar, should be on everyone’s must-read list — including that of the baroness herself, who was extensively assisted by a ghost-writer, Deborah Crewe. In an interview at the weekend, Trumpers nonchalantly admitted: “I don’t understand all this excitement. I didn’t write the damn book, and I haven’t read it either.”
Is Nige the new Hague?
Honest Nige took the Ukip roadshow to Portsmouth yesterday but the day started badly when his campaign bus smashed into the canopy outside the railway station during a tricky manoeuvre. Clearly the driver hadn’t got the memo about “no U-turns”.
The purple bus had “common sense” written on the side, which was the same slogan used by the Conservatives in the 2001 general election. Ukip’s platform of saving the pound and rejecting immigration is similar to that pursued by William Hague 13 years ago, and Farage has even built his image on drinking pints. Is Nige trying to be Hague Mark II?
An unfortunate juxtaposition of adverts was spotted in Edinburgh. Next to a billboard promoting the Ukip election campaign was an advert for a camping company, showing its new tent with the slogan “no poles required”.
Named and unashamed
When he’s not grappling with Max Clifford’s shortcomings in court, I have a colleague who likes to hang out at literary festivals. It was Chipping Norton’s turn at the weekend, where Joanna Trollope, below, dame of the Aga saga, praised the sturdiness of Emma Bridgewater’s dishwasher-friendly surname. That led her to recall a night out with a “very prim and proper” friend who had the surname Hoare. The friend was dismayed by the amusement she caused in the taxi office when she phoned to book a car for Hoare and Trollope. The driver was probably disappointed, too.
Document TIMEUK0020140428ea4t00319
