{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2747"}
﻿Politics
Cameron’s biggest hopes for the talks
Times Staff   
496 words
27 February 2014
00:02
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Repariation
Cameron wants:
* To negotiate powers back to national control from Brussels to help to win over voters in a referendum on EU membership in 2017.
Merkel does not believe that this is possible, but she does favour giving Britain special deals to help to keep it in the EU.
* Powers back over immigration, linking future freedom of movement to the strength of each member state’s economy.
For Merkel a non-starter: freedom of movement is a sacrosanct principle in the EU.
* Powers back over welfare payments to combat benefit tourism.
Merkel is keeping an open mind on this. She has commissioned research on the true extent of benefits tourism in Germany.
* Powers back over social and workplace regulation
Merkel can support an evidence-based case to support national traditions in the public services, such as NHS working hours.
* To exempt small and medium-size businesses from EU red tape.
Merkel can support a sensible proposal that does not go too far.
* Powers back over environment regulation.
Merkel feels that flexibility could help the German car industry so there is perhaps room to deal on this.
* An end to the commitment to “ever closer union".
Merkel believes this is not necessary and is unlikely to support this.
Personnel
* Cameron wants to block the most federalist candidates for President of the European Commission and install a business-friendly north European when the job changes in the autumn. He favours Enda Kenny (centre-right Irish PM); Jyrki Katainen (centre-right Finnish PM), Valdis Dombrovskis (centre-right ex-Latvian PM); and Helle Thorning-Schmidt (centre-left Danish PM). He is keen to stop Martin Schulz (centre-left German President of European Parliament); Jean-Claude Juncker (centre-right Luxembourg ex-PM); and Guy Verhofstadt (Liberal Belgian ex-PM).
Merkel also wants a business-friendly north European but her Christian Democratic Union Party has formally backed the federalist Mr Juncker.
She is reluctantly giving public support to Mr Juncker. She is keen on Donald Tusk (centre-right Polish PM), Mr Kenny and Mr Katainen.
She is also keen to stop Mr Verhofstadt and may reluctantly be forced to accept Mr Schulz if centre-left parties win the most votes in May’s European Parliament elections.
Reform
* Cameron wants protection for non-euro countries from decisions taken by the 18 nations in the single currency, which have an unbeatable qualified majority.
This sounds like a sensible reform that Merkel can live with.
* To complete the single market in services, energy and digital.
Merkel believes that this is worth giving a try.
* A bigger role for national parliaments in blocking EU legislation.
Merkel is open-minded on groups of parliaments having a bigger say, but against a return to individual national vetoes.
* Repatriation and reform written into a new EU treaty.
Merkel is against a new treaty, but has an open mind on legal opt-outs and provisos attached to existing treaties.
Document TIMEUK0020140227ea2r000yp
