{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"841"}
____
  
Law Reports
Systemic deficiencies not required for asylum claim
1,227 words
27 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Supreme Court
Published February 27, 2014
EM (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department EH (Iran) v Same AE (Eritrea) v Same MA (Eritrea) v Same
Before Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury, Lord Kerr of Tonaghmore, Lord Carnwath, Lord Toulson and Lord Hodge
Judgment February 19, 2014
The presumption that other member states of the European Union would comply with their international obligations in relation to the protection of the human rights of asylum seekers and refugees did not extinguish the need, in deciding whether a person should be returned to a member state where he had first sought asylum, to examine whether in fact those obligations would be fulfilled when evidence was presented that it was unlikely that they would be.
If it was shown that there was a real risk that he would be subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment in that member state, his removal there was forbidden. It did not have to be shown that the source of the risk was systemic deficiencies in that state’s asylum procedures and reception conditions.
The Supreme Court so held when allowing appeals by four claimants from a decision of the Court of Appeal (Lord Justice Richards, Lord Justice Sullivan and Sir Stephen Sedley) (The Times December 6, 2012; [2013] 1 WLR 576), dismissing the claimants’ appeals from Mr Justice Kenneth Parker in the EM case ([2012] CMLR 1190), Mr Stephen Males, QC, sitting as a deputy High Court judge, in the EH case ([2012] EWHC 512 (Admin)), Mr C. M. G. Ockleton, sitting as a deputy High Court judge, in the AE case ([2011] EWHC 3826 (Admin)) and Mr Justice Langstaff in the MA case ([2012] EWHC 56 (Admin)).
Each of the claimants had sought asylum in Italy before they arrived illegally in the United Kingdom and made fresh claims for asylum. On discovering that they had all first claimed asylum in Italy the Home Secretary issued removal directions for each of them to be returned to Italy.
The claimants resisted their return on the ground that Italy’s system for the processing and reception of asylum seekers was such that if returned to Italy they would face a real risk of being subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment in violation of article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
Ms Monica Carrs-Frisk, QC, Mr Raza Husain, QC, Mr David Chirico and Mr Mark Symes for EM, AE and EH; Ms Monica Carrs-Frisk, QC, Mr Raza Husain, QC and Ms Melanie Plimmer for MA; Mr Michael Fordham, QC and Ms Marie Demetriou, QC, for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as intervener; Ms Lisa Giovannetti, QC and Mr Alan Payne for the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
LORD KERR OF TONAGHMORE, with whom the other members of the court agreed, said that Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003, commonly known as the Dublin II Regulation provided that asylum claims had to be processed and acted on by the member state of the European Union in which an asylum seeker first arrived.
Asylum seekers and those who had been granted asylum (refugees) might therefore be returned to the first member state by any other EU member state in which asylum seekers and refugees subsequently arrived. But where a person claimed that his removal from the United Kingdom would expose him to the risk of breach of his human rights or ill treatment within the member state to which it was proposed to return him, he had a statutory right of appeal under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision to remove him.
That right was exercisable from within the UK unless the secretary of state certified the claim to be “clearly unfounded". The Home Secretary had decided in each of the appeals that the contention that Italy was in systemic breach of its material international obligations was clearly unfounded. That had the effect of prohibiting any appeal while the claimant remained in the UK.
The need for a workable system to implement Dublin II was obvious. To allow asylum seekers the opportunity to move about various member states, applying successively in each of them for refugee status in the hope of finding a more benevolent approach to their claims, could not be countenanced.
Therefore, that the first state in which asylum was claimed should normally be required to deal with the application and, if the application was successful, to cater for the refugee’s needs was not only obvious, it was fundamental to an effective and comprehensive system of refugee protection. Asylum seeking was now a worldwide phenomenon. It had to be tackled on a co-operative international basis.
The recognition of a presumption that members of an alliance of states such as those which comprised the EU would comply with their international obligations reflected not only principle but pragmatic considerations.
A system whereby a state which was asked to confer refugee status on someone who had already applied for that elsewhere should be obliged in every instance to conduct an intense examination of avowed failings of the first state would lead to disarray.
It was entirely right however that a presumption that the first state would comply with its international obligations should not extinguish the need to examine whether in fact those obligations would be fulfilled when evidence was presented that it was unlikely that they would be.
The presumption should not operate to stifle the presentation and consideration of evidence that the consequence of the enforced return of an individual asylum seeker would be a violation of his fundamental rights. It was not required that in order to rebut the presumption it had to be shown, as a first and indispensable requirement, that there was a systemic deficiency in the procedure and reception conditions provided for the asylum seeker.
Violation of article 3 did not necessarily require that the complained of conditions said to constitute inhuman or degrading conditions were the product of systemic shortcomings. The violation was not intrinsically dependent on the failure of a system.
The Court of Appeal’s conclusion that only systemic deficiencies in a country’s asylum procedures and reception conditions would constitute a basis for resisting transfer there could not be upheld.
The critical test remained that articulated in Soering v United Kingdom (Application No 14038/88) ((1989) 11 EHRR 439), that “substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the person concerned ... faces a real risk [in the country to which he or she was to be removed] of being subjected to" treatment contrary to article 3.
All four cases were remitted to the Administrative Court so that an examination of the evidence might take place to determine whether in each case it was established that there was a real possibility that, if returned to Italy, the claimant would be subjected to such treatment. That examination could only be conducted properly if there was an assessment of the situation in the receiving country. The court would have to examine the foreseeable consequences of sending a claimant to the receiving country bearing in mind both the general situation there and the claimant’s personal circumstances, including his or her previous experience.
Solicitors: Wilson Solicitors LLP; Sutovic & Hartigan; Switalskis, Leeds; Baker & McKenzie LLP: Treasury Solicitor.
Document TIMEUK0020140227ea2r000v1
