{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1786"}
____
  
UK News
The Times Diary (TMS): Javed shuffles off to Hamlet, Ukip’s election posters, Isaac Asimov’s predictions and topless women promoting veganism
Kaya Burgess, Deputy Diary Editor   
555 words
23 April 2014
11:08
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Javed shuffles off to Hamlet
Like a schoolboy doing his homework long after deadline, Sajid Javid, the former banker and new culture secretary is finally embracing his role and making a trip to the theatre.
We learn that he has invited his fellow Tory MP Nadhim Zahawi on an outing to Shakespeare’s Globe tonight to see Hamlet on the Bard’s 450th birthday.
Tipped as a future leader, Javid should heed the Dane’s warnings about the “insolence of office” and remember that, even if he has David Cameron’s ear, he probably shouldn’t get too ambitious and pour “leperous distilment” into it.
Lord Polonius’s advice to “neither a borrower nor a lender be” seems to fit with the current climate, as do Hamlet’s wise words for dealing with a divided party, reminding us that: “God has given you one face and you make yourselves another.”
Football pundits have dusted off their favourite clichés for David Moyes’s sacking, but if only the Rev Richard Coles, the pop star turned Radio 4 presenter, were on Match of the Day instead of Alan Shearer to share more original insights. He tweeted: “Premiership managers make me think of those Aztec ixiptla, fêted and lauded, and led out with cheers to be ceremonially eviscerated.”
Mad men
The @UkipBillboards Twitter feed has created parody slogans for Ukip’s crude election posters and the rest of the internet has joined in. “Guess whose children EU migrants want to eat . . .” asks one, while another shows a van with the slogan: “We were telling immigrants to go home long before the Tories.”
With many posted on billboards owned by JC Decaux, another proclaims: “Bloody French poster companies, coming over here, taking our advertising hoardings.”
Idle speculation
For the first World’s Fair exactly 50 years ago in 1964, Isaac Asimov predicted what 2014 would be like. Much has been made of his accuracy, foreseeing 3D television and cars with “robot brains”. It wasn’t all spot on, however. “Compressed air tubes” will carry goods around cities, he said, while “moon colonies” will exist. Yet he did say the most common ailment in 2014 would be the “disease of boredom”, which makes it all the more surprising he didn’t predict Twitter or the DVD box set.
Nigel Farage’s spin doctor, Patrick O’Flynn, declared yesterday that his boss would be “meeting the people” in Sheffield while Cameron dined with Herman Van Rompuy, the European Council president, at Chequers last night. He used the tag #ukipspring in his tweet, created for the party’s conference in February but now seemingly a nod to an Arab Spring-style uprising in Britain. In which case, we await a poorly organised revolt followed by years of political chaos.
Ethically exposed
PETA may campaign for the ethical treatment of animals, but it seems less concerned about women. A press release yesterday, designed to promote veganism, boasted “sexy bodypainted vegan Beefeaters”, with pictures of topless women outside the Tower of London, their “slender bodies” painted like Yeomen Warders. Apparently treating women like meat is the best way to put people off eating it.
Document TIMEUK0020140422ea4n0031e
