{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2860"}
____
  
Fiction
Frog Music by Emma Donoghue
Melissa Katsoulis   
602 words
29 March 2014
00:06
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
In the stifling San Francisco summer of 1876 Blanche Beunon, a sexy young burlesque dancer, plies her trade at an upmarket gentleman’s venue, The House of Mirrors. On the edge of town Jenny Bonnet, also beautiful and young, catches frogs to sell to the many French restaurants that have sprung up since mass immigration made San Francisco one of the first truly multicultural cities.
When the two women are thrown together one steamy night on the street they sense an instant, not entirely welcome, connection. But their friendship is complicated by Issues that even today would be problematic, but in 19th-century America take two women of immense strength of character to overcome. And when a murder is committed the race to find the culprit throws all their secret idiosyncrasies firmly into the public sphere.
First of all, Jenny passes as a man. A sort of proto trans-man, refusing to dress as a woman despite it being illegal for a woman not to. Her short hair, rough mannerisms and heavy drinking don’t frighten Blanche, however, who as well as being a dancer is a sex worker and has seen it all. Blanche has a baby son, P’tit, who is being looked after by a family in the country, an arrangement organised by her boss at The House of Mirrors. Her feelings about motherhood are ambiguous to say the least. Oh, and she lives in a passionate ménage à trois with Arthur and Ernest, two bohemian dandies whom she met at the circus.
Trouble starts when Jenny’s innocent questions about P’tit lead Blanche to investigate the place where he is boarding. Far from being a lovely rural foster home, it is right there in the city — a city now in the grip of a smallpox epidemic — and turns out to be a “farm” for children only in the most nightmarish sense: rows of foetid cots contain babies who are inadequately fed and never held. Babies that no longer even cry.
This is the territory of Emma Donoghue’s previous book, Room, which was bought by the million readers who were not satisfied with mere news reports about the grisly Fritzl house in which children were incarcerated and abused, but wanted for their bedtime reading a more detailed, emotionally vivid account of the horror. Booker-shortlisted as it was, and properly literary as Donoghue’s credentials are (she is a feminist academic as well as a novelist and playwright) there is perhaps something distasteful about capitalising on the public’s desire for sensation of that kind. In Frog Music, however (which is also based on true events), the neglect of babies plays second fiddle to some genuinely eye-popping scenes of graphic gay and straight sex, not to mention bloody murder, gruesome illness and every bodily function and obscenity a nice Irish lady such as Donoghue could imagine. This is definitely not a book to give granny on Mother’s Day.
Blanche’s quest for freedom is hampered at every turn by her being that most marginalised of creatures, a foreign woman selling her body to survive. But the most depressing thing about this grubby historical novel is that although it’s all about sex slavery and gender fascism, the pinky-red jacket boasts an alluring, skinny pair of lady’s legs in a frilly garter and high heels. Plus ça change . . .
Frog Music by Emma Donoghue, Picador, 531pp, £20; e-book £10.99. To buy this book for £14.99, visit thetimes.co.uk/bookshop or call 0845 2712134
Document TIMEUK0020140329ea3t00099
