{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2501"}
____
  
Politics
Downing Street urged to publish ‘suppressed’ immigration report
Michael Savage, Chief Political Correspondent   
451 words
5 March 2014
10:04
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Downing Street has been urged to publish today a report apparently suggesting that immigration is not as damaging for British workers as previously thought.
The research is understood to state that the number of UK workers out of a job as a result of immigration is far lower than argued by Theresa May, the Home Secretary. But No 10 has been accused of holding it back.
Mrs May has previously cited research from the independent Migration Advisory Committee (MAC), as she suggested that “for every additional 100 immigrants... 23 British workers would not be employed".
However, a new analysis by civil servants was said by the BBC’s Newsnight to give far less weight to the impact of migrants. Downing Street is said to have stepped in to stop the release of the study.
The Government declined to comment on the report.
The row comes shortly after official figures revealed a steep rise in net immigration. Ministers are now unlikely to meet their pledge of reducing immigration to the tens of thousands by the next election.
Ministers have already rushed through restrictions on how quickly EU migrants can claim benefits in the UK in an attempt to reduce the “pull" factors attracting them to Britain. Economic turmoil in Southern Europe, however, has seen many migrants head to the UK.
David Hanson, the Shadow Immigration Minister, said: “David Cameron and Theresa May now need to publish this report today. The British people should have information made available to them so they can make a judgment about the impact of immigration on jobs.
“This should be done on the basis of fact, not more empty rhetoric or spin from the Government."
Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence Party, told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme: “I think there is no doubt that British people have lost their jobs because there is too much labour coming into the market.
“The other factor, which is not in this report but is perhaps even more pertinent, is the effect on wages of people in work.
“We have had wage compression and it has meant lower wages for millions and millions of people."
Martin Horwood, Liberal Democrat MP for Cheltenham, joined in the calls for a swift publication: “Let’s put it kindly: it’s got stuck in someone’s in-tray waiting for the final sign-off, hasn’t it?
“It would be very, very helpful if it was now extracted from that in-tray and published. It sounds as though this is a very rigorous study ... a very important contribution to the factual debate on immigration which is sorely needed."
Document TIMEUK0020140305ea35002bd
