{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3024"}
____
  
Politics
Farage a ‘threat’ to Britain, says Cameron
Philippe Naughton   
462 words
8 May 2014
18:14
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron took the election fight to Nigel Farage and Ukip today, describing him as a “threat” to the UK economy whose only answer to Europe was to give up.
The Tory leader went on the attack as he visited an engineering firm in the ultra-marginal Conservative seat of Stroud in Gloucestershire two weeks before European parliamentary elections at which Ukip is expected to win the largest share of the vote.
“I know people are frustrated with their politicians, sometimes angry that we haven’t taken more steps to deal with these issues, but what we’ve got to have in our country is the politics of the answer rather than politics of anger,” Mr Cameron said.
“Because what we’ve got to do is fix these problems. Fix our welfare system so it rewards the hard working; fix the immigration system so it benefits the whole of our country; get our taxes down so we see living standards rise.
“Those are the things I am focused on because they are the politics of the answer, not the politics of anger.
“It’s going to be tough in these European election campaigns to get those points across but in the end if we really want to sort out these problems we need people who have the policies, the answers, the ability to get stuck in and sort these problems out.
“Not simply people who stand up and make an attractive sounding protest.”
The prime minister has come unstuck in the past and invited accusations of arrogance with his mockery of Ukip as “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists”.
With Ukip riding high with the voters - a YouGov poll for the Sunday Times last week put it on 29 per cent support, ahead of Labour on 28 per cent and the Tories on 22 - Mr Cameron clearly wants to avoid making the same mistake.
He said: “My message to anyone thinking of voting for Nigel Farage is: don’t give up on Britain in the world. Give us a chance to get in there, negotiate a better deal for Britain and, with me in charge, you will get a referendum before the end of 2017 where the British people can decide: Do we stay in this reformed organisation or do we leave?
“Is he a threat to our economy? Yes, he is, because we are a trading nation and his answer is to give up.
“Is he a threat to me and my party? Politics is about choice. We’re in competitive elections and I am going to try and get out around the country and convince people: Don’t give up, don’t take a pessimistic view of Britain and the world.”
Document TIMEUK0020140508ea58002e6
