{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2922"}
____
  
Non-fiction
Revolt on the Right by Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin
Robbie Millen   
616 words
31 March 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
It is gratifying to learn that you were a revolutionary in your youth. Twenty years ago I was a “swivel-eyed loon”, a Eurosceptic obsessive, a revolting student in both senses of the word.
With two co-conspirators, I made a huge banner out of sheets and smuggled it into the university library underneath a duffel coat. We then unfurled it from the main tower, the message “No to Maastricht!” hanging limply for apathetic students to ignore.
I leafleted the streets during the 1992 general election for the Anti-Federalist League, the outfit that morphed into Ukip. Yes, I was strange but I was also there at the beginning of the “revolt on the Right”.
Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin, two political scientists from the universities of Manchester and Nottingham, in this authoritative book for political anoraks argue that Nigel Farage’s party is more than a flash in the pan. It represents a profound reshaping of the political landscape.
It is a phenomenon that deserves to be taken more seriously, they say. Too often commentary about Ukip turns into piddling questions of whether the Tories need to change their messaging or whether Ed Miliband should offer a referendum.
The co-authors argue that commentators have misunderstood who Ukip’s supporters are. They are not blazered Tories who think Cameron is a bit wet. Ukip voters — and the authors have the datasets to prove it — are blue collar, uneducated, pessimistic older men. In fact, they look remarkably like Labour voters who in the past few decades have given up on the increasingly affluent, liberal “people’s party”.
The authors call them the “left behind” — those who feel dumped on by globalisation and immigration. A better description still is the “pessimistariat”. The authors calculate that some 20 to 30 per cent of voters might be tempted by Ukip’s populist, anti-immigrant, Eurosceptic message, a radical right-wing electoral space that has been waiting to be filled for decades.
Mr Farage won’t like this, but Ukip’s arrival has Europeanised British politics; the Front National, the Progress Party in Denmark, the Freedom Party in Austria have all been fishing for years in the same waters of blue-collar anger.
Ukip has not reached its potential. Ford and Goodwin show that it has only just started to learn from the Lib Dems on the joys of street-level campaigning. (In 2003 there were no Ukip local council candidates; last year it won a million votes and 147 councillors.
Note too the 28 per cent vote share at the Eastleigh by-election, and 24 per cent in South Shields). The authors think it will be hard for Ukip to win a Westminster seat but reckon the party has a shot in Labour-held seats such as Great Grimsby, Plymouth Moor View and Ashfield.
Ukip is now a serious force, but Ford and Goodwin think it counterproductive for the big parties to chase its voters by pitching populist messages.
Because it is hard to curtail immigration or win back powers from the EU, unrealistic promises only make politicians look slippery or weak, which adds to the discontent with politics on which Ukip thrives.
Ah yes, the politics of unreality. Back in 1992, Hammersmith’s voters showed a great deal of “false consciousness” and gave a mere 41 votes to the Anti-Federalist League. Quite enough to cool my revolutionary ardour.
Revolt on the Right , by Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin, Routledge, £14.99, 336pp. To order for £13.49, including free postage, visit thetimes.co.uk/bookshop or call The Times Bookshop on 0845 2712134
Document TIMEUK0020140331ea3v0001z
