{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3576"}
____
  
Magazine
The house in this season’s colours; Everything is subject to change in the Connecticut home of Amy Smilovic, the fashion-forward founder of the Tibi label
Abigail Radnor   
766 words
22 February 2014
13:40
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
During the first five years that Amy Smilovic lived in her six-bedroom, six-bathroom house in “back country" Connecticut, her friends were less than impressed. When they visited the home, with its three reception rooms, kitchen, office, hall, basement and swimming pool, they were looking forward to seeing what the creator of fashion label Tibi had done with the space. They left disappointed. The house was nothing like they had imagined, right down to a bizarre monkey motif in the bathroom.
The truth was that Smilovic had been so intimidated by the house that she hadn’t touched it since she and her husband, Frank, bought it in 2000. “The place was all mustards and deep reds, with very heavy curtains," Smilovic explains. “It was sort of New England meets faux French country. There was chintz everywhere. It was just sad and moody."
Smilovic never intended to make this house near Greenwich her family home. The couple bought it at the same time as their loft on Crosby Street in SoHo, Manhattan, which they saw as their permanent base. But after having their first baby (her sons are now 13 and 10), they changed their minds. “My husband is European and had been working overseas for American Express for ever, in London, Paris, Frankfurt, Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore. He was craving a permanent space and a piece of land," says Smilovic. “Greenwich was perfect – close enough to the city, but you feel like you’re in another world out here."
Incidentally, they used their SoHo loft as premises for their business. (Frank now runs the financial and legal sides of the company.) Smilovic’s advertisement for seamstresses caught the eye of immigration officials, who suspected she may have been running a sweatshop. “They turned up, saw two seamstresses and this beautiful fireplace and were like, ‘Erm, can we work here?’ "
It was only when Smilovic made her home a work project that she embarked on renovations. “I called my head of PR and told her to get in touch with InStyle magazine so we could do a before and after feature." She employed the help of interior designer Bruce Shostak, whose first question was, “What do you hate most about the house?" Smilovic pointed to the mustard curtains with cockerel motifs in her kitchen. Shostak simply tore them down. “He showed me how to react right away when something annoyed me. I can’t believe I lived with those curtains for five years."
From that moment it was a relatively speedy transformation, completed within six months. “Once I set my mind to something, I can make decisions quickly." To create a minimalist yet bold aesthetic, Smilovic turned to what she knew best and drew up fashion mood boards. “The bedroom colours were inspired by a past Chloé spring collection. I found it the easiest way to communicate which colours I was in the mood for, how bold the room should be and how clean the fabrics should look and feel."
Despite her daring use of colour and print throughout the house, Smilovic factored in her tendency to get bored very quickly, a trait that irritates her husband. “I created everything in the house to be functional, so that I can change it once I tire of it. I need to have options to make quick fixes, such as re-covering the kitchen chairs [recently changed from green and white fabric to a “calming" grey and white], changing the pillows or recarpeting certain rooms."
Smilovic is constantly on the lookout for new additions to their homes. “I could browse furniture online all day, especially on 1stdibs.com." She also loves the warehouse shops on the waterfront in Stamford, Connecticut, with her favourite being Irwin Feld (which also has a space on 1stdibs.com), a specialist in mid-century modern pieces. Her husband can’t understand why she keeps throwing out perfectly decent furniture to make room for new items, “but I try to make him understand that you can’t just stick to an interior from the time you first made money. Otherwise, it would all look very Eighties or Nineties."
What she hasn’t told her husband is that she feels the urge to go Scandinavian neutral, injected with a note of colour to give it her signature warmth. “That would require a complete overhaul. I don’t dare bring it up."
tibi.com
Document TIMEUK0020140222ea2m0030d
