{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"692"}
____
  
Politics
Toad of Toad Hall or the heir to Thatcher: which is the real Nigel Farage?
Alice Thomson and Rachel Sylvester   
2,159 words
11 March 2014
00:04
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
“We call it Fukip — Farage’s Ukip — it’s all about him," says a former aide. “Nigel uses the party for everything he can get. He is incredibly charismatic when you first meet him. He came to visit me and strode off across the fields, extolling the virtues of the hedgerows, but after ten minutes he was out of breath. That sums him up really, he can’t keep anything up. Under pressure he crumbles. He is very charming — until he’s not."
Nigel Farage is Ukip. Even the director of communications, Patrick O’Flynn, agrees. “The leader of a party is the most positive and priceless asset it has," he says. “In bigger parties the leader is 60 per cent of what makes them electable. When you have a leader like Nigel Farage it means 85 per cent of our positive impact in the media is down to the efforts of one man."
And what a man. Farage polarises opinion. He has been described to us variously as “Toad of Toad Hall", “a matinee idol", “Bart Simpson" and “the heir to Thatcher". Winston McKenzie, his Commonwealth aide, sums up the positive side: “We need another Churchill in this country and Farage is the man. I love his honest approach. I stood against him as leader but now we are friends and I would trust him with my life."
A senior Tory Cabinet minister provides the opposite view: “He looks like a 1950s insurance salesman. I can’t see how anyone is taken in by him but a great many people seem to find him reassuring."
Farage was born in Herne, Kent, on April 3, 1964. His father was a conventional stockbroker and president of the local Territorial Army who left home when he was 5. His mother brought up Nigel, sending him to Dulwich College, the public school in South London, where he idolised the alumni Ernest Shackleton and P.G. Wodehouse.
It was discovering that he had testicular cancer at 19 that formed his character, according to a close friend and colleague. “It returned when he was in his 20s. He knows he has cheated death, he is a survivor and that makes him feel invincible. He is convinced that there isn’t much time."
Farage’s first foray was into the City, following the absent father he adored. He threw himself into the drinking culture until he was hit by a car and ended up in intensive care with serious head injuries. He married the nurse who helped him back to health and by the age of 22 he was the father of two sons. But he was so busy that he spent little time at home, and the marriage ended in 1997. He then married Kirsten Mehr, a German bond-dealer who was working in the City when he met her, though she now spends her time looking after their two daughters and acting as his assistant.
It was the signing of the Maastricht treaty in 1992, he says, that forced him into politics and to join the Anti-Federalist League, which eventually became Ukip. By 2006 Farage was firmly in charge, having seen off other contenders such as Robert Kilroy-Silk, whom he named “the vain orange buffoon".
Then came his third brush with death. On the morning of the May 2010 general election, he was flying in a two-seater plane with a pro-Ukip banner attached when it crashed in a field, leaving him bleeding profusely, covered in petrol, with his breast bone and ribs broken and his lung punctured but his Ukip rosette intact.
However, he soon returned as leader and made his name with his tirades against senior members of the European Union such as one about “Rumpy Pumpy" Herman Van Rompuy, the President of the European Council, which went viral.
Farage has positioned himself as the anti-establishment candidate, being the only MEP to remain seated when the Prince of Wales was invited to speak to the European Parliament in 2008 on climate change.
He has said: “I’m not really a politician at all. That’s the extraordinary thing. I never had any intention of being involved in this." Yet Farage joined the Conservatives at 14 and made six unsuccessful attempts to become an MP.
Although he went to a private school, wears pinstripes and sports pocket handkerchiefs, he is determinedly not posh. It’s all about a pint in the pub, a ciggie, a game of golf and being a rebel in a blazer. “He is obsessed by the posh Tory boys and likes to pretend he isn’t anything like them, but he acts as though he is posher than anyone else. He loves black tie and fine wines and he adores smart restaurants," says a former insider. Another agrees: “He’s a real snob — he’ll say, ‘Oh he’s so common’, or ‘What a terrible shirt’."
This is partly because he likes to evoke a more old-fashioned world. For some he is deeply reassuring. Suzanne Evans, Ukip’s new national communities and women spokeswoman, says that she defected from the Conservatives to Ukip after meeting Farage.
“I was a councillor for the Tory Party and they were very patronising to women. Farage treats women exactly the same as men but he still opens the door for you — it’s the best of both worlds. He is fantastic, he is honest, there’s no flannel and he is very bright. He knows about everything. David Cameron is distant and frowning of the grass roots, Farage is a ray of sunshine."
But a former follower of the youth wing says that he is the reason why she left. “Nigel really panders to people’s insecurities that the world is going too fast. He acts as though he is Fred Flintstone and can drag women off into caves and stomp around waving his stick," she says. “He sees himself as the saviour of the Bufton Tuftons and likes nothing better than to stride up the path of a mock Tudor house and sit down for a cup of tea to sort out the world. I trailed after him but soon felt he would be happier if I had stayed at home in my pinnie."
Farage does love the British countryside, its pubs, golf courses, cricket pavilions, sea fishing and wildlife. He was the only politician during the recent floods who owned his own pair of waders and he often waxes lyrical about England’s green rolling hills on his tours of Ukip strongholds. He prefers the old sitcoms — Margot and Jerry from The Good Life, Dad’s Army — and he confesses to being an ’Allo ’Allo! fan: “Can’t beat it really". His favourite periods of history are the First and Second World Wars and he used to take a group of friends, “Farage’s Foragers", on tours of the battlefields of France and Belgium. He wears Spitfire cufflinks and collects First World War posters.
His greatest strength is his perceived normality. Here is a man who hasn’t always lived in the political bubble but who has had a real job and understands the real world. Neil Hamilton, the former Tory MP, who is now Ukip’s deputy chairman, sums it up. “Farage is what you see — he is not a creature of spin. He has redeeming defects. He likes a drink and a cigarette, he likes a laugh and behaves like a normal person. When he makes mistakes, he admits them. He’s not a dictator.
“I would put him up with Thatcher as a great leader who inspires. He doesn’t need focus groups to tell him what to think."
Yet his normality is also what can get the party into trouble. Godfrey Bloom, who has resigned the Ukip whip but is still an MEP, says: “I was on the piss with him only the other night. Ukip was anti-establishment,that was the great appeal to voters. But now, for better or for worse — and a lot of people think for worse — it’s the Nigel Farage Ukip party. It’s unfortunate. There’s a danger whenever you have a very hard working and charismatic leader that it looks like a one-man band."
Bloom says that Farage’s behaviour can be excessive, but the Ukip leader has always said: “I’ve never pretended to be a priest." Having shared a flat with Farage for several years in Brussels, the MEP saysP: “We all have our foibles and our weaknesses — mine is real ale, I’ve never been partial to crumpet — Nigel’s is women. It’s not something he ever denied."
The drinking, he thinks, is probably an asset. “He loves his bottle of wine at lunch time, and in the evening, but he’s not an alcoholic. It’s no secret he likes a sherbet. There’s nothing wrong with that — it’s part of his charm."
Others disagree. A former staff member says: “Ukip is hinged on Nigel’s very complicated personal life, there is very little room to professionalise anything. There are skeletons in his closet. Nigel is dragging Highgate Cemetery behind him."
He certainly lives life to the full and sees himself as an optimist, refusing to be embarrassed or disheartened by anything. This may be partly because he has had so many near-death experiences. One former aide says: “He doesn’t like to admit he’s in a lot of pain and is not a well man. He has cheated death three times. The drive he has is because he believes his time is very limited. There’s a fragility to him. When the camera is off you can see his face crossed with pain."
This may be in part why both friends and foes say that he becomes easily riled. In Scotland last year, he was accused of being “racist", “fascist" and a “homophobe" and told to go home by demonstrators.
During an interview with BBC’s Good Morning Scotland radio show, he labelled the protesters “yobbo, fascist scum" before hanging up.
He works so hard he barely has time to see his family as he relentlessly pounds the pavements and criss-crosses counties and market towns, spreading his gospel, preaching against the excesses of the European Union. He has explained that he loves the thrill of the “Billy Graham moments", in which suburban doubters are spontaneously converted to the cause. He also feels guilty at how little time he manages to spend with his children. But he refuses to delegate. A former member of the Ukip governing body found it infuriating.
“I feel that Nigel is the absolute dictator," he says. “He keeps himself surrounded by people who are fairly weak and will bow to his forceful personality. In Ukip you are either with Nigel or you are out."
Those who cross him have to leave as Alan Sked, Ukip’s founder, discovered. “Everyone thinks he’s a nice character but he’s a complete disaster — intellectually and morally. He says he’s worried about fruitcakes but I think he’s one himself. He’s turned Ukip into his own fiefdom."
Sked believes his successor has betrayed the original premise of Ukip by starting to campaign against immigration, wind farms and gay marriage and for grammar schools, the Commonwealth and hunting.
He worries that Farage isn’t clever enough. “Nigel isn’t very bright. When he was a candidate for Salisbury, I used to get letters saying, ‘I’m glad your candidate believes in education but until he learns to spell it I’m not going to vote for him’."
A former Ukip member who defected to the Conservatives says: “Nigel’s been a rebel all his life. He comes through to me as somebody who’s been bullied when he was young. I don’t think he has any discipline — he doesn’t want to deal with detail or organisation. He’s like a spoilt child. That’s why he surrounds himself with people who will always say what he wants. He is an amiable character when he is in the pub but he can be a very selfish man. I was very disappointed."
Farage, of course, would disagree. “I don’t hide, I don’t change my message according to my audience, I try to just be me wherever I go," he says. “People either like you or dislike you, but if you try and pretend to be what you’re not, you always get found out anyway. So there’s no point in doing it.
“I believe in the values we stand for and the agenda we’re pushing and I try and sell it to people. I do my best and then people make up their own minds."
Document TIMEUK0020140311ea3b000fb
