{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"554"}
____
  
Life
Robert Crampton: Most work is so boring that falling asleep is natural
Robert Crampton   
944 words
8 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Some sleep openly in the office, others sneak off to the loos for a nap, but surely most of us are tempted to snooze
One in eight of British workers, a survey reveals, admits to having fallen asleep during a meeting or a presentation or some otherwise soporific soul-destroying losing-the-will-to-live non-activity at their office. Which is to say — and full marks for honesty — 12.5 per cent of our country’s labour force confesses to catching 40 winks — or possibly an even greater number of winks — on the job. As in grabbing shut-eye. Copping zeds. Slumbering. Snoozing. Stuporing. And so on.
Just so we’re crystal clear, here we have a finding that suggests that a fair few of us not only approach, but successfully penetrate (visa in order, passport and immigration tickety-boo, crack on and get your head down, mate) the Land of Nod while we are actually on the clock. In other words, on any given so-called working day the truth is that an eighth of us are away with the fairies.
I’m amazed.
Surely the figure should be a lot higher.
And in fact I bet it is. Most obviously, a lot of us don’t get enough sleep. We’re tired. Exhausted. Insufficiently rested. Knackered. We need whatever extra minutes may be granted us.
Having said that, this 12.5 per cent only covers those of us – the hardcore – who are so catatonically bored by professional proceedings that we are willing to embrace full unconsciousness, even in public. We could call this element the Power Point percentage.
As an aside: Microsoft Power Point, for goodness sake . . . what use does it serve?
We also need to factor in those employees who may teeter towards oblivion yet manage heroically to haul themselves back from the brink of a total blackout.
Conversely, what about those of us who may well fall into a coma in a work-based setting, but have the presence of mind to ensure that the setting is not a public one? I’m thinking of a hedge-fund guy of my acquaintance who — multimillion-dollar trades be damned — regularly curls up for a cheeky half-hour’s kip in a cubicle in the office loo. Gives the tiles a bit of a wipe, balls up his suit jacket as a pillow, job’s a good’un.
At the other end of the income scale — £1 an hour sleep-rate as opposed to £500 an hour for the same deal — recalling a student-era holiday job I had in a factory while pretending to be working class in 1983 I can’t help but salute young Dave. Well, young Dave as he was then — by now no doubt old Dave is a respectably upstanding middle-aged member of society. But back in 1983, I’m sorry to say Dave was a waste of space. The lad was consistently found fast asleep 40 feet up in the warehouse stores, snoring contentedly on a stack of unsold merchandise.
Nothing much changes.
My point is, then and now, for many of us, going to work is boring and there’s nothing to be done. Almost all meetings are worthless. In those circumstances, falling asleep in the average office gathering is not anything to be ashamed of. Rather such behaviour serves as a good indicator of the likely future usefulness of the somnolent individual to the company or concern involved.
Although admittedly not in the case of Dave.
Reward bright kids with more work
A school in Bedfordshire is being slated for instituting a scheme under which some pupils, having reached a designated academic target, are allowed to wear their own clothes for a day. Parents are protesting that this is unfair.
OK: while unfair may be one word I might choose to describe incentivising smart youngsters by letting them attend school in mufti, it would not be the first word. The word idiotic would come much higher on my list. Just a thought, but giving the bright kids more work might be a better option.
I know the educational establishment is too chicken to see what’s in front of its face and bring back grammars, but even so I thought some progress regarding the promotion and advancement of clever kids had been made.
Apparently not. I’m reminded of an episode early on in my own school career — this is going back 43 years — in the first year infants. Once you had achieved 100 gold stars (I can’t quite remember how you did so — a combination of achievement, effort and grovelling I suspect), the reward was that you were allowed to bring your toys in and play with them with for a whole week.
Idiotic indeed.
A fake mourners is better than none
Once in a while you read about some new trend that on the face of it is supposed to represent a terrible indictment of the modern world, and you have a think, and you conclude that hey, actually that isn’t such a bad idea. Which is how I felt on learning that at some funerals in China, actors are hired to ensure that the number of mourners reaches a respectable level.
Tragic, right? And yet here in our own country there is nothing more tragic — more sad, more ghastly — than a funeral service that hardly anybody attends. Perhaps drafting in a few thesps to fill out the pews is the lesser of two evils. There are lot of unemployed actors after all.
Document TIMEUK0020140407ea48003he
