{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1373"}
____
  
Politics
Boris will have ‘key role’ in Tory campaign
Michael Savage, Chief Political Correspondent   
386 words
2 March 2014
12:30
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Grant Shapps, the party chairman, disclosed a star billing for the Mayor of London amid an apparent feud between Mr Johnson and his potential rival for the Tory leadership, George Osborne.
It comes after claims that the Chancellor suggested to Mr Johnson that he should run at the next election and return to Parliament. However, allies of the mayor see it as a plot to make Mr Johnson “own" the election result as much as Mr Cameron and the Tory leadership.
Mr Shapps said today that Mr Johnson would “absolutely" have a leading role in the general election campaign next year.
“Boris Johnson is a guy who’s able to communicate incredibly well," he told The Andrew Marr Show on the BBC. “Of course, it would be crazy for him not to be part of that message because people in this country want to know that we are on their side, that we’re dealing with those long-term problems, that we’re making sure that we’re continuing to cut the deficit but whilst dealing with the big issues like immigration and welfare.
“We all think Boris is a fantastic London Mayor and he’s got a lot to offer. He’s doing a brilliant job in London; his term runs till 2016, so he’s got a little way to go."
He added: “What Boris does is up to Boris — we just think he’s got a great contribution. He’s part of what we’re trying to do as a Government … Boris Johnson’s got a big future in the party; I want him to be an important part of our campaign."
Allies of Mr Johnson said that there had been no conversation in which the Chancellor urged Mr Johnson to fight to become an MP at the election.
A friend said: “Boris’s focus is on London — it was in 2012, when he stood for a second term, it will be in 2016, when he finishes that term.
“In between, only two things matter to Boris — delivering for London and ensuring we have a majority Conservative government led by David Cameron after 2015. Boris will be out and about doing all he can to make sure that happens."
Document TIMEUK0020140302ea32002xm
