{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1196"}
____
  
Politics
‘I’m not going to hold back. I have to thump the table sometimes’
Alice Thomson and Rachel Sylvester   
1,931 words
22 March 2014
01:55
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nick Clegg is a warrior in fighting form, he tells <signature>Alice Thomson</signature> and <signature>Rachel Sylvester</signature>
Nick Clegg sees himself as El Cid more than Don Quixote. He wants to be the radical and inspirational warrior,battling to bring his country together and not a “batty” nobleman tilting at outdated windmills. “Although ideally you want a bit of both the warrior and the dreamer.”
His party may be floundering in the polls, and facing a pounding at the European elections, but the Liberal Democrat leader is in fighting form. Having gone into combat with the Conservatives over education, welfare and green taxes, he is now strapping on his armour to take on Nigel Farage next week in the first of two live debates. When we meet him at a nursery in Exeter, he seems to exude confidence.
He has been championing noble causes in the Budget this week. “I’m all for what we’re doing on reducing the tax on bingo and beer, but if you look at the pounds and pence what are the big things people worry about? They mention childcare costs, heating bills and tax to me.”
Mr Clegg insists he is not one for gimmicks. “Some of the really big ideas in this Government are Liberal Democrat — whether it’s the pupil premium, the tax allowance or the pension reform, these are really big changes which will stand the test of time.” The removal of restrictions on annuities was also “the liberal thing to do”, and encouraging companies to take on more apprentices “was a Budget measure I insisted on”.
It must be infuriating to hear George Osborne taking credit for Lib Dem ideas, from garden cities to raising the rate at which people start to pay tax to £10,500. “In politics, just as in life, everybody suddenly wants to be the inventor of a good idea.
“I don’t begrudge it and it doesn’t surprise me but nor am I going to hold back. I’ve been pretty remorseless in going on about the tax threshold. I’ve sat in so many meetings with David Cameron and George Osborne where they’ve said, ‘Actually we’d like to do something else, the married couples allowance or tax breaks for shares’. It was hard pounding and it did require me sometimes proverbially thumping the table.”
He was recently talking to staff in Sainsbury’s in Fulham Broadway, southwest London, who said everybody was discussing the tax change. “You’ve no idea how proud it makes me that people can see these things happening. We are a smaller party but I’ve always thought we’re a smaller party with big ideas. I think this Budget suggests that’s the case.”
Now that the Lib Dems have become a party of action, Ukip seems to have become the party of protest. This is Mr Clegg’s next big fight, but he worries that he is the only one standing up to Mr Farage. “I find the Conservative attitude to Ukip quite frustrating because they’re not taking them on at all in the way that Ukip does need to be taken on. I take Ukip deadly seriously. They are tapping into a very significant strand in sentiment. It’s about much more than Europe.”
Ukip, he thinks, is taking advantage of people’s anxieties after the economic crash. “The world feels dangerous, insecure. As night follows day, if you have a huge shock to the way in which we run the economy and society, it’s the most natural thing to say, ‘I want to turn the clock back, I want to return to the old certainties’. But, however seductive and attractive that might be, it’s very dangerous.”
He sees this as a battle between the future and the past. “It frustrates me immensely that the Conservative Party is so busy talking to itself on Europe, that there’s this endless navel-gazing, when there’s a bigger thing at stake here which is: ‘Do we remain an open or closed country?’ This self-absorption of the Conservatives, this lack of national leadership, the constant introversion, means that nobody is taking on the big argument.”
David Cameron and Ed Miliband have “lost their nerve” on Europe. “We’ve got a Conservative Party talking to itself and a Labour Party that’s lost the courage of its convictions and Nigel Farage making hay.” He doesn’t dismiss Ukip as fruitcakes and loons. “There are some Ukip people with views that are utterly abhorrent, others are eccentric or have laughable views or practices, but I never underestimate them because they speak for a part of the nation that feels left behind.”
Mr Farage is “a very gifted politician”. Mr Clegg would be happy for him to be included in the televised leaders’ debates at the general election. “You can’t underestimate him . . . but the consequences of what he is saying are very dangerous to the wealth and prosperity of his country.”
Although Mr Clegg admits that Europe is “not perfect”, he insists: “What politicians need to argue at times of insecurity and anxiety and flux, is that overall it’s still better for us to be in this great market of 500 million.”
It’s the same on immigration. “We need to show people that we can run a competent immigration system. I’m constantly badgering Theresa May and saying, ‘Can you please get on with it and re-insert the exit checks.’ But then you’ve got to make the bigger case and say, ‘If we pull up the drawbridge, the NHS would collapse overnight, and we would be poorer and there would be more people out of work.”
The Prime Minister should be confronting the insurgents rather than running scared. “When you’ve got so many people in society who are increasingly tempted by the ‘put two fingers up at the rest of the world’ type approach, mainstream politicians have to take a stand and draw a line in the sand. History suggests that if you just let populists run and run and don’t take them on, don’t be surprised if they suddenly do extremely well.”
He doesn’t understand why the Tories pander to Ukip. “Surely one of the golden rules of politics is that if you keep repeating the same language, and you accept the terms of reference set by your opponents, people are going to say, ‘I’ll vote for the real McCoy’. It’s a bidding war the Conservatives will never win with Ukip, because they will always outstep them.”
The Tory leader should face down his Eurosceptic critics. “At some point you have to confront Conservative backbench MPs and say, ‘If you want out of Europe, have the guts to say it but don’t indulge in these endless euphemisms of a renegotiation here, a repatriation there’.
“The problem is that because the leadership don’t want to take on their backbenchers, and the backbenchers don’t want to fully admit what they really think, you’ve got this extraordinarily blocked, introverted approach . . . at some point his party needs to be confronted with a really simple choice, which is that you can’t forever have your cake and eat it, rant and rail against the European Union, almost suggest you want out but not have the courage to quite say so.”
The Prime Minister, educated at Eton and Oxford, has been described as the “best recruiting sergeant” for the anti-Establishment Mr Farage. Even Mr Gove says it’s “ridiculous” that there are so many Old Etonians at the top. Mr Clegg, educated at Westminster, is “not going to be pious about schools”, but adds: “You do have to have answers to this sense of loss of power.”
The Tories’ attempt to squeeze more money from the welfare budget is far more damaging than the number of public schoolboys, he believes. “It’s a huge error on the part of the Conservatives to say now that after a phase of serious austerity . . . the only people being asked to keep making additional sacrifices are the working-age poor.”
He is in favour of scrapping free television licences and winter fuel payments for wealthy pensioners because “it’s really important to show that we’re trying to be fair”. He makes the same argument about the mansion tax. “I celebrate people’s success, but it can’t be right that a family in Lewisham is paying the same as an oligarch.”
Having spent four years working closely with Mr Cameron, he seems disillusioned by his coalition partner. “The Conservatives are what they say on the tin: conservative. They don’t like rocking the boat. If your basic premise is that you should keep the pecking order as it is, then it is all about managing the status quo. Liberalism is much more disruptive.”
Mr Gove is a more revolutionary Tory. But Mr Clegg says: “Quite a lot of his reforms go with the grain of what preceded him, so I wouldn’t say he was radical.”
He has, he admits, clashed repeatedly with the Education Secretary. “There are a lot of pinch points and tensions with myself and Michael Gove on a range of issues.”
The curriculum reforms were a tipping point. “When I was told that Michael Gove was single-handedly writing which medieval kings should be taught in our classrooms, I thought, ‘This is complete madness’. In the name of decentralisation and school autonomy the Secretary of State is, by hand, going to write the list? That is nonsense.”
The Deputy Prime Minister has been battle-hardened by his time in Government. The Lib Dems’ El Cid is now preparing for the next big assault in 2015. “I’ve been watching what I eat,” he says. He appears to have lost more weight than any of his rivals. Mr Cameron, Mr Osborne and Ed Balls are all on diets.
He smiles. “I am going to be mean and lean for the general election.”
Nicholas William Peter Clegg
Curriculum vitae
Born January 7, 1967
Educated Westminster School; Cambridge University
Career After a stint as a journalist,he went to work for the European Commission, then took a job in the private office of Leon Brittan, the Trade Commissioner. He was an MEP between 1999 and 2004, and was elected to the House of Commons in 2005. He was the Lib Dems’ Home Affairs spokesman, before being elected leader in 2007. In 2010 he formed a coalition with David Cameron and became Deputy Prime Minister.
Family Married to Miriam González, a lawyer, they have three sons
Quick fire
Bingo or bridge? Neither to be honest
Shadow or substance? Substance
Hugh Grant or Colin Firth? Colin Firth
Wimbledon Centre Court or Emirates Stadium? Emirates Stadium. But I’d be very happy watching at either
Putney or Chevening? Putney
Michael Gove or Tristram Hunt? David Laws
Naughty step or star chart? Star chart
Tapas or sushi?  Tapas
Blue Jasmine or 12 Years a Slave?  Blue Jasmine
Wind farm or fracking? Wind farm. But we need both
Cigarettes or e-cigarettes? Cigarettes
Line of Duty or Silk? Haven’t seen either but have heard good things about Line of Duty
Alex Rider or Harry Potter? Harry Potter. He reigns supreme in my house and has for many years
Rose garden or bed of thorns? Peak District — ups and downs
Document TIMEUK0020140321ea3l003xp
