{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2415"}
____
  
Columnists
The culture minister’s life is steeped in drama
Libby Purves   
996 words
14 April 2014
15:52
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
With such a searing family history, Sajid Javid cannot fail to understand – and champion – the value of the arts
We have a new culture secretary. Maria Miller, that complacent and greedy pudding, won no love from the arts communities but her successor has already received a shrill tirade from a former children’s laureate. With heavy sarcasm Mike Rosen doubts that Sajid Javid can possibly care about cultural capital because he was once a banker in an “outrageous, lavish, crazy world” that caused the crash and thus the austerity, which closes libraries and causes “crap” backstage conditions and poverty for performers.
From other directions come other views. Some worry that Mr Javid likes Star Trek. (Why shouldn’t he? One of our greatest actors, Sir Patrick Stewart, played Captain Picard.) Political wonks explain that he wants the Tory leadership and won’t stay long in the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, not least because he once said it was an unnecessary department. Fair comment, actually: you can’t help noticing that whenever there is a hot potato (licence fee, Leveson, Olympics) it is whisked away for Downing Street or Seb Coe to organise. Maybe Mr Javid won’t stand for that. Meanwhile on these pages Philip Collins has pointed out that an arts minister needn’t hang about in theatre foyers and galleries with a glass of tepid white wine to prove he cares. The important thing is that he understands money, and funnels it in the right direction.
Yet there is another reason, maybe fanciful but to me oddly powerful, to welcome him with hope. Great art — in literature, drama and film particularly — is about storytelling. We need it not just for amusement and distraction, but to broaden empathy and human understanding. It lures us in, then forces us, in imagination, to walk in others’ shoes and acknowledge that there are experiences, feelings and needs we have not personally known. Stories inspire, warnand make us feel and wonder. And, unlike the vast majority of parliamentarians, bred in humdrum comfort with only small private problems, Mr Javid is a man whose family story encompasses a tremendous narrative: exile, crossing continents, clashing cultures, painful parental effort, a fight against socially ingrained scorn. His hinterland — though one hopes without tragic endings — is straight out of Arthur Miller, August Wilson, Steinbeck or Harper Lee.
Think about it. His father Abdul-Ghani Javid arrived here in 1961, when boarding-houses merrily proclaimed NO BLACKS NO IRISH. His family, from a Pakistani village, lost everything in a huge and unjust social earthquake, the partition of India 13 years before. Abdul-Ghani had £1 in his pocket, we are told, but made his way to a Rochdale cotton mill. Dreaming of better work on the buses he was turned away repeatedly; finally he got the job, and on the side ran a stall selling clothes sewn by his wife. They called him “Mr Night and Day” because he was always working. Eight years after his arrival came Enoch Powell’s infamous speech about the perils of “grinning picaninnies” persecuting old white war widows and the “black man” seeking the whip hand. A year after that, into this toxic and uncertain atmosphere, young Sajid was born. He was 7 years old before the Race Relations Act made it illegal for employers to discriminate against the likes of him.
The clever hard-working boy got his degree, aimed for the City and was rejected (“face didn’t fit”): so he moved on to join Chase Manhattan in New York and to work for Mayor Giuliani. Back in Britain he rose by talent through potentially scornful ranks at Deutsche Bank, but gave up that £3 million a year job (presumably having saved carefully, according to family tradition) to become an MP on £65,000. Which implies some kind of belief beyond mere amassing of riches and comfort.
I know only those public facts about the new minister, but thought about him often the other night on the benches of the Young Vic, during a stark and brilliant production of Arthur Miller’s A View From the Bridge. It is set among poor Sicilian immigrant longshoremen beneath the Brooklyn Bridge in the hungry Forties: the patriarch a fiercely proud provider (another “Mr Night and Day”) who for decades has searched out any hard, bruising dock work he could find: “I took food out of my mouth and walked hungry.” He supports a wife and orphaned niece, and boasts he took the very blankets off his bed to welcome and hide his wife’s cousins, illegally arrived from starving Europe to work and send money home.
Even without Eddie Carbone’s central tragedy of passion, the play makes vivid the perennial drama of the poor and determined immigrant. Indeed it is impossible not to reflect that just outside the Young Vic (which cherishes a particularly wide, warm, democratic, diverse community audience) lies a sprawl of South and East London where in crowded rooms and sheds a new generation of incomers from a hungry world are also sending money home.
I see and review four or five plays a week (currently I am at HighTide Festival, a visit that has so far encompassed neuroscience, betrayal, feminism, bereavement and dystopianism). Britain is in a golden age of drama: I see powerful and inventive work in pub back rooms, dim cellars and great theatres.
Theatre deals in seriousness and frivolity, cultural memories and clashes from across the world, playfulness and high principle, catharsis, diversity, determination, devotion and intense detailed work done by artists who often live on little and who want, most of all, to connect with fellow humans.
I cannot think that Mr Javid, with his history and gifts, will fail to understand the arts’ value and speak for it. If he ever has a night off, I’ll take him out and show him wonders.
Document TIMEUK0020140413ea4e002t5
