{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1547"}
﻿Politics
Live: Farage beats Clegg in EU debate
Laura Pitel   
2,443 words
26 March 2014
21:23
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
2123: Ladbrokes has cut the odds on Ukip securing the most votes in the European election from 6/4 to 11/10, making them joint favourites with Labour.
2105: Nigel Farage’s statement that the European Union has “blood on its hands” over the crisis in Ukraine by showing imperialist ambitions is probably the most controversial claim of the night.
The British government and the EU had “geed up” the protesters who ousted the Ukrainian president, Viktor Yanukovych, and “we should hang our heads in shame”, he said. The British Government had encouraged the EU to pursue an “imperialist, expansionist” agenda.
“We have given a false series of hopes to a group of people in the western Ukraine and so geed up were they that they actually toppled their own elected leader,” he said. “That provoked Mr Putin and I think the European Union, frankly, does have blood on its hands in the Ukraine.
“I don’t want a European army, navy, air force or a European foreign policy. It has not been a thing for good in the Ukraine.”
2102: Nadine Dorries, Tory MP, doesn’t agree. “After tonight, it will be impossible for the three party leaders to exclude Farage from the televised GE leadership debates,” she says.
2101: And a couple of thoughts from Tory polling guru Lord Ashcroft, also on Twitter: “Big gamble by Clegg taking on Farage. Doesn’t seem it paid off....probably good for Tories if they can now exclude Clegg from General Election debates.
“One reason Nigel Farage was a winner tonight irrespective of how the two performed was simply his exposure to a wide audience.”
2058: A couple of tweets from Ann Treneman, The Times’s political sketch-writer. “Well I think that, on the whole, Farage was the winner. Sorry but that’s the verdict. He didnt’ fall over.
“But other winners include LBC, Kay Burley (v good gold shoes) and Nick Ferrari. Also John Redwood who is, incredibly, in the spin room.”
2051: Tim Farron, Lib Dem President, tells LBC: “Give us 36 per cent at the European elections and I’ll join you in dancing down Whitehall.”
He continued: “I thought Nick won the debate quite comfortably but I also recognise that he’s shown real backbone and integrity in taking on an issue where, at the start of the debate, the ‘in’ campaign is in a minority.
“The establishment line, the general received wisdom on the streets of this country is generally Euro-sceptic, is anti our membership of the European Union, which is what makes Nick so brave, doing what he’s done.”
2047: Joe Twyman, of YouGov, tells LBC: “It’s clearly a strong performance by Farage and it’s worth pointing out that we asked people to think beyond simply their political persuasion and asked them who they thought had performed best.
“It was clear the emphasis away from simply Europe and a move to look at immigration and benefits has benefited him.”
2038: Reaction from Danny Alexander, the Lib Dem Chief Secretary to the Treasury: predictably, perhaps, he’s going against the grain of the poll result.
“I think what the debate did illuminate is the real choice in Britain. Do we in the end want to stay as a strong part of the European Union for the sake of our jobs, for the sake of our economy, for the sake of safety, for the sake of our clout in the world or do we want to leave?
“If you want to stand up and say Britain is better off as part of the European Union, the only way credibly to express that view is on May the 22nd, in the European Elections, is to back the Liberal Democrats. That’s why I think that Nick Clegg did win this debate because he came across as authoritative, well briefed and he knew his facts and he got that message across again and again and again.”
2029: And here is the result of the YouGov/Sun snap poll of 1,003 voters: Nigel Farage 57 per cent, Nick Clegg 36 per cent. Seven per cent judged the result to be a draw.
2026: The quick poll on LBC窶冱 website asking who’s won suggests that it was Nick Clegg, by 100 per cent to Nigel Farage’s 0 per cent. With all respect to Mr Clegg, it sounds like the website’s not working properly.
The results of a YouGov poll are expected shortly.
2016: Reaction from Andrew Mitchell, the Tory MP: “I’m going to say it is a score draw. The message I take away is that the Liberal Democrats want to stay in Europe willy nilly and that UKIP cannot deliver the referendum that the Conservatives have promised.”
2000: We’ve reached the closing statements already.
Nick’s key soundbite: “I want us to be Great Britain not Little England.”
And Nigel’s: “I’m British, I believe the best people to run Britain are the British people ourselves.”
Stay tuned for the snap polls that will show how the debate went down with voters.
1957: Nigel is defending employing his wife using European taxpayer’s money. He says that very few people have “worked the hours and had as little fun” as him over the last few years. He needs someone to help manage his life when he gets home at midnight every night.
1955: Now they’re arguing about Britain’s ability to make its own laws. Nick says only 7 per cent of legislation is related to the European Union. Nigel says 75 per cent of UK laws are made in Brussels. The Lib Dem leader says his figures come from the House of Commons library. Farage says his stat is the party’s estimate, but if he had gone with Germany’s appraisal the figure would have been even higher.
1953: Nigel says he won’t back gay marriage while Britian remains in the European Court of Human Rights. Clegg’s support for same-sex weddings wins a big cheer from the audience.
1950: The two leaders are talking over each other as they argue over the Britain’s ability to deport foreign criminals. Farage says that the European Arrest Warrant is not necessary. Clegg says that it has help Britain to ship off hundreds of paedophiles and murderers thanks to the measure. He says that law enforcement agencies believe its needed. “I believe the police more than I believe Nigel Farage.”
1945: Nigel Farage says that there are some things that Britain can learn from Europe. “The food’s getting better here and that’s great.”
We know that the Ukip leader likes a good dinner. Times duo Alice Thomson and Rachel Sylvester revealed this month that the party’s MEPs hold monthly “Gadfly Dinners” at a restaurant in Strasbourg that often go on late into the night.
1942: On international trade, Nick Clegg says that Britain would have to renegotiate trade agreements with 77 different countries if it left the EU. Farage says the UK can strike deals on its own, just like Iceland.
Citing a free trade agreement with China signed by Iceland, with a population of 320,000, Farage says: “If it’s good enough for Iceland to do it, I’m damn certain the British, with 64 million, can do it better.”
1938: Nick Clegg whips out a highly-contested figure about the number of jobs at stake if Britain leaves the EU. Three million positions will go, he says.
Things heat up as Farage pours scorn on the statistic and goes personal. “You’ve never run your own company,” he says. “You’ve never had a proper job in the real world. You’re part of the political bubble.”
Mr Farage was a City broker for 20 years, while Mr Clegg went to work for the European Commission after a brief stint as a journalist. But, as the Lib Dem leader points out, his Ukip counterpart is not exactly a newbie in politics. He has stood for election six times, and became an MEP at the same time as Mr Clegg.
Clegg says: “Nigel Farage and I were elected to the European Parliament on the same day in 2009. I left the European Parliament after five years. He still remains a euro-politician.”
1932: The pair are trading blows on business and the EU. Farage accuses Clegg of being in thrall to “All your gang - all the big corporates’ Clegg says that business wants Britain to stay in. He cites last week’s announcement by Hitachi that it would make UK its global rail HQ. The company made clear that it wanted Britain to remain in the EU.
Nigel says small businesses are strangled by European employment law. He says that 60 per cent of business in Britain have 10 employees or less. One small business-owner he spoke to recently complained about having to trawl through 350 pages of EU employment law.
1927: Farage is needling Clegg on his party’s support for joining the Euro in 2003. “Thank God we didn’t listen to them,” he says.
1926: A quick fact check shows that the combined population of Romania and Bulgaria is 28.6 million, so the Ukip number was far off. But every single citizen in the two countries would have to come to Britain for their warning to come true.
1924: Nick Clegg accuses Ukip of misleading voters. He highlights one of the party’s election posters from last year’s Eastleigh by-election. It warned that 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians could come to Britain when a bar expired at the end of 2013. “There aren’t even 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians living in those countries,” he says. “It’s simply not true.”
1919: We’re onto the hot topic of immigration, as an audience member asks why low-paid foreign workers should benefit from the coalition’s decision to raise the basic tax threshold.
Nick Clegg makes the economic case for European migration, a position not popular amongst politicians these days. “They create wealth, they pay taxes, they help to maintain the NHS,” he says. “If we were to simply pull up the drawbridge we would destroy jobs for everyone in this country.”
Farage says that he is wrong. Due to the influx of cheap workers from Eastern Europe, he says, “you have seen your wages go down.. and that is not far for working people in this country.”
1914: There we go: the first sign of some mutual respect. Farage says that at least Ukip and the Lib Dems are united in their positions on Europe. For the Tories, he says, it is a “faultline”.
1911: The first questioner asks: “Why won’t politicians trust the British public by giving us a vote?” Nick Clegg says that the coalition passed a law that would guarantee voters a say if it is proposed that further powers are transferred to Brussels. Farage says that “no one believes” that politicians are actually going to deliver.
If Cameron were here, he would no doubt be making the point that he has pledged an in/out referendum in 2017. But he hasn’t turned up, so the Conservative position is being left out of equation.
1906: Nigel Farage sets out his pitch. We are facing a choice, he says, between “a tired status quote defending a crumbling European Union that, frankly, isn’t working any more and a fresh approach.”
1903: Nick Clegg wins the toss to go first. He tells the audience that “This debate is about you... it’s about your job.” It is, he says, “for the sake of your jobs, for the sake of our clout in the world.”
1901: And we’re off. Nick Ferrari, the LBC Radio host, sets out the rules. Both leaders will begin with a brief introductory speech, followed by questions from the audience.
1854: Both leaders are at the venue and limbering up for the big clash.
Arriving at the venue, near London’s Trafalgar Square, Nigel Farage told ITV he had been at a “dress rehearsal in the Westminster Arms.” The Ukip leader likes to encourage his “man in the pub” image, and it seems that today is no different.
On his arrival, Nick Clegg said only: “I’m looking forward to it.”
A Ukip source admitted ahead of the debate that there would be “enormous pressure” on both men. “We’ve waited 20 years to have this opportunity,” he said.
1850: It’s the clash of the underdogs tonight as Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage go head-to-head over Britain’s membership over the EU. David Cameron and Ed Miliband have declined to join the Lib Dem leader and his Ukip counterpart for the first of two debates ahead of May’s European elections. We will be left instead with the leaders of the UK’s third and fourth parties, whose views on Europe could not be further apart.
Don’t imagine that Labour and the Conservatives won’t be watching closely, though. Both parties are fearful of the impact that the growing popularity of the anti-EU Ukip will have on their chances in 2015. They may be less scared of the Europhile Lib Dems, whose position in the polls these days hovers around the 10 per cent mark, but the junior coalition partners believe that they have “nothing to lose” from the encounter. We know that voters like conviction politicians, so seeing Mr Clegg mounting a passionate defence of the European Union, however unfashionable that may be these days, could win him some kudos.
Despite their differences, there is a grudging respect between Mr Farage and Mr Clegg. There will no doubt be mutual back-patting for the decision to turn up. Both will contrast their staunchly-held views with the murkier positions of the two biggest parties.
Aides of both leaders have suggested that they will seek to avoid personal insults, going instead for “big picture” arguments that address Britain’s place in the world. But there will inevitably be talk of the touchstone issues of migration and welfare payments. Also expect discussion of the impact on Britain’s EU membership on jobs, business, foreign policy, the environment and crime.
Can Nick remind us why he caused Cleggmania in 2010? Can Nigel keep a lid on his famous temper under the pressure of an hour-long debate? It all kicks off at 7pm. Stay here for updates and analysis from The Times politics team.
Document TIMEUK0020140326ea3q002xl
