{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1478"}
____
  
Politics
Cameron goes to work in defence of foreign nanny
Sam Coates, Deputy Political Editor in Bethlehem   
630 words
14 March 2014
00:30
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron defended his employment of a foreign nanny after being asked whether his decision showed why he was struggling to meet his target on cutting migration.
The Prime Minister gave a passionate defence of the work of Gita Lima, who looks after his children. She is originally from Nepal but became a British citizen after passing the necessary tests .
Members of the Cabinet have been answering questions about the employment of domestic staff after James Brokenshire, a newly promoted Home Office minister, claimed that immigration was benefiting the middle class at the expense of the working class.
Speaking at a press conference with Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority, Mr Cameron was asked why he had employed a foreign nanny if he wanted to cut net migration. He said: “I have an excellent woman, Gita Lima, who looks after my children, who is a British citizen. She came originally from Nepal. She has carried out exams and become a British citizen and she does a fantastic job. She certainly fits the description of someone who works hard and wants to get on. I can confirm, as well, that I did not give her any assistance in these exams she had to take to become a British citizen."
Last week it emerged that Samantha Cameron had helped Ms Lima to secure British citizenship. The Prime Minister’s wife allowed her name to be entered on Ms Lima’s application form four years ago.
Mr Cameron said that he did have conversations with Ms Lima about the exam. “She did once ask me one of the questions in the exam — ‘What is the role of the British Cabinet?’ I will not share the answer I gave."
He has employed her for several years since recruiting her from Kalayaan, a charity that helps immigrants to escape abusive bosses. Ms Lima took a temporary leave of absence in 2012, when an Australian nanny filled in.
Figures published last month showed a rise of more than 30 per cent over the past year in net migration to Britain, to 212,000. This has all but dashed the Conservatives’ hopes of meeting their target of bringing the figure below 100,000 before the general election.
Mr Cameron made the personal pledge to bring down annual net migration to the tens of thousands by 2015 shortly before the last general election campaign, but it does not represent official government policy because the Liberal Democrats think that the target is misguided and unachievable.
The Office for National Statistics said that the unexpected rise of 58,000 in the 12 months to last September had been fuelled by migrants from the recession-hit southern European countries, as well as Poland.
Mr Cameron said that the Government had succeeded in bringing down immigration from outside the EU, raising questions about what he can do about the flow from inside the EU.
He said: “We have a clear position on immigration, which is that it has been too high and needs to come down, and it has. It has come down across the course of this Government by almost 20 per cent. If we look at the components of that immigration, we have brought down immigration from outside the EU by something like a third."
Immigration “is a problem" and needs to be tackled by the next Labour Government, the leader of Britain’s biggest union has warned. Len McCluskey, the general secretary of Unite, also said that ministers should only be driven around in British cars to give domestic companies the “inside track" on Whitehall contracts. He said it was “frustrating and annoying" that UK companies were not given preferential treatment.
Document TIMEUK0020140314ea3e00105
