{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"845"}
____
  
Education
Teenager swaps council estate for Eton
John Simpson   
383 words
27 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Eton College, set in 400 acres of grounds and home to the sons of a global elite, is a far cry from an inner-city council estate in the country’s most overcrowded borough.
However, Ishak Ayiris is about to make the transition from his estate in Newham, East London, to the country’s most famous public school.
Ishak, 15, will follow in the footsteps of Prince Harry, David Cameron and 18 other British prime ministers by studying at the 574-year-old college and donning the school’s famous tailcoats uniform.
The son of an Ethiopian immigrant living on state support, Ishak has secured a place studying politics, philosophy and economics at the elite sixth form in Windsor next September.
The pupil at Forest Gate Community School was given money from pupil premium, a government scheme aimed at children from impoverished backgrounds, to help him to win the £76,000 two-year scholarship after an impressive performance in a series of rigorous residential interviews.
Ishak said yesterday of the prospect of being a boarder: “Leaving will be hard for my family, not so much for me. Windsor is much quieter than Newham. Newham is loud, vibrant.
“It is a wonderful opportunity for me. It will be very different because the people I have grown up with in Newham and at Forest Gate Community School don’t have the same background as the people I will mix with at Eton. When my dad found out, he said he had two dreams — coming to England and for his son to go to the same school as the Prime Minster. Both of these dreams have come true. So, yes, you can say he is proud."
The teenager has set his sights on a place at the University of Oxford and a career in politics but promised that he would return to Newham to bring change to the borough.
“Drugs and crime have a big impact on our community here in Newham. My parents are helped out by state support and benefits. But I see Newham as my home. I want to live here for the rest of my life. I want to go and get the best education I can and come back and improve it."
Document TIMEUK0020140227ea2r000y6
Search Summary
 All of these words
	
	   At least one of these words
	immigrant immigration immigrate immigrants
	   None of these words
	
	   This exact phrase
	
	   Date
	22/02/2014 to 05/04/2014
	   Source
	Newspapers: Top UK newspapers Or Belfast Telegraph Or Birmingham Mail (U.K.) Or birminghammail.co.uk Or City AM Or Daily Star (U.K.) Or dailystar.co.uk Or The Daily Telegraph (U.K.) Or Liverpool Echo Or liverpoolecho.co.uk Or London Evening Standard (U.K.) Or London Evening Standard Online Or Manchester Evening News (U.K.) Or manchestereveningnews.co.uk Or Metro Or Scottish Daily Record Or Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland) Or The Scotsman Or The Sun (U.K.) Or The Sunday Mirror (U.K.) Or thescottishsun.co.uk
	   Author
	All Authors
	   Company
	All Companies
	   Subject
	 Not Sports/Recreation
	   Industry
	All Industries
	   Region
	United Kingdom
	   Language
	English
	   Results Found
	2,848
	   Timestamp
	30 May 2014 16:29
	  
 Page  of      © 2014 Factiva, Inc.  All rights reserved.
