{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1240"}
____
  
Politics
Black staff ‘held back’ at Home Office
Richard Ford, Home Correspondent   
691 words
24 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
An investigation is under way at the Home Office amid fears that a racist “glass ceiling” is preventing black and minority ethnic staff from winning promotion to senior jobs.
The move has been prompted by perceptions among ethnic minority staff in the Government department and its agencies that they are disadvantaged during promotions and appraisals, and when bonuses are handed out.
Ethnic minority staff are underrepresented among those judged to be performing best in their jobs and overrepresented in the lower performance category.
Mark Sedwill, the permanent secretary, said the department had to tackle whether there were unconcious biases which are preventing staff rising through the ranks. There is concern about the issue throughout Whitehall, but Mr Sedwill said the Home Office was the only department which had commissioned work to identify any barriers.
In his first newspaper interview since becoming permanent secretary last year, Mr Sedwill told The Times: “We cannot identify overt barriers but clearly black and minority ethnics feel there are glass ceilings that they are just not getting through.”
He has commissioned academic Dr Kathlyn Wilson, who is a member of the Department of Work and Pensions ethnic minority employment stakeholder group , to investigate the underlying causes of the diversity imbalances in staff performance appraisals.
Dr Wilson is expected to produce her findings for the permanent secretary by the end of the month.
Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons Home Affairs Select Committee, said many minority ethnic staff felt racism existed in Whitehall but there was a real issue at the Home Office which of all departments was where “we need to see change”.
He welcomed Mr Sedwill’s initiative but said academic research was not the way to deal with the problem.
“The way to deal with this is through recruitment processses. They should head-hunt people from outside and make sure that on every recruitment panel there is a minority ethnic person because all research shows that people choose people for jobs who are like themselves,” Mr Vaz said.
Almost one in four of the 25,000 staff in the Home Office and its agencies have identified themselves as minority ethnic - far higher than the 9.3 per cent across the Civil Service - but the proportion in the higher ranks is disproportionately low.
The proportion of ethnic minority staff among top officials fell from six to five per cent in the year to 2012-13, according to latest Home Office figures.
Minority ethnic staff are over-represented in the three lowest grade of officials and are also over-represented in the lowest appraisal performance category.
In performance appraisals, black and minority ethnic staff are under represented in the top 20 per cent of best performers and over represented in the lowest-performing category.
Mr Sedwill, who arrived at the Home Office after a career spent largely in the Foreign Office, said: “We have a large number of ethnic minority staff particularly in the immigration system in the operational area and we have been aware that this has been an issue for years.
“We have looked at it. We have looked at our appraisal system. We have looked at the way performance rankings and bonuses were handed out, all of these kind of things.
“We could not see anything that seemed to explain across the whole organisation, both evidence but also the perception which is as important among black minority ethnic staff, that they were disadvantaged.”
He wants the inquiry to look at whether there are “unconcious biases” operating in the department or an absence of opportunities for black and ethnic minority staff.
“The general pattern seen was that, above executive officer grade, the more senior the grade the smaller the proportion of minority ethnic employees,” the Home Office’s employment monitoring report said.
Mr Sedwill said the department had led society in employing lesbian, gay and bisexual people and had a “fantastic track record”.
“What we have done has not just reflected society but has led social change. We need to to ask what are the lessons from that for other underrepresented groups”.
Document TIMEUK0020140324ea3o0001e
