{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1242"}
____
  
Politics
Lady Thatcher ‘would have been a secret fan of Farage’
David Sanderson   
466 words
24 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Margaret Thatcher would have been secretly cheering Nigel Farage on, according to a former Cabinet minister.
Jonathan Aitken said yesterday that the Ukip leader “voices a lot of her prejudices”, citing immigration and the “domination” by Brussels of British affairs.
Mr Aitken, who had a three-year relationship with Baroness Thatcher’s daughter, Carol — the ending of which he believes may have kept him out of a Thatcher Cabinet — said that Lady Thatcher would have had a “lot of leanings” towards Ukip policies, and added: “I think secretly she would have cheered him on.” However, he added, she would never have publicly admitted voting for Mr Farage’s party.
Publicising his biography Margaret Thatcher: Power and Personality at the Oxford Literary Festival, Mr Aitken said: “I think she would have had not just a sneaking sympathy, but a lot of leanings towards Nigel Farage, without ever quite coming out for Ukip.
“[Farage] voices a lot of her prejudices. Despite being wildly disloyal to John Major . . . she would never have voted for Ukip. She would never have said ‘I vote for Ukip, I vote for Farage’.”
The former Chief Secretary to the Treasury under John Major, who was infamously imprisoned for perjury in 1999, added that Lady Thatcher would have agreed with “a lot of the views Nigel Farage expresses, on immigration, on the idea that Britain can manage as a world-leading nation without relying on the European Union; and above all she was really fed up with centralism, liberalism and Brussels domination”.
He also praised her “magnificent” response to big issues, adding that she could be “brutally unkind to people her own size”.
The biographer claimed that Lady Thatcher had been “insecure” and looked favourably on attractive men.
Mr Aitken was known to have had a mixed relationship with Lady Thatcher, who died last year aged 87, after the breakdown of the three-year affair with her daughter. Her mother was reported to have said: “He made Carol cry.”
He was caught out shortly after she became Tory leader when he was asked about her Middle East policies, saying: “She knows so little. She probably thinks Sinai is the plural of sinus.” This was published in Private Eye.
Mr Farage last year claimed that his party was the “true heir” to Lady Thatcher, and added: “I cannot believe that a young Margaret Thatcher leaving Oxford today would join the Conservative Party led by David Cameron”.
He said that she would have become involved with Ukip and “toppled” him within 12 months.
He also said: “Who is the heir to Thatcher? Is it David Cameron? Good God, no. Most certainly not. She was about leadership.
“He appears to be far more about followership.”
Document TIMEUK0020140324ea3o0002q
