{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2069"}
____
  
Politics
Farage not a racist, says under-fire Miliband
Sam Coates, Deputy Political Editor   
984 words
18 May 2014
13:41
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ed Miliband says he does not believe Nigel Farage is a racist despite the Ukip leader’s admission that he would be uncomfortable if a group of Romanians were to move in next door.
The Labour leader baffled some party figures today when he sought to make a nuanced judgement about comments by the Ukip leader about Romanians on LBC on Friday.
Mr MIliband told Sky News: “I think his remarks he made were deeply offensive ... I think they were a racial slur but I don’t think of Nigel Farage as a racist himself.”
However, he suggested that he was tempering his language about Mr Farage, whom he has only met once, as part of a deliberate political strategy, adding: “I have been careful not to characterise [Mr Farage] personally as a racist.”
Mr Miliband’s remark prompted Mark Ferguson, editor of the influential Labour List Blog, to tweet: “Miliband desperately trying not to call Farage a racist. If it walks like a racist and talks like a racist…”
The equivocation also comes after criticism of the way that Labour has dealt with Ukip in the European elections.
Simon Danczuk, Labour MP for Rochdale, said it was “daft” to dismiss voters who were to turning to Ukip as “disaffected loons” and that winning back support was more than a matter of “setting off a few fireworks or coming up with some catchy slogans”.
The Labour leader told Sky that Ukip are trying to tap into people’s “sense of discontent” but said he did not believe Mr Farage’s party had the right solutions.
Mr Farage’s party could top the poll in Thursday’s elections to the European Parliament. A poll for ComRes put Ukip comfortably on top, while two other polls, one for YouGov and one for ICM, had Labour in front.
Labour figures have already started criticising the campaign run by the party, amid fears that a failure to come top will provoke a round of infighting in the party.
Mr Danczuk, the MP for Rochdale, said they had to stop relying on the unpopularity of the government and come forward with a positive vision of their own.
“We’ve become too comfortable with talking to ourselves, with policy announced through set-piece speeches as though in a university lecture. Some in the party view politics as an intellectual pursuit; it’s not, it’s a monumental struggle to win hearts and minds,” he said.
“We won’t win a general election by campaigning excessively on food banks and the bedroom tax. Labour has to offer a route out of poverty and unfulfilled potential.
His comments were echoed by Tristan Osborne, the parliamentary candidate for Chatham and Aylesford, one of the party’s key target seats, who was recorded making critical remarks at a Labour fundraising event.
In comments reported by the Mail on Sunday and The Sunday Times, he was quoted as complaining of a “dodgy campaign” with “no coherent messaging”, and that “The machine is not functioning in any capacity”.
Mr Osborne was said to have warned that Mr Miliband would “never form a credible government” unless he did more to win over “the aspirational southern voter”.
“The economy is picking up. That reinforces the narrative that they [the Conservatives] are doing well, and there’s absolutely sod all anyone can do about that,” he was quoted as saying.
Nick Clegg went further than Mr Miliband but also stopped short of calling Mr Farage a racist.
Asked if Mr Farage was “indulging in racist language” with his Romanian comments, Mr Clegg told The Andrew Marr Show on BBC One: “I think the mask is starting to slip and I think what’s being revealed that sort of behind the beer-swilling bonhomie is a rather nasty view of the world.
“I think anyone who singles out one community, one nationality, and says ‘I don’t want to live next door to them’, I really think that’s the politics of division and I think it really should have no place in modern Britain.
“I would say to people if you don’t like that point of view, if, like me, you are really put off by this very divisive, nasty approach to things then please go out and vote.
“The more people don’t vote, the more likely it is that Ukip will get in.”
Meanwhile the Tory culture secretary, who is the son of Pakistani immigrants and the first Asian secretary of state, said today that immigrants who come to live in Britain need to learn to speak English and to “respect our way of life".
Sajid Javid, said that people were entitled to expect that immigrants made a contribution to society.
“People want Britain to have more control over its borders, and I think they are right,” he told The Sunday Telegraph.
“People also say, when immigrants do come to Britain, that they should come to work, and make a contribution and that they should also respect our way of life, and I agree with all of that. It means things like trying to learn English.”
His intervention comes at a time when the Conservatives are under intense pressure from the UK Independence Party over the issue of immigration before Thursday’s European elections.
Mr Javid criticised those who had failed to assimilate into British society, despite living in the country for many years.
“I know people myself, I have met people who have been in Britain for over 50 years and they still can’t speak English,” he said.
“I think it’s perfectly reasonable for British people to say, look, if you’re going to settle in Britain and make it your home, you should learn the language of the country and you should respect its laws and its culture.”
Document TIMEUK0020140518ea5i0002t
