{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1611"}
____
  
Politics
Thousands caught up in deportation delays
Richard Ford, Home Correspondent   
475 words
28 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Thousands of illegal migrants and foreign offenders are still in the UK despite the Home Office having documents to deport them, according to a watchdog report published yesterday.
Some of the emergency travel papers were provided by foreign embassies up to 13 years ago.
John Vine, the Chief Inspector of Borders, warned that the backlog of unused papers could hit future deportations as foreign embassies questioned why they had not been used.
Mr Vine said: “The Home Office was applying for too many emergency travel documents that had little prospect of being used, rather than focusing resources on cases where re-documentation was likely to result in removal.
“The Home Office had not used several thousand emergency travel documents that had already been agreed. In some instances, these agreements dated back more than 10 years.”
The documents are acquired by the Home Office to deport illegal immigrants and foreign national offenders who have destroyed their travel papers.
The inspection found that there was no central monitoring of the progress of 4,000 applications. Of 27 foreign offenders whose cases were examined it was found that they had each been locked up for an average of 563 days beyond the end of their sentences.
In one case a detainee had been held for more than three and a half years at a cost of £211,000 to the taxpayer because there was no passport to send him home.
Mr Vine said: “I was concerned to find that the Home Office was keeping foreign criminals who had completed their prison sentences, in immigration detention for months or even years in the hope that they would eventually comply with the re-documentation process. Given the legal requirement only to detain individuals where there is a realistic prospect of removal, this is potentially a breach of their human rights. It is also very costly for the taxpayer.”
A second report revealed serious failings in the use of immigration powers to carry out raids on business premises without a warrant when there is a danger offenders will abscond.
There was a large increase in the number of times these powers were used in the past two years from 843 in 2012-13 to 1,049 in the first six months of 2013-14. Over the same period, the number of raids carried out with search warrants fell from 5,850 to 3,046.
Mr Vine said it was clear that a significant number of staff were either ignorant of Home Office guidance or were choosing to ignore it.
A spokesman for the Home Office said letters authorising raids on businesses without a warrant and emergency travel documents played a vital role in removing offenders. He said: “Work was under way to improve their use before the inspections were conducted.”
Document TIMEUK0020140328ea3s0006o
