{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"771"}
____
  
UK News
Seasoned Tory rebel with many causes
Andrew Norfolk   
811 words
25 February 2014
01:44
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Shy and retiring Peter Bone is not. It took long years and three general election defeats before the arch-Eurosceptic finally took his Westminster seat in 2005, determined to make up for lost time.
There have been few political issues since that day about which the Wellingborough MP has not shared his thoughts with the Commons or the public at large. Those opinions rarely feature shades of grey.
Mr Bone, 61, loves cricket, the late Baroness Thatcher and capital punishment. His lengthy list of pet hates has included Europe, criminals, the “Stalinist" NHS, gay marriage, Liberal Democrats, benefits for single parents, illegal immigrants, the BBC and the minimum wage.
Born in Billericay, Essex, the grammar school boy was 15 when a local newspaper tipped him as a future Prime Minister. If that was a childhood ambition it seems likely to remain unfulfilled but the serial Tory rebel has at least achieved the distinction of being a constant thorn in David Cameron’s side.
Mr Bone was 24 and about to become a chartered accountant when he was first elected as a Conservative local councillor in Southend. His first general election campaign was in a Welsh constituency, Islwyn, in 1992, and led to inevitable defeat against the Labour leader, Neil Kinnock.
Further electoral disappointment followed in the West Yorkshire seat of Pudsey in 1997 and in his first attempt to regain Wellingborough for the Tories in 2001. He finally triumphed four years later by a mere 687 votes, but significantly increased the Conservative majority to almost 12,000 in 2010.
Alongside his political ambitions, his business career saw the marathon-running Mr Bone become finance director of an engineering company and managing director of an electronics firm before, in the 1990s, he set up his own holiday company, Palm Travel (West) Ltd, in Newport, South Wales.
Opposing the introduction of the minimum wage - then thought likely to be £2.50 an hour - in a speech at the 1995 Conservative party conference, he told delegates that he was paying a 17-year-old trainee at the travel company 87p per hour and would not have employed her had the minimum wage been in place.
The boast led to him being labelled Britain’s “meanest boss" by the Daily Mirror. Seven years later Palm Travel, which was wholly owned by Mr Bone and his wife, Jennie, went into voluntary liquidation with debts of £1.36 million. The long list of creditors included many small companies and members of the public.
The MP said last night that when the company ceased trading “all customers either received their holidays in full or received a refund; no one was left out of pocket".
In Wellingborough a few years later, Mr Bone was taken onto the books of a Northamptonshire entertainment agency as an available-for-hire lookalike of then-England football team manager, Sven-Göran Eriksson, to whom he bears an uncanny resemblance.
The schtick by which he made his name at Westminster, amusing or tiresome according to personal taste, was to rise to his feet to ask questions, many and often, on behalf of a woman in whose common-sense opinions he senses the definitive voice of middle-English sanity and wisdom: his wife.
By so frequently airing Mrs Bone’s views, sometimes said to have been expressed in forthright terms over the breakfast table, her husband seemed intent on creating in the public mind a 21st-century incarnation of the man on the Clapham omnibus.
In 2012, the mother of three sought selection by the Conservatives as their candidate in the election for Northamptonshire’s first Police and Crime Commissioner. The Tory selection panel felt she was “not a suitable person to go forward".
A leaked email from Lord Feldman, the Conservative peer, described her as “a likeable, capable and sensible person" but concluded that she “did not have the relevant qualifications or experience for the role" and “did not display a sufficiently developed understanding of what the job would entail".
Mrs Bone, 53, accused party grandees of “bully-boy behaviour" and claimed they rejected her application because they “want to get at Peter through me".
Had the panel’s decision been different, she might have found herself in a distinctly awkward position. The police commissioner poll was won by the Tory candidate, Adam Simmonds, whose duty in his four-year term of office is to hold the Northamptonshire force to account on behalf of the public.
For the past year, that police force has quietly been conducting a high-level fraud investigation, prompted by a Conservative-controlled local authority, into one of its local Tory MPs, Mr Bone. The inquiry’s focus is the financial status of his elderly mother-in-law. What Mrs Bone would have made of that is anyone’s guess.
Document TIMEUK0020140225ea2p000xd
