{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"31"}
____
  
Columnists
The coalition must fight fear with progress
Rachel Sylvester   
1,175 words
25 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Cameron and Clegg need an optimistic, forward-looking message to counter the negative nostalgia of Ukip
David Cameron once taunted Tony Blair at Prime Minister’s Questions by telling him: “You were the future once.” There will be a similar dynamic tomorrow when Nick Clegg faces Nigel Farage in the first of two broadcast leader’s debates on Europe. At the last general election, the Liberal Democrat leader was the plucky outsider, the anti-establishment figure who attracted protest votes and represented a new kind of politics. Now it is the Ukip man who is the underdog, challenging the political elite and promising to stand up for ordinary voters.
Instead of “I agree with Nick,” the mainstream parties are all chanting: “I agree with Nigel.” Mr Clegg was the future once; now it’s Mr Farage.
Except he isn’t. Ukip — like Marine Le Pen’s Front National, which made big gains in local elections in France over the weekend — is all about a yearning for an earlier age, a mythically better era. Its supporters are anxious about change and looking for the security blanket of familiarity. When Liberal Democrat strategists asked a focus group of Ukip voters what they liked most about Britain, they had only one reply: “The past.”
Mr Clegg discussed the rise of such protest parties with Angela Merkel, on her recent visit to London. Her view, he says, chimed with his: “It’s not right or left, it’s not State and market, it’s not communism versus capitalism; it’s a big visceral debate about whether in the footloose-and-fancy-free globalised world, in which there is huge social insecurity, do you face up to what causes that or do you offer people false comfort?”
And yet, far from confronting the innate pessimism of Ukip, the Government itself seems more at ease with fear than hope. The dark clouds of austerity have squeezed the sunshine out of Mr Cameron. The realities of power have tempered the optimistic idealism once displayed by Mr Clegg. Ministers pit strivers against skivers, young against old, Britain against the world. Immigrants are told to “go home”, hardworking bingo players and beer drinkers patronised as “they”.
Instead of standing up to the negative narrative, the mainstream parties reinforce it. The recovery is fragile, the internet a threat, the world a dangerous place. Gang crime is spiralling, family life is collapsing, obesity and anorexia are out of control. Human rights laws, health and safety legislation and political correctness have all gone mad. Perhaps there is a grain of truth in all these things, but just as in Scotland, where the “no” camp is losing ground because of the lack of a positive message, “Project Fear” is not enough at Westminster. If the incumbents try to fight fear with fear they will lose, because Ukip will always be able to raise more terrifying spectres about the modern world.
In John Campbell’s new biography of Roy Jenkins, A Well-RoundedLife, the author describes how his subject saw the purpose of politics as to engineer social and cultural change rather than just to manage the nation’s finances. His aim, he said, was to create a more “civilised society”. In 23 months as Home Secretary, Jenkins oversaw the legalisation of homosexuality and abortion, ended flogging in prisons and theatre censorship, while liberalising the divorce laws and introducing the Race Relations Act. He harnessed the mood of the “swinging Sixties” even as the Government dealt with economic crisis, industrial disputes and rising concerns over immigration.
Defining his political philosophy as “optimistic humanism”, he set out to shape events rather than allowing his time in office to be shaped by them. “Let us be on the side of those who want people to be free to live their own lives, to make their own mistakes,” he once wrote, “and on the side of experiment and brightness, of better buildings and better food, of better music (jazz as well as Bach) of better books, of fuller lives and greater freedom. In the long run these things will be more important than the most perfect of economic policies.”
Looking back over Tony Blair’s time in power, it’s arguable that the most enduring reforms were cultural. From civil partnerships to the smoking ban, increased maternity leave to the minimum wage, the creation of children’s centres to the relaxation of licensing laws, it was the social changes that had the most impact on people’s everyday lives. New Labour helped to create a country more at ease with itself, a Britain that was a nicer place to live. Indeed, Mr Cameron defined himself as a moderniser by supporting these reforms.
What, though, has the coalition done to create a more civilised society? This week the first gay marriages will take place — a significant moment, but really just the logical extension of civil partnerships. There has been a proliferation of online government services, making life easier for the citizen. The Treasury would argue that the pension reforms, announced in the Budget, are a liberalising measure, in line with changes to education, welfare and the NHS, that are intended to give people more power over their own lives. These don’t, though, amount to a cultural revolution.
One small measure that would fit the bill — a Home Office proposal to reform the use of stop-and-search powers by the police — has been blocked by No 10 because of fears that it would make the Government look weak on crime. Meanwhile, the green agenda has been sacrificed on the altar of austerity. There is no sense of urgency about the dramatic increase in fixed-odds betting terminals, which risk creating a new generation of gambling addicts. Instead, Tory MPs mutter about reversing the hunting ban. The Prime Minister has announced plans to curtail the availability of online porn — but many of the wider social and ethical questions raised by the internet, including how much access the State should have to personal data, have got bogged down in wrangles between the Conservatives and the Lib Dems.
Ministers argue that their mission is deficit reduction. A Downing Street strategist says: “We live in completely different times. You can’t have a society that works if you don’t make sure you have a rock solid economy.” But homosexuality and abortion were legalised in 1967, the same year that the Government was forced to devalue the pound. As Lord O’Donnell, the former Cabinet Secretary, argued in a report last week: “GDP is not enough. To measure a country’s progress, we also need to look at how satisfied we are with our lives.”
To deal with the threat from Ukip, the mainstream parties need to explain what is good about change. The answer to fear is hope, the challenge to nostalgia is progress. You can’t counter the argument that we are all going to hell in a handcart just by jumping on board.
Document TIMEUK0020140325ea3p0000y
