{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2528"}
____
  
Political Sketch
Sam Cam Halo Effect puts MPs on their best behaviour
Ann Treneman   
519 words
6 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
PMQs seems to exist in a time lag. Last week no one said even one word about Kiev (not even “chicken", which I would have accepted). This week, no one said one word about immigration (not even “Farage", which again I would have accepted). Instead, all Ed Miliband wanted to talk about was Kiev, and not as in chickens.
First, though, before we get on to geopolitics, I have some news. Samantha Cameron was there, observing her husband, her face luminescent. She was sitting in what I think of as the Meryl Streep memorial seat, for it is where La Streep sat when she came to prep for the film The Iron Lady. The seat is on the floor of the house, on the side, and is accessed by a secret door. No 10 refused to say why she was there. “No special reason why today," they claimed.
I’m not sure that I believe them. Still, perhaps Sam Cam did awake yesterday to the smell of baking bread (as always) and say: “You know what, Dave? I’m going to pass on the fashion front row in Paris and go to PMQs instead!" At which point Dave immediately sent an emergency text to his hairdresser (MBE) about covering up his bald spot even better than usual.
It’s amazing how just her presence seemed to change PMQs. Everyone, not just Dave, was on their best behaviour. I am calling it the “Sam Cam Halo Effect", which is like the Halo Effect, but, of course, wearing much better shoes.
My first documentation of the Sam Cam Halo Effect was when Ed Miliband arose to ask his six questions. “Do you agree with me that Russia’s actions are completely without justification?" he asked, adopting a new statesmanlike tone to match his blank statesman face.
Dave answered: “I agree with you." Then he added, just in case there was any doubt: “You are completely right." Ed, who had never heard that before from Dave (or possibly anybody, including Justine), responded: “I am sure we agree."
And they did. They agreed on everything, but especially about the fact that they agreed, because, other than that, there was precious little of substance to agree on. Everyone said there must be “consequences" if Russia did not behave, but specifics were hard to find. Dave explained one idea: “It is hard to see how a G8 meeting could properly go ahead." Ed nodded gravely: “I entirely share the Prime Minister’s view."
I examined Dave, whose glow from the Sam Cam Halo Effect was almost at radioactive levels. Across from him, Ed was also aglow. Next time, I must bring a Geiger counter.
The halo extended to the backbenches. When Tory Caroline Dinenage arose, the PM said: “May I first congratulate you on your happy news at the weekend?"
Caroline blushed. Near by, Tory Mark Lancaster also smiled. It seems they are newlyweds. The whole chamber had a confetti moment. Over in her seat, Sam Cam, halo clearly visible, smiled.
Document TIMEUK0020140306ea36000og
