{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1610"}
____
  
Columnists
Mainstream politics lost out along with Clegg
Gaby Hinsliff   
700 words
28 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Being statesmanlike did the Deputy PM a fat lot of good
Nick Clegg did everything right, or at any rate as right as he’ll ever do. Yet somehow it was all wrong.
Watching the much-hyped Europe debate from my sitting room rather than the spin room on Wednesday night it was clear that Mr Clegg did everything a politician is conventionally supposed to do.
He sounded statesmanlike but personable, up against a slightly tetchy Nigel Farage; he exposed some of Ukip’s madder arguments. (How exactly will 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians swamp the UK seeking work, when that’s more than the entire Romanian and Bulgarian populations put together?)
Fat lot of good it did him. Mr Farage is surfing a powerful tide of hostility not just to immigration and Europe but to social solidarity generally: the welfare state, progressive taxation, common defence, pretty much anything that smacks of being told what to do. Snip, snip, through the ties that bind, and a lot of people liked it. Forget spin about how the Lib Dems won in a way by getting the pro-EU argument out there, or having the nerve to confront Ukip. If 57 per cent of viewers think Mr Farage won, he won. That’s how politics works. And for the first time in my adult life, I’m not looking forward to the general election.
The campaign will be a shouty, scrappy year of politics at its worst: of aggressively playing the opponent not the ball; of pretending that there are easy answers to everything and that there aren’t vast areas where the parties roughly agree. Well, campaigns are always like that, and somehow the big ideological arguments still get made. More worrying is that conventional parties may be losing the traction to make them.
Why did commentators mostly think Mr Clegg, not Mr Farage, won? The answer, I suspect, is that we’re hopelessly old-fashioned. We still think that economic credibility, logically compelling arguments, and knowing something about Ukraine — plus charisma — are what matters. But this kind of conventional political competence is becoming a red flag to some voters, a warning marker of exactly what they don’t want, namely yet another smoothie-chops conventional politician. The debate wasn’t about Inners vs Outers but about mainstream politics publicly squaring up to anti-politics, anti-establishmentarianism, anti-reason, and losing. Ignore talk about how Labour and the Tories didn’t have a dog in this fight. They did. Everyone did.
Just giving
A fat envelope stuffed with goodies falls through the letterbox. The enclosed coasters, bookmarks and cards are, the letter announces, the Red Cross’s gift to me — in the hope, obviously, of a gift back. And there’s me imagining they used my donations to send parcels only to the needy.
How dare they assume that I need to be bribed into giving, that I only give a toss about Syrian refugees if there’s a novelty shopping bag in it for me. I admire what the Red Cross does, which is why I support it with cold hard cash. But like chugging, this kind of stunt puts me off giving.
It’s true that charity is often a two-way street. Every time I drop off a bag of outgrown children’s clothes at the hospice shop I wonder who is doing whom a favour as I walk away with a warm fuzzy feeling of virtue (and more wardrobe space).
Yet there’s something about bribing people with geegaws that cheapens the deal, turning what should be common humanity into just another knowing, cynical transaction. Stop it.
A chilli wind
The hedgerows are frothing white, the hawthorn is in early bloom. My husband reports that, according to the old boys in the village pub, this is bad — when the maybush flowers before May, a hard freeze follows. This is obviously superstitious claptrap, as the hawthorn’s only out because it’s so unseasonably warm and I carry on merrily sowing spring vegetables.
Two days later the temperature plummets, freezing hail falls, and my chilli seedlings die. Oh.
Document TIMEUK0020140328ea3s0005b
