{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1396"}
____
  
Politics
UKIP in tax offensive
Michael Savage, Chief Political Correspondent   
613 words
3 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A series of tax cuts is to be backed by UKIP in an attempt to woo more Tory voters at the next election, it has emerged.
The move will put further pressure on David Cameron and George Osborne to announce their own giveaways before the 2015 election, which UKIP hopes will see it return its first MP to parliament.
Nigel Farage’s party will stop anyone earning the minimum wage from having to pay income tax, a policy already backed by the Liberal Democrats.
Senior UKIP figures are also known to be interested in reforming inheritance tax, which they describe as a “death tax". Slashing the levy would prove popular with traditional Tory supporters.
Mr Osborne won huge plaudits before the last election for promising to raise the point at which inheritance tax was applied to an estate from £300,000 to £1 million.
The pledge was so well received that it helped persuade Gordon Brown not to hold a snap general election that Labour may well have won.
However, he dropped the policy in order to secure the coalition deal with the Lib Dems.
He has since frozen the level at which inheritance tax is paid at £325,000 until 2018.
Grassroots Tories continue to be nervous about the UKIP threat. In a letter to Mr Cameron, Stephen Mansbridge, the Tory leader of Guilford Council, accused the Prime Minister of undermining the party’s election chances.
“We have lost many Conservative Party members - indeed whole branches of the local association - due to various government policies, and UKIP won over 20 per cent of the vote in the local elections last year in Surrey," he said.
“Immigration, the EU and gay marriage are frequently given as reasons for this."
UKIP is likely to help pay for its tax giveaways by cutting Britain’s £11 billion foreign aid budget.
A spokesman for the party said that its tax policy would be “spelt out in our general election manifesto".
Mr Farage, the party’s leader, suggested yesterday that savings could be made from the NHS. “The lessons of tax are that when you raise taxes, tax income goes down and I would like to think of us doing things the other way around," he told the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show.
“I think the most important tax reform we need is to say anybody earning [the] minimum wage is not paying tax, so we incentivise people to get off benefits.
“If you cut taxes, then you’ve also got to cut back government spending substantially and the big challenge for UKIP after the European elections is to put a manifesto together … that has some numbers that add up and we are working on that."
He added: “Labour doubled spending on the National Health Service, it didn’t double the return. What we will look for is better value for money. If we could get the same result or a better result by spending less, that is what we should try and do.
“Let’s see where we can make savings. Given that middle management has grown by over 40 per cent since 1997, it seems to me there are places here where we can make genuine savings."
Mr Farage signalled the party was going to ever greater lengths to stop people with unacceptable views from running for the party. He said that anyone that could be “a distraction" would be weeded out.
“What happens is people run election campaigns and they tend in the short term, perhaps, to change the message slightly and we have got to make sure we are absolutely consistent," he said.
Document TIMEUK0020140303ea33001bc
