{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2655"}
____
  
Columnists
When migrants have a name, they’re welcome
Rachel Sylvester   
1,167 words
1 April 2014
01:44
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Voters dislike the abstract idea of immigration. But when real people are involved their views change dramatically
In The West Wing Leo McGarry, the White House chief of staff, says one of his jobs is to stop the President meeting the wrong people. “I don’t want him putting a voice to the guy,” he explains. “I take my daughter to a seafood place, the first thing she does is name all the lobsters in the tank so I can’t eat them.” Politics is as much about psychology as policy. That’s worth remembering when it comes to government immigration policy. There is often a mismatch between general hostility and specific compassion.
The case of Yashika Bageerathi, the London schoolgirl facing deportation to Mauritius, has prompted a wave of public sympathy. This model pupil — hard-working, intelligent and popular — is about to take her A levels and is expected to get top grades. Described as a pillar of the community by her head teacher, she volunteers in her free time, tutoring less able students and has been offered places by several Russell Group universities.
Yet for the past two weeks she has been held at the Yarl’s Wood Immigration Removal Centre — without her mother, brother or sister — waiting to be sent back alone to the country she fled in 2012 to escape a physically abusive relative. The Home Office refuses to deal with her along with the rest of her family — or to consider her imminent exams — because, at the age of 19, she is classified as an adult.
There is a growing backlash to this bureaucratic approach. More than 170,000 people have signed an on-line petition urging Theresa May to look again at the case. The supermodel Cara Delevingne is among those who have tweeted their support for the teenager, telling the Home Secretary: “She deserves a future!” During a protest at the weekend, pupils at her school, the Oasis Academy Hadley, held placards saying: “Yashika is our family.” On the website set up by supporters, a friend said she embodies “the values of Great Britain”, while a member of staff wrote that she is “simply the best student a teacher could ever work with.”
In the Commons yesterday, David Burrowes, the Tory MP for Enfield Southgate won support from all sides when he urged the Home Office to show “common sense and compassion” and release the sixth former, who is his constituent. Boris Johnson is also weighing in on her behalf - an aide told me he was “surprised" by the decision to consider her case in isolation, and believes it should have been heard alongside that of her mother and siblings. Perhaps aware of the strength of public opinion, two airlines – British Airways and Air Mauritius – have now refused to accept the teenager on their flights.
The Tories seem determined to get into a bidding war with Ukip to sound tough on immigration, and Labour keeps apologising for being too soft about how many people it let in, but the public’s views are far more nuanced than is often assumed by politicians. Although voters are fearful about an abstract threat, they seem much less worried by the reality. Areas where people have most contact with migrants, including London, tend to be the most positive about immigration. In polls, although people put it high on their list of issues facing the nation, when they asked about the problems facing their own area or family, it is far lower down. “There is a disconnect between what people feel is happening to them and what they believe is going on in the country at large,” says one Lib Dem strategist.
The same is true of welfare reform, where voters are more sympathetic to individual claimants than to anonymous beneficiaries of an amorphous system, and international aid, where people who oppose spending in theory nonetheless support specific donations of things such as mosquito nets.
On immigration, of course, voters want to feel that the system is working. They need to know that everyone is playing by the rules. The Government is right to curtail so-called benefits and health tourism. There is, however, a general willingness to accept new arrivals. According to research by the think-tank British Future, while about 20 per cent of the public are hostile to immigration, and another 20 per cent are instinctively positive, the remainder are in between — a “sceptical middle” who can see the benefits of people coming to this country but worry about the impact on jobs and public services. Most of the public, 55 per cent, think Polish immigrants “work hard for a living” compared with 19 per cent who think they survive on welfare.
Sunder Katwala, the director of British Future, says: “When people talk about ‘immigrants’, they’re referring to people they don’t know. Once they are talking about someone they have met — a neighbour, workmate or, like Yashika, a student at the local school — they tend to judge them on their merits.”
The claim by James Brokenshire, the Home Office Minister, that a “metropolitan elite” was unpatriotic by hiring foreign nannies and cleaners backfired so spectacularly because it immediately translated the abstract into the specific, turning the spotlight on the household staff of senior ministers, including David Cameron.
The Prime Minister is determined to turn this into a numbers game. He has set a net migration target, promising to bring the level down to “tens of thousands” a year. Yet, with the Government unable to limit the number of people coming from the EU, or to control the number of Britons deciding to live abroad, this is completely unenforceable. Privately ministers admit that they are unlikely to meet the target before the election, with the latest figures showing that net annual migration rose by 58,000 to 212,000 in the year to September 2013. If, as Lord Ashcroft concluded after conducting a poll on immigration last year, the real problem is that people believe the Government is “powerless” to manage migration, because it is inextricably linked to the global economy, it seems foolish to reinforce this sense of impotence by making promises that are impossible to keep.
The Lib Dems have long opposed the target, but now some Tories are starting to question the approach. The Department for Business Innovation and Skills is also worried that the best foreign students, worth potentially millions of pounds to this country, are being put off applying to British universities. Mark Field, the MP for the Cities of London and Westminster, warned last week that this could harm Britain’s global competitiveness and insisted that his party should not get into a “Dutch auction” over immigration. “We must remember that those who have or will come to our shores are not numbers — they are people,” he said. That’s the point. Perhaps it is time to start naming the lobsters in the tank.
Document TIMEUK0020140331ea41002w7
