{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"456"}
____
  
Politics
They call them fruitcakes in public but Tories still fear the Ukip threat
Alice Thomson and Rachel Sylvester   
1,859 words
12 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Ukip donor who is bankrolling the party’s European elections campaign has suggested that Nigel Farage should not stand candidates against Tories who want to pull out of the EU.
Paul Sykes, the Yorkshire businessman who has promised to spend millions of pounds promoting the Eurosceptic cause between now and May, said that Ukip should give Conservatives a clear run at the general election if they are in favour of withdrawal.
“I don’t think you should stand against a candidate who clearly says in his manifesto ‘I’m going to campaign to leave the European Union,’ he said. “You shouldn’t have candidates against him. That could save their seats and that’s the way it should be."
The call will increase tensions within the Tory Party, where senior figures are divided about how to deal with the rise of Mr Farage’s party, which is set to do well in May’s European elections.
David Cameron may have dismissed Ukip as “fruitcakes and loonies", but privately the Conservatives are taking the threat from Mr Farage very seriously.
Matthew Goodwin and Rob Ford, the authors of an academic study on Ukip, were recently invited to brief Downing Street strategists on their findings.
Ukip may be small, ill-disciplined and chaotic, but it is having a disproportionate effect on the other parties at Westminster. Mr Cameron has already promised a referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU, and toughened up his rhetoric on immigration, in an attempt to see off the threat. The debates between Mr Farage and Nick Clegg will be a highlight of the European elections campaign.
One senior Cabinet minister thinks the Tories should ostracise Mr Farage. “Ukip remind me of the Tory party a decade ago when the grassroots were all obsessed with immigration, gays and harking back to the past," he said.
“We need to make sure that it becomes as embarrassing to say you vote Ukip at a dinner party as it was to say you voted BNP. This is more than just a protest vote; it is a vote from the past. It allows people to admit their worst feelings."
A Downing Street source agreed that Ukip was “xenophobic and racist and panders to the lowest common denominator. It’s like candy floss — a sticky mess that easily dissolves leaving a horrible aftertaste."
However, some senior Conservatives are convinced that doing a deal with Ukip is the only way for the Tories to retain power at the 2015 general election. According to a recent poll by Conservative Home, almost half of Tory activists agree, with 41 per cent in favour of a pact and 54 against. The number in favour has risen by 7 per cent since May.
Lord Tebbit, the former Tory chairman, said: “I think a pact would be sensible after the European election. Where a Ukip candidate has more chance of defeating Labour and the Lib Dems, we should stand back and let them fight the seat. Conversely where the Tories look likely to beat the Lib Dems or Labour Ukip should stand back. It would be relatively easy to work out who should contest which seats."
In his view, Mr Farage has damaged the Conservatives’ electoral prospects by winning over traditional Tories who feel they have been “abandoned" by Mr Cameron. “It would help if we didn’t abuse former Tory voters by attacking Ukip as nutters," he argued.
“If I was a shopkeeper and I began to notice that shoppers kept walking past my shop and on to another one that had recently opened, I wouldn’t stand at the door and shout abuse at my former customers," he said. “I would find out why they were going to the other shop. If I discovered it was because they preferred their stock, I would fire our purchasing manager and get new stock that they wanted."
Jacob Rees Mogg, the MP for North East Somerset, is also in favour of a pact. “We need to make an offer that is sufficiently generous that they will take it seriously," he says. “If we don’t do something we could lose. Ukip is a great threat to our election chances — it is appealing to the Thatcher Tories."
However, Ken Clarke, the pro-European Cabinet minister, said that it would be “complete political madness" to do a deal with Ukip. “We would lose huge numbers of Conservative supporters who are not angry right-wing populist protesters," he said. He warned David Cameron against pandering to Ukip by shifting to the right on Europe or immigration. “Emphasising Ukip subjects just maximises their vote," he said. “Sounding like Ukip makes Ukip sound credible."
“My own view is that Ukip is just wrong . . . We don’t live in isolated little tribes any more. You can’t get all excited about the fact that not everybody speaks English on the Tube. That’s the modern world. Nigel Farage can’t get the Tube train back full of old Cockney pensioners with cloth caps."
For the former Chancellor and Health Secretary, the most worrying thing about Ukip is the scale of the disillusion with politics that it reveals.
“The political class has lost the confidence of too big a section of the public," he said. “People forgive [Nigel Farage] the fruitcakes. The public aren’t looking for signs of Ukip’s governing manifesto — it’s protesting people from the perfectly sensible and intelligent to the completely mad and eccentric. None of them thinks they want Nigel Farage to run the Health Service; they are angry and embittered against the bloody Government and bloody Brussels and all these bloody immigrants."
Lord Heseltine, the former Deputy Prime Minister, also warned of “consequences" if there were a pact. “In absolutely no circumstances should they do a deal with Ukip," he said. “The centre ground is where politics is determined."
He compared Mr Farage’s party to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, which drove the Labour Party towards unilateralism, making it unelectable in the 1980s.
“Extremists always push the boundaries — that’s what CND and the pacifists did with the Labour Party — but there comes a point when you run out of muscle and steam. Independence is an attractive concept but of course Ukip are not arguing for independence, they’re arguing for isolation."
Another former Conservative Cabinet minister warned the new generation to learn the lessons from the past: “The Tory party is at its worst when riven by Europe. At first it was a relief to have them [the anti-Europeans] out of the party but then Ukip started to influence everyone’s thoughts. They take all the negative, dispiriting side of the Tories; their view is that the world is a bad place, that the future is terrifying and the past was always rosier.
“The Tories would be better off articulating a positive plan for the future." Bill Cash, the veteran Tory Eurosceptic, said Ukip’s success would be counterproductive if it meant Labour won power. “They had three per cent at the last election and that deprived us of 23 seats; now they could have 18 per cent it doesn’t take much imagination to see how that could translate into 60 seats and cause the death of the Tory party. They are a very serious threat to us and to themselves."
According to another Conservative MP: “Either Ukip will implode by the next election or the Tories. I hope it is Ukip but I fear it may be the Tories. Farage has very effectively split our party."
Labour is less neurotic about the rise of Mr Farage, but Harriet Harman, its deputy leader, insists there is no room for complacency. “Ukip isn’t about Ukip, it’s about us," she says. “It appeals to people who are vulnerable to the suggestion that Labour doesn’t care and we have to engage. It’s a spur to us to get involved at grassroots level and speak to people in language they understand. We shouldn’t be looking over our shoulders to Ukip, we should be looking straight ahead to the people who have lost faith in politics."
Lord Mandelson, the former Labour Cabinet minister, believes the appeal of the insurgents will wane between now and the general election in 2015. “You can’t build a successful political movement on the back of one man and one anti-foreigner political idea. Ukip are too thin and too shallow to mount a sustainable appeal. Nick Clegg is the first politician to take them on for what they are. It’s both brave and right and I suspect he’ll benefit from it."
Certainly, the Liberal Democrats are the only party keen to promote the profile of Mr Farage. According to their internal polling, only 3 per cent of their potential voters would consider voting Ukip, so they have less to lose from the party’s rise. “There is much less cross-over for us than either of the other parties," says one strategist. “Ukip is useful to us. If it takes votes from the Tories or Labour it could tip seats to us and help us keep seats that are already Lib Dem-held."
Indeed, for some around Mr Clegg the leader’s debates on Europe that will take place in the next few weeks could be a dry run for the general election campaign. “I personally would love it if Nigel Farage was included in the leader’s television debates at the general election," says an aide. “Anything that raises Ukip’s profile is good for us."
The suggestion from Mr Sykes that Mr Farage seek a pact with Tories is likely to increase the political turmoil at Westminster.
Mr Sykes confirmed that he intended to spend “millions" on Ukip’s European election campaign, although he would employ his own strategists rather than handing the money to Mr Farage. His only aim was to get Britain out of the EU, he said.
“I’m only supporting Ukip to get us free of the EU and turn us back into a self-governing nation," he said. “There will be civil unrest in all the countries when the people can’t get what they voted for because nation states have been handed over to a bureaucracy. It’s going to turn out nasty."
Describing himself as a “Conservative at heart" who had supported the Tory Party for 27 years, he said: “David Cameron is lost in a fog. His referendum is a stunt — he’s admitted he doesn’t want to leave the EU. How can you have a man leading the troops who says ‘charge’ then turns on his own men? How can my old party have such a liberal wishy-washy guy as leader?"
On Monday night, Martin Schulz, the President of the European Parliament, announced to the EP Bureau that he was launching an investigation into allegations, made by a whistleblower to The Times, that Ukip improperly diverted taxpayers’ money to fund its political operation.
Document TIMEUK0020140312ea3c000lw
