{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1053"}
____
  
UK News
The Times Diary (TMS): Ukip’s song and dance act, Lewinsky’s lament, Federer’s double double and Keifer queues for Hancock
Patrick Kidd   
587 words
8 May 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ukip, a song and dance act
Ukip has finally made the big league with a musical written about its campaign. Not, alas, by Sir Tim Rice, a former donor, but by Richard Ng, a student at Brasenose College, Oxford, David Cameron’s alma mater. Ukip: The Musical will have its premiere next week with a view to taking it to the Edinburgh Fringe.
The plot, about a “normal British worker who finds herself at the centre of an immigration conspiracy”, is witty, poking fun at stories that claim “50 per cent of gays are communists” based on a survey of two people and raising fears of foreigners stealing 3,000 years of British sleep every night.
The songs are very good too, with a rousing finale after Ukip triumph to the tune of Do You Hear the People Sing? from Les Mis. It ends: “Thanks to us the EU’s gone. Thanks to us Britain is great. Look how much you can achieve on a message of hate!” Wonder if Nige has tickets.
Lewinsky’s lament
Beyoncé, the American singer, has managed to annoy Monica Lewinsky, that blast from the 1990s, with a reference to the former White House intern’s infamous affair on her new album. The song Partition has the line “He popped all my buttons and he ripped my blouse/ He Monica Lewinsky’d all on my gown”. Thanks a lot, Lewinsky replies. “But if we’re verbing, I think you mean ‘He Bill Clinton’d all on my gown’ .”
You have to admire Roger Federer’s Swiss efficiency. Four years ago the tennis player’s wife gave birth to twin girls and on Tuesday they had twin boys. Ladbrokes offered odds of 10,000-1 yesterday against there being a future all-Federer mixed doubles final at Wimbledon. The bookies aren’t stupid, though. They offer only 100-1 against one of them winning the singles title.
Cracking shot, sir
Steve Hedley, a wannabe leader of the RMT, attempted to impress the comrades by posting a photo of himself in a Soviet fur hat with hammer and sickle badge holding what he no doubt thought was an AK-47, gun of choice for all self-respecting Marxist revolutionaries. No one can fool a Times reader on military hardware, though. Rupert Edis writes to observe that it was actually a German MP44, used by the Waffen SS. “Is this the image he really wished to project?”
After I reported the National Trust’s warning that any unattended children at a house in Devon will be given an espresso and promised a puppy, Colin Forbes emails to say that the Daneway Inn near Cirencester has a blunter sign: “Any unattended children will be sold.”
With armful intent
BBC staff were surprised to see a Hollywood star queuing outside Broadcasting House recently for a radio recording of missing episodes from Hancock’s Half Hour. Who knew that Kiefer Sutherland was a fan of Galton and Simpson’s curmudgeonly antihero?
“You’re not on the VIP list,” staff told Sutherland, but he’d applied for public tickets. Here’s hoping that the new series of 24, which is set in London, has a scene in which Jack Bauer, Sutherland’s terrorist-hunter, growls Hancock’s immortal line from The Blood Donor: “Dammit Chloe, a pint? That’s very nearly an armful.”
Document TIMEUK0020140507ea58003im
