{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3059"}
____
  
Politics
Farage refuses spending review but admits errors
Billy Kenber   
761 words
26 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage will not allow an independent auditor to examine how he uses EU funds but admitted yesterday that he could not guarantee that every penny had been spent correctly.
Mr Farage appeared to make the offer during a BBC radio interview last week after The Times revealed allegations that he had misused almost £60,000 in European parliamentary allowances meant to fund the upkeep of office since mid-2009.
Asked if he would allow an independent accountant to examine his books, Mr Farage told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “If that would settle the argument of course I would.”
However, in an interview with The Guardian yesterday he denied that he had ever accepted the suggestion.
“I said if every other British MEP wants to, then I would,” he said. “I mean, I am not going to be one out of 73 that is held up as an example of all that is wrong with the European Union. I’ve been saying that myself for years, so this is absolutely ludicrous. If all 73 people want to go on to a new regime then of course I’ll do it, but to be singled out in this way is frankly ridiculous.”
His comments came as the party’s European election campaign suffered a further setback when it emerged that a poster accusing EU workers of taking British jobs featured an Irish actor who had migrated to the UK.
The fresh embarrassment came hours after a star of the party’s televised election broadcast was suspended for a series of 窶徨epellent窶  racist tweets. Andre Lampitt, who will still appear on ballot papers next month as a Ukip local election candidate in Merton, south London, had described Muslims as animals and said that black Africans should be left to “kill themselves”.
Mr Farage has told this newspaper that the “missing” funds, which he had claimed in an online transparency report had been spent on utilties, insurance and business rates for a small constituency office near Bognor Regis, had in fact been spent “campaigning against British membership of the EU”.
This appears to be in breach of EU rules which prohibit using the money for party political purposes.
Asked by The Guardian whether he could guarantee that every penny had been spent correctly, Mr Farage replied: “I can guarantee one thing; that I haven’t done it for personal gain. But how I’ve spent my time and money, and whether I’ve spent it because I’m an MEP, or because I’m Ukip, I would suggest to you is a very grey area.”
He continued: “It’s a difficult divide. I’ve made no bones about it that I would use the wherewithal provided by the European parliament to go round Britain and campaign against Britain’s membership of the European Union. I think I’m just about within the rules. I think I’ve kept just the right side of the line, albeit pushing right up to it, sure.”
Meanwhile, the party’s £1.5 million nationwide poster campaign before the European election next month was ridiculed for using an Irish actor as the face of an anti-EU immigration campaign.
In one, a builder in a high-visibility jacket and hard hat is shown begging on the street. The poster has the slogan: “EU policy at work. British workers are hit hard by unlimited cheap labour.”
It emerged that the “builder” was Dave O’Rourke, an Irish actor who was born in Dublin and lives in Edinburgh.
The revelation was particularly embarrassing because Mr Farage had said that the party used genuine supporters rather than actors in campaign material. He made the comments on Wednesday after the party was criticised for presenting a Ukip staff member, Lizzy Vaid, as an ordinary voter from Devon in a campaign brochure.
Ukip decided to stand by David Challice, its communications manager and a council election candidate, yesterday after it was revealed that he had suggested that “cash-strapped Muslims” should get multiple wives as a “money spinner” so they can claim large benefit payments. Mr Challice, who made the suggestion in an advert he placed in his local newspaper in 2009, had made online postings last year in which he said that women shouldn’t go to work.
A spokesman said that the comments were meant as a joke, and added: “Ukip is not a party that believes in public debate and conversation being stifled by an obsession with political correctness.”
Document TIMEUK0020140425ea4q003a5
