{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3560"}
____
  
Law
Couple duped to think they had baby after herbal remedy
David Brown   
734 words
22 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
An infertile couple were tricked into believing that the woman had given birth after a doctor prescribed a herbal remedy, a judge has ruled.
The British couple fell “under the spell" of a bogus doctor after travelling to Lagos, Nigeria, where the wife was given herbs that mimicked the effects of pregnancy, the High Court was told. They returned to Nigeria nine months later and the woman was given another mixture that made her believe she had given birth. Her husband was even given a fake placenta as part of the charade.
The couple paid £4,500 for the treatment but when they returned to Britain with their “daughter" they were arrested. They were distraught after DNA tests proved that they were not the parents. The girl has been left as “effectively an orphan" in London, with no prospect of learning who her real parents are and possibly facing a childhood in the care system, the court heard.
Mrs Justice Hogg, sitting in the Family Division of the High Court, has cleared the “intelligent, educated, hard-working" couple of social workers’ accusations that they were knowing parties to the fraud.
The judge said that despite ten years of trying surgery, laser treatment and IVF, the couple had failed to conceive. The father met a friend in 2010 who claimed that his wife had had twins after undergoing “some herbal treatment" in Nigeria. The couple travelled to Nigeria in May 2011 where a Dr Cletus Okolo prescribed a course of herbal treatments.
On returning to Britain and taking the herbs, the mother noticed her body changing. Her face, arms and abdomen all swelled up. A “kindly and well-meaning" local GP was taken in, accepting that she was seven months’ pregnant. The doctor signed off a maternity certificate and the couple travelled back to Nigeria in April 2012.
The wife was given a brown liquid to drink before entering what she thought was a delivery room. Mrs Justice Hogg said: “She did not experience much pain, which she attributed to the herb she had been given. In due course she felt the baby’s head, and the baby’s body emerging and something sliding against her leg. She was lying on her back with her knees up. She could not see what was happening."
The expectant husband waited in the corridor outside and, after few minutes, heard a baby cry. He entered the room to find the baby girl lying on the bed beside his groggy wife. He was given a placenta take away. Dr Okolo wrote: “Treatment successful, patient delivered of a baby girl. All fees paid. God’s doing".
That was the only document that accompanied the birth and, after the couple flew home with the baby, social workers were alerted. The couple were arrested and the baby was taken into police protection. To their “considerable dismay and shock", DNA testing proved that the girl was not their child. Having waited so long for a baby, the couple could not accept the truth. They insisted that “the combination of spiritual and herbal treatments was so powerful as to be able to change DNA".
Social workers from Hillingdon council, West London, who brought the case, argued that the couple were “knowing parties to an elaborate fraud and charade upon the British immigration authorities".
Mrs Justice Hogg judge conceded: “At first blush, the immediate reaction of the ordinary man on the proverbial Clapham omnibus would no doubt be, ‘Don’t be daft, it’s a fraud, they knew it’.
“Despite their education and intelligence, they are struggling with the result of the DNA test. Having considered all the evidence . . . I am driven to conclude that in some way they allowed themselves to be duped by fraudsters. They so much wanted a baby . . . they allowed themselves to fall under the spell of the herbalists, believing what was said to the mother and acting faithfully upon the instructions given to them."
She ordered a further hearing to decide where the girl’s best interests lie. Her finding will improve their chances of persuading the court that the girl’s future should be with them.
Social workers and child protection organisations issued guidelines last year on how to recognise “staged fake births" after a number of cases were detected by the British consulate in Lagos.
Document TIMEUK0020140222ea2m001db
