{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"768"}
____
  
UK News
Seasoned Tory rebel with many causes
Andrew Norfolk   
492 words
25 February 2014
00:15
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Shy and retiring Peter Bone is not. It took long years and three general election defeats before the Eurosceptic finally took his Westminster seat in 2005, determined to make up for lost time.
There have been few political issues since that day about which the Wellingborough MP has not shared his thoughts with the Commons or the public at large.
Mr Bone, 61, loves cricket, the late Baroness Thatcher and capital punishment. His list of hates has included Europe, criminals, the “Stalinist" NHS, gay marriage, Liberal Democrats, benefits for single parents, illegal immigrants, the BBC and minimum wage.
Born in Billericay, Essex, the grammar school boy was 15 when a local newspaper tipped him as a future Prime Minister. Should that childhood ambition remain unfulfilled, the serial Tory rebel has at least achieved the distinction of being a constant thorn in David Cameron’s side.
His first general election campaign was in the former Labour leader Neil Kinnock’s rock solid safe seat of Islwyn, in 1992.
Further electoral disappointment followed in the West Yorkshire seat of Pudsey in 1997 and in his first attempt to regain Wellingborough for the Tories in 2001. He triumphed four years later by a mere 687 votes, but increased the Conservative majority to almost 12,000 in 2010.
Alongside his political ambitions, he set up in the 1990s his own holiday company, Palm Travel (West) Ltd, in Newport, South Wales.
Opposing the introduction of the minimum wage — then thought likely to be £2.50 an hour — in a speech at the 1995 Conservative Party conference, he told delegates that he was paying a 17-year-old trainee at the travel company 87p per hour and would not have employed her had the minimum wage been in place. The boast led to him being labelled Britain’s “meanest boss" by the Daily Mirror.
A few years later, Mr Bone was taken on to the books of a Northamptonshire entertainment agency as a lookalike for Sven-Göran Eriksson, then manager of the England football team, to whom he bears an uncanny resemblance.
He has made his name at Westminster by asking questions on behalf of a woman in whose opinions he senses the authentic voice of middle-English sanity and wisdom: his wife.
In 2012, Mrs Bone sought selection by the Conservatives as their candidate for Northamptonshire’s first Police and Crime Commissioner. The panel felt she was “not a suitable person to go forward".
The contest was won by the Tory candidate, Adam Simmonds, whose duty is to hold the Northamptonshire force to account on behalf of the public.
For the past year, that force has been conducting a fraud investigation, prompted by a Conservative-controlled local authority, into Mr Bone. The inquiry’s focus is the financial status of his elderly mother-in-law. What Mrs Bone would have made of that is anyone’s guess.
Document TIMEUK0020140225ea2p000jl
