{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2478"}
____
  
Dance
Border Tales at The Place, WC1
Donald Hutera   
350 words
5 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Star Rating: 2 stars
Cited as the Best Independent Dance Company at the 2011 National Dance Awards, Luca Silvestrini’s Protein has, since its founding in 1997, developed a solid reputation for concocting performances that tickle the funnybone while stimulating the grey cells. Devised with eight core cast members, this latest production is probably Silvestrini’s most ambitious to date. For their efforts they’ve been rewarded with a three-week run at The Place, something rarely accorded most mid-scale dance-based shows.
For all of the above reasons I wish I could say I liked Border Tales more than I do. Staged in the round, this earnest, eager piece is a collage of dance, dialogue and live music arranged around the subject of personal identity within the frame of British multiculturalism. How topical is that, especially given current debates about immigration? But the work — ideal perhaps for supporters of UKIP — is too wide in the realisation of its theme and somehow too reductively narrow. The sharply satirical entertainment factor that marked Protein’s previous shows (one about body image, another about the pitfalls of internet dating) has here been forfeited in favour of something far too indigestibly messagey.
The bulk of what the dancers have to say is loosely autobiographical. Their talk is incessant. What we hear repeatedly are variations on national and cultural stereotypes, all hinged upon how easy it can be to make assumptions about people based on how they look and what we think we know about them. Border Tales doesn’t move much past this single, admittedly valid point. The cast — all top-notch movers and individually often quite engaging — is oddly gender imbalanced, with just one main woman pitted against seven men (including a male musician). Some audience members stood up and cheered at the end. Feeling so hectored and harangued I was just glad it was over.
Ends March 15. 020-7121 1100, theplace.org.uk/luca-silvestrinis-protein. May 13-17 at DanceXchange’s Patrick Centre, Birmingham Hippodrome (www.idfb.co.uk)
Document TIMEUK0020140305ea35000mn
