{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"764"}
____
  
UK News
Attack on ‘eBay culture’ of visa sales
Richard Ford, Home Correspondent   
454 words
25 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Immigration lawyers last night criticised proposals to auction visas for overseas millionaires, warning that it would create an “eBay culture".
Plans to sell a set number of investor visas or offer them in return for endowing hospitals or universities will be outlined today by the Government’s migration advisers.
The proposals come after an investigation into the operation of the investor visa route into the UK, which found that Britain may not be getting a good deal.
However, the idea has met opposition from immigration lawyers with Nick Rollason, the head of business immigration at Kingsley Napley, saying it would create an “E-bay culture" and leave a bad taste with the British public.
Sophie Barrett-Brown, a senior partner with Laura Devine solicitors, said: “An auction system has, rightly, been rejected by the Home Office previously when the points-based system was first introduced, and sent out the wrong message to the public."
The idea of auctioning a number of investor visas was disclosed in The Times last month after Professor Sir David Metcalf, the chairman of the Migration Advisory Committee, said it was time for Britain to think more creatively about the operation of the investor visa route.
The number of investor visas rose from 423 in 2011-12 to 530 in 2012-13, according to latest figures. As well as the 530 investor visas, a further 1,038 visas were issued for applicants’ dependants. Visas issued to wealthy Chinese went from 95 to 171, Americans from 19 to 66 and Russians from 99 to 125.
Investor visas allow migrants to invest £1 million, £5 million or £10 million in government bonds or in British businesses in return for permission to apply for permanent residence in five, three or two years, respectively. Applicants need not speak English and may bring their spouses and dependants.
The inquiry by the Migration Advisory Committee found that most of those using the investor visa route bought gilts that Britain did not need when the Treasury was selling £300 million of gilts a day to fund the deficit.
Sir David said that wealthy investors sometimes held the gilts for five years and then sold them, which amounted to making a loan to gain indefinite leave to stay in the country.
Katrina Cooper, counsel at Faegre Baker Daniels LLP, expressed concern at the proposal from the committee. “A key pressure point with the current investor route was the ability to retain long-term investment. I fail to see how an auction system would achieve this. The British voter will want the Home Office to deliver other sensible approaches that provide commercial reality and incentivise investment."
Document TIMEUK0020140225ea2p000h9
