{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"691"}
____
  
Political Sketch
Cabinet fat cats fail to catch out the insolent mole
Ann Treneman   
580 words
11 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Even at the best of times James Brokenshire has the air of a panicking mole about him. His hair is quite extraordinary, a black velveteen bog-brush of such deep lustre that he must never ever go near a furrier for fear of being harvested. He looks about 17, with rimless specs that cannot hide his perpetually alarmed eyes. It is quite simply incredible that this teenager is the Immigration Minister.
However, these are not the best of times for Mr Brokenshire. For last week he managed, in his debut speech, to blame the Prime Minister and others from the WME (wealthy metropolitan elite) for our immigration woes.
Yesterday he sat next to Theresa May (another of the WME), determined not to look contrite. The result was an uneasy air of insouciance that hung over his shoulders as ill-fitting as a jacket several sizes too large.
Who, I wondered, would be the first to try to catch the mole? What a delight when, from the farthest-back Labour bench, the man who is Keith Vaz arose. I say man, but that does not do justice to the Great Vaz, who lives for the limelight and believes that it lives for him, too.
“Last Thursday the Immigration Minister scolded the metropolitan elite, which includes, of course, members of the Cabinet," Mr Vaz announced.
Tory MPs screamed and pointed back at him. The Vaz, secretly pleased, I suspect, for who really wants to argue with any word of that description, barely paused before continuing “for employing people who were born outside this country. What he said came dangerously close to endorsing the discredited slogan of ‘British jobs for British workers’."
This caused more outrage. Gordon Brown, for it was his slogan, was nowhere to be seen, as usual. The Home Secretary, her face like a mask, observed the Great Vaz, her eyes cold, her shoes gold. Next to her the mole blinked ever faster. I looked down on him and realised that such is the density of his hair that, if turned upside down, he would make an ideal floor polisher.
“Could you ask him to return to his normal sensible demeanour?" asked Mr Vaz of the Home Secretary.
The word “normal" fell into the void from which it would never return. The mole looked slightly stunned at being described in such a bizarre way. The Vaz now called for a “constructive" debate without “stereotypes and clichés". (This is an admirable goal but, frankly, if we stripped politics of stereotypes and clichés, we would all be in trouble.)
Ms May, in full Cruella mode now, announced that in fact Mr Brokenshire had been contributing to a “constructive" debate. “And I do not accept the description of the speech," she announced, as only a Home Secretary can, despite the fact that it has caused uproar and, possibly more importantly, that the Prime Minister has had to issue several statements about his nanny.
Ms May explained that Mr Brokenshire’s message was that it is the lowest paid who suffer the most from mass immigration. The mole nodded his head, his head burnishing the air, and later insisted that his speech had not been in the least “feeble" or “pathetic". His blinking now was akin to windscreen wipers in a monsoon. But by the end of the session, we all could see that the mole had survived — for now.
Document TIMEUK0020140311ea3b000ei
