{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"805"}
____
  
Leading Articles
The Workers’ Party; To again become the party of opportunity, the Conservatives must recall how to champion social mobility
677 words
26 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
What does the modern Conservative Party stand for? Eight years ago, at the start of his leadership, David Cameron began to answer that question by giving the Tories a new logo. Out went the torch of liberty that had been the emblem of Margaret Thatcher’s premiership and in came a somewhat squiggly-looking tree. The redesign was intended to represent a new, greener conservatism. The tree shape is still with us but it’s no longer coloured green. It is now covered with the Union Jack in keeping with the more Eurosceptic, patriotic evolution of Mr Cameron’s political message.
One backbench Tory MP, Robert Halfon, wants to drop the tree altogether. He wants it replaced with a ladder to signify a Conservative belief in upward mobility. Winston Churchill would certainly have approved. For him the difference between Conservatism and Socialism was the difference “between the ladder and the queue". “We are for the ladder," he said, “Let us all do our best to climb. They are for the queue. Let each wait in his place until his turn comes."
Few Tories better represent the ladder of opportunity than another former Conservative Prime Minister — John Major. Born in Brixton, he rose to the highest office in the land. He embodied the Conservatives’ message “Opportunity for all" in a way that the current Tory leadership does not. It was no surprise, therefore, that the Tory Chairman, Grant Shapps, invited Sir John to open the party’s new election headquarters yesterday. At a time when the Conservatives are desperate to look as if they’re not run by a male, privately educated elite, Sir John reminds voters of the fact that the Conservatives have often been led by outsiders. Nor were Margaret Thatcher, Ted Heath or William Hague born into privilege.
Standing alongside Sir John, Mr Shapps was keen to argue that the Conservative Party is still the party of opportunity. He pointed to a range of policies enacted by the coalition government that aim to help working people. These include cuts in income tax, lower fuel duty, investment in apprenticeships, help for first-time house-buyers and reductions in low-skilled immigration.
For various reasons these concrete policies have not persuaded voters of average earnings that the Conservative Party is on their side. Perhaps this is because some of the measures mentioned by Mr Shapps — such as the increase in income tax thresholds and the freeze in petrol duty — were forced on the party by others (the Liberal Democrats and Mr Halfon respectively). Perhaps it’s because in the early years of Mr Cameron’s leadership there was a different message, centred on quality of life issues rather than some communities’ struggle to make ends meet. The Tories, like Labour, have also seemed more interested in the gender of their candidates than in their experience of life and background. Of course we need more women in parliament, but there has been little attempt to recruit people from working-class or northern backgrounds. Swapping a male barrister for a female barrister cannot be the end of making parliament look like the nation it serves.
Perhaps there’s another reason the Conservatives aren’t connecting, and perhaps Mr Halfon’s choice of a ladder logo points to the problem. As well as describing the Conservatives as the party of the ladder, Winston Churchill insisted that, if anyone was to fall, “we shall have a good net and the finest ambulance service in the world". Churchill was right. Britain does need to reignite the engines of upward mobility but there also needs to be support for the vulnerable, especially the sick, the disabled and the old. Until the Conservatives communicate that they are a party of social security as well as of social mobility, they will never rise above the electoral glass ceiling that has inhibited them at the last four general elections — and they won’t deserve to.
Document TIMEUK0020140226ea2q000zd
