{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3373"}
____
  
Politics
Get organised because the Conservatives are, Axelrod tells Labour
Sam Coates and Francis Elliott   
533 words
17 May 2014
01:33
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ed Miliband’s new election guru has told Labour campaign chiefs to sharpen up, get organised and to exploit David Cameron’s critical weaknesses in marginal seats.
David Axelrod, the US strategist who helped to put Barack Obama in the White House, urged key figures to get a stronger grip in the face of a well-funded, well-oiled Tory machine.
Senior Labour figures saw Mr Axelrod’s intervention as a call to get their act together and halt simmering internal tensions that have plagued Labour’s election campaign effort to date.
One source who heard Mr Axelrod speak said that he told the party: “Your messages are good, your policies good, your politics is good. But the other side are extremely well-organised. That’s where you can close the gap.”
After a two-day visit to London this week, Mr Axelrod tweeted in praise of the party — but misspelt Mr Miliband’s name and linked to a spoof Twitter account.
“Enjoyed my visit with @Ed_Milliband and his @UKLabour team,” he wrote. Mr Miliband downplayed the error as part of the “perils of tweeting” and said that the two men shared a mission to tackle a “disconnect” between economic growth and living standards.
Labour are reeling from a miserable week that saw them briefly overtaken by the Conservatives in the polls. Insiders said that they had even mused in advance of the visit about how much of “the ugly stuff” in Labour they should let Mr Axelrod see.
On Monday, Mr Miliband made a major policy announcement on guaranteed GP appointments, only for the party to send out a leaflet on Tuesday failing to mention the new idea. Earlier promises that the campaign would highlight the party’s promise to introduce a form of rent control never materialised, amid disquiet about a party political broadcast attacking Nick Clegg as the “the Un-credible Shrinking Man”.
Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, distanced himself from a campaign poster on the coalition’s VAT increase on Wednesday, while on Thursday Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, wrote an article suggesting that immigration should have played a more prominent role in the campaign.
Mr Miliband appeared to be responding to the criticism that he has not said enough on immigration, when he suggested yesterday that Labour could bar migrants from claiming out-of-work benefits for more than six months, and that immigration to the UK could be cut without leaving the European Union.
Mr Miliband also said that Mr Axelrod had concentrated on the “defining question” of “growing inequality” in his talks with Labour campaign chiefs. “This is what he has been saying to us this week. I will let you into the secret,” he told the BBC.
A senior Labour figure said that the strategist would want to run through the issues that the party was polling, and how it was conducting its focus group research, as well as examining Mr Miliband’s campaign team.
“He’ll want to make sure whether there’s someone with proper sign-off powers during the campaign,” the source said.
Document TIMEUK0020140516ea5h003ov
