{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1895"}
____
  
TV Reviews
Friday’s TV: Gogglebox
Marie-Claire Chappet   
1,642 words
7 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Gogglebox
Channel 4, 9pm
Gogglebox debuted on Channel 4 in March last year and while the thought of watching people watching television might not have sounded hugely appealing, this voyeuristic oddity became a huge hit and made stars of its amateur critics. And so it makes a welcome return to our screens tonight with the first of a new 12-part series in a new primetime slot (upgraded from its old Wednesday night 10pm slot). It’s still narrated by Caroline Aherne and the irony is surely lost on nobody that she made her name in The Royle Family — another show that involved watching people watching telly. Rest assured that all the old favourites are back to offer their thoughts on the week’s best — and worst — television: there’s loveable OAPs Leon and June, hairdressers Stephen and Christopher, Brixton’s finest Sandy and Sandra, and old soaks Steph and Dom, who last week admitted to being drunk on the show (which will come as no surprise to regular viewers — have you seen that drinks cabinet!). This week the lucky lot getting paid to watch TV (imagine that!) are covering The Oscars, the first battle rounds of The Voice, Nigella Lawson’s cookery challenge The Taste and Saturday Night Takeaway with Ant and Dec. The show continues to be hugely entertaining, while also acting as a barometer of the TV tastes of the nation.
Paralympic Winter Games
Channel 4, 3.30pm
Channel 4 and More4 are sharing coverage of the 11th Paralympic Winter Games, following the ten days of competition. Ahead of the action (which starts tomorrow at 9am), Jon Snow presents live coverage from Sochi, Russia, of the opening ceremony. Krishnan Guru-Murthy is in the Fisht Olympic Stadium as athletes from more than 40 countries assemble for the lighting of the cauldron. The ceremony promises to include pyrotechnics, ballet performances, acrobatics and wheelchair contemporary dance inspired by Russian traditions. Also in this programme, the presenting team of Jonathan Edwards, Ade Adepitan and Iwan Thomas, along with a raft of Paralympic experts, will assess Team GB’s prospects of emulating the success of their able-bodied compatriots, who brought home a record-equalling medal haul.
Fonteyn ‘59: Sleeping Beauty
BBC Four, 8pm
Darcey Bussell introduces rarely seen footage of the ballerina Dame Margot Fonteyn’s 1959, made for TV, performance of Tchaikovsky’s Sleeping Beauty. An undisputed highlight of BBC Two and Four’s ballet season, the performance features clips previously assumed lost from this special performance, including the “lost kiss" between Sleeping Beauty and her prince, played by Michael Somes, Fonteyn’s partner before her famed union with Rudolf Nureyev. It’s a fascinating glimpse into the ballet indicative of post-war Britain and is a must for dance fans and history buffs alike, broadcast for the first time since it was originally aired on the BBC more than 50 years ago.
Jonathan Creek
BBC One, 9pm
In all its time on our screens (almost 17 years), Jonathan Creek has finally served up a truly baffling mystery — what on earth has happened to this once great show? The plotting, which was once the stuff of impregnable whodunits and impossible crimes, is now as apologetic and lacklustre as Alan Davies’s shrug. This week’s episode was about as exciting as an episode of Midsomer Murders without any murders. There’s a bungled burglary (nothing exciting to report here), a mysterious discovery in the house of a retired magician (nope, still dull) and an attempt at a Hound of the Baskervilles-esque side plot that is given so little air time you forget it’s there. You’d be better served watching repeats to remind yourself of how great it used to be.
37 Days
BBC Two, 9pm
In spite of the Serbian government acceding to all of Austria’s preposterous demands, the Austrians and Germans are still hell bent on a short sharp war in the Balkans on any pretext. Sir Edward Grey (Ian McDiarmid) summons the Austrian ambassador to the Foreign Office. “Let me remind you how post-Napoleonic diplomacy works," he tells him. “We statesmen, we occasionally conceal things from each other. We dissemble. We act hypocritically when consistency or sincerity would be either dangerous or hurtful. We don’t always tell the whole truth, but we don’t exactly lie. But what we’ve never done is pretend that the other fellow is a fool or that black is white when everyone can see that it isn’t. Because if did that, the whole system . . . would begin to break down." Too late. The system had already begun to break down. David Chater
Edge of Heaven
ITV, 9pm
It’s still plodding along. It’s still rather endearing. It’s still only mildly amusing. Points for effort must go to all involved but the weak laughs really can’t be outweighed by the well-meaning cast. This week Alfie and Michelle are having trouble keeping their fledgling (and utterly unsurprising) relationship a secret, which isn’t helped when Alfie’s loudmouth boss takes him out for a disaster of a lads’ night out. Meanwhile, Tandeep and Judy argue about the questionable décor of the B&B, Ann-Marie reunites with an army buddy and Bald Gary and Camp Gary host a dinner party for Nanny Mo. Sweet and simple and still easy watching.
Storyville: Muscle Shoals — The Greatest Recording Studio in the World
BBC Four, 9pm
This is a brilliant and fascinating insight into Muscle Shoals, Alabama — the breeding ground for some of the most inspiring music of the late-1950s and 1960s, the influence of which continues to be felt today. The film takes a deeper look at the story of Rick Hall, who formed FAME studios (commonly known as Muscle Shoals) in the late 1950s. The legendary titans of music that have recorded there include Wilson Pickett, Aretha Franklin, Otis Redding, Etta James, Mick Jagger and Alicia Keys. Some of these icons lend their voices to the film, with insight from Franklin, Jagger and Bono to name but a few. Compulsive viewing for all music geeks.
Nurse Jackie
Sky Atlantic, 10pm
It’s a bit of a filler episode this week but no less entertaining. Jackie (Edie Falco) seems to be having a good day. Her date with Officer Frank Verelli (Adam Ferrara) has spawned a budding romance and her friendship with Eddie (Paul Schulze) is back on track. However, things are never calm at All Saints for long. Gloria (Anna Deavere Smith) loses a patient — highlighting the memory lapses she’s been suffering from — and the team rally round to protect her from an angry Dr Prentiss (Morris Chestnut). Meanwhile, Jackie’s daughters are causing trouble at school. Her 14-year-old is even dating a busker in Union Square.
Film choice, by Wendy Ide
The Proposal (2009)
BBC One, 10.35pm
This Sandra Bullock vehicle takes Hollywood’s most likeable comedienne and shoe-horns her into a thoroughly unpleasant role. She plays ball-busting uber-cow business woman Margaret Tate, a stiletto-clad harridan who makes the lives of her subordinates utterly miserable. But Margaret has an Achilles heel — she’s Canadian. And thanks to a little problem with her Visa, she’s about to be deported. Enter browbeaten assistant Andrew (Ryan Reynolds). Margaret decides that her best bet to avoid the fate of being chucked out of the country is to marry, and Andrew is the lucky groom. The balance of power slowly shifts and Andrew encourages his new lady wife to mend her ways. It’s all rather predictable — a kind of Pygmalion in Prada — but Bullock is a redeeming factor. (108min)
Brüno (2009)
Channel 4, 12.05am
Sacha Baron Cohen tweaks the nipples of conservative America and bares his butt at the religious right as his latest creation, a flamboyantly gay Austrian fashionista. But is he exposing the deep-seated homophobia in US society? Or demonstrating the perfectly reasonable resistance most people would feel when confronted by a screeching pillock in an assless unitard? To argue the former, you would have to accept Bruno as representative of the gay community as a whole and that, tragically for the manufacturers of assless unitards, is just not the case. But while claims that the film is a social satire are as empty as Brüno’s pretty head, there’s no arguing with the fact that the film is staggeringly rude and very, very funny. (81min)
Radio choice, by Joe Clay
Three Pounds in My Pocket
Radio 4, 11am
The majority of the pioneering Indian immigrants who came to Britain in the 1950s arrived with as little as £3 — an extremely meagre amount enforced by the Indian authorities — with which to start a new life. It was a time where the country desperately needed workers for its factories, foundries, and new public services in order to boost the postwar economy. In this three-part series, Kavita Puri hears the stories of the “£3 generation", including that of her father, Ravi.
Ravel Day
Radio 3, from midday
Today Radio 3 clears its entire schedule to focus on Maurice Ravel, he of the stirring Bolero. At midday, there is a live concert from Wigmore Hall, where the Nash Ensemble play some of his best-known chamber works, while at 1.10pm, Roy Howat joins Sara Mohr-Pietsch and Tom Service to talk about Ravel’s piano compositions and to play a couple of the composer’s miniatures. The highlight is A Ravel Soirée (7.30pm), an evening of live music, guests and recordings of some of his last works including the Piano Concerto for the Left Hand, the Don Quichotte songs and that little-known piece of music that Torvill and Dean once ice skated too.
Document TIMEUK0020140307ea37000nq
