{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2573"}
____
  
Scotland
Davidson calls on every Scot to come and join the Tory team
Lindsay McIntosh, Scottish Political Correspondent   
690 words
17 March 2014
00:55
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ruth Davidson yesterday made a bold attempt to broaden the appeal of the Scottish Conservatives and attract working-class voters as the leader of the party sought to build on its growing support before the referendum.
Speaking at her party conference in Edinburgh, she said: “I don’t care where you’re from, which school you went to — I don’t care about your age, your race, your sexuality. What I care about is whether you care, whether you want to change our country for the better — that you are willing to give of your time, your talent and of yourself to make that happen. If you have ever wanted to be involved in public life, but didn’t know where to start, then start with us.
“We want you on our team. We want you to come forward."
She admitted that the party had been on the back foot for two decades and had faced repeated criticism for being out of touch and irrelevant. “Not any more," she said. “I’m here to tell you that on the big issues facing our country the Conservatives stand four-square with the people of Scotland."
Seeking to appeal to Scots’ “inner Tories", she said that if they believed in personal freedom, choice and responsibility, as well as aspiration, opportunity, family and community, “then that makes you a Conservative".
She painted the Tories as the party most in touch with the views of Scots on the Union, welfare, the economy and immigration. The Conservatives have been making modest gains in recent council and Holyrood by-elections.
Ms Davidson buoyed representatives at the event in the Edinburgh International Conference Centre, saying: “Our voice is loud, it’s growing. We’re here to fight for your community, to fight for your family. We’re here to fight for you."
She also revealed that the Tories would scrap universal free prescriptions, introduced by the Scottish National Party, and use the savings to fund 1,000 more nurses and midwives.
However, she also called for tax cuts for working Scots, saying she wanted to “ensure there are more pounds left in the pocket of men and women across Scotland to spend in their local shops, to invest in their local community, or to save for their children’s future".
She drew a distinction between her approach and that of the SNP, which she accused of pandering to multinational corporations such as Amazon and Starbucks with the promise of a lower rate of corporation tax than in the rest of the UK. “They’re saying a tax cut for Starbucks is a good thing, but a tax cut for the barista behind the counter is somehow bad? Not in my book. Our future prosperity will come from an economy built on a strong and growing working class. And when I say a strong working class, I mean anyone who gets up, goes to a job and earns a wage to support them and their families."
Ms Davidson devoted a large section of her speech to the need to reform education, although she stopped short of specific policy pledges. She said it was not enough for the SNP to argue that Scotland was doing at least as well as other parts of the UK, branding that stance “depressingly narrow-minded".
She said she wanted to “end the monopoly of mediocrity that traps too many Scottish kids into lives of low expectation" and called for “reform to Scottish education of a scale not seen in our lifetime".
Alex Neil, the Scottish Health Secretary, claimed that the speech was “lost in its own contradictions.
He said: “The Tories claim they want the power to cut tax, but the only policy they have is to reintroduce a health tax on 600,000 people. The party of the bedroom tax now plans an even more unpopular health tax for Scotland."
Mr Neil added: “When we cut through the confusion of this Conservative speech, it is about taxing ill heath in Scotland, not cutting taxes."
Document TIMEUK0020140317ea3h0010f
