{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2631"}
____
  
Music
Can the Rolling Stones keep rolling after this tragedy?
Will Hodgkinson, chief rock critic   
1,806 words
19 March 2014
11:59
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The Rolling Stones have postponed the rest of their tour of Australasia following L’Wren Scott’s suicide. “All I can tell you is that Mick is absolutely devastated and that everyone from the band members to the sound engineers are being hugely supportive,” a spokesman for the Rolling Stones said yesterday. “He’s in such a state. I was with L’Wren a lot, and anyone who met her will tell you what an amazing person she was.”
The official line is that the band plan to reschedule the postponed shows. “A new schedule of dates is presently being worked and will be advised as soon as possible,” said a statement. The world tour is then due to resume in the Netherlands in June.
So will the biggest rock’n’roll band on the planet really get back on the road soon? It’s a similar dilemma to the one faced by Pete Townshend and Roger Daltrey in 2002 when John Entwistle died in a Las Vegas hotel room on the eve of The Who’s world tour. The tour was cancelled immediately on the news of Entwistle’s death, but after taking advice from members of Entwistle’s family, Townshend and Daltrey decided to continue, Townshend going on to explain that to cancel the tour meant putting the small army of people employed to keep a major rock show on the road out of work.
“My immediate mission is to complete this tour in good heart and to remember John in my quiet and private times,” said Townshend at the time. Entwistle’s son Christopher said of his father: “He lived for music . . . This is what he would have wished.”
With their 50 And Counting tour of 2012-13 limited to 30 dates, the Stones’ last massive-scale outing was the Bigger Bang tour of 2005-07, which sold 4.5 million tickets over 147 concerts, second only to U2’s 360º tour of 2009-11. Cancelling a tour of this size is not easy. When Lady Gaga was forced to end the sold-out North American leg of her Born This Way tour on doctor’s orders because of a hip injury last year, 200,000 tickets, were refunded.
In his incredibly energetic fronting of Rolling Stones shows, Mick Jagger seems to defy the laws of science, ageing and exhaustion, but there’s too strong a disconnect between the good times Jagger brings to audiences and the deeply personal tragedy of Scott’s suicide for him to jump straight back into his Jumping Jack Flash persona.
If the dates aren’t rescheduled, press releases will be written, promoters notified and the process of moving about 150 musicians, backing singers, immigration lawyers, travelling accountants and road crew back to their respective homes will get under way.
The financial implications are not as dire as they at first seem. Myriad forms of insurance cover a tour of this size, including the expenses involved in ending the tour, lost revenues for performers and promoters and advertising costs. And for a band with the Stones’ pull, rescheduled concerts are more likely than outright cancellations. When Bono’s back surgery forced the postponement of 16 of U2’s stadium shows in 2010, the dates were rescheduled for the following year and fans held on to 97 per cent of tickets.
The Stones are, however, a large business. They are global, they pay taxes, they employ many, and their biggest revenue stream comes from touring. Since 1989 they have grossed more than $1 billion from concerts.
“When we first started out, there wasn’t really any money in rock’n’roll,” Jagger told Fortune magazine in 2002. “Obviously there was somebody maybe who made money, but it certainly wasn’t the act.”
The big change came after the disaster at Altamont Speedway in 1969, when a free gig led to the death of a young fan at the hands of the Hell’s Angels hired as security. After Altamont the band hired a tour director, frequently the late Bill Graham, to cut deals with local promoters, who would take 10 to 15 per cent of ticket sales after the cost of the show. Then, coming in to manage the band’s 1989 Steel Wheels tour, a Canadian promoter called Michael Cohl revolutionised the model.
Cohl offered the Stones’ financial advisor, the Bavarian aristocrat Prince Rupert Loewenstein, $40 million for 40 shows, resolving to cut out local promoters and book the tour himself. Cohl found new revenue streams in corporate sponsorship deals and merchandise. The band members had to take physicals for Lloyds to insure the tour. (Even Keith Richards passed.) Meanwhile, Jagger worked on revolutionising the stadium concert experience. Steel Wheels took in more than $260 million worldwide, a record at the time for a rock act.
It’s possible that the band will dedicate a rescheduled concert to Scott, as they did for founder member Brian Jones in July 1969 with a free concert in Hyde Park. Planned as an introduction for their new guitarist Mick Taylor, the concert became a tribute to Jones after his death three days earlier.
“This whole thing runs on passion,” said Keith Richards in 2002, on why the Stones keep going against the odds. “Even though we don’t talk about it much ourselves, it’s almost a sort of quest or mission.” That mission may prove to be Jagger’s saviour.
How rock survived tragedy (by Marie-Claire Chappet)
The Beatles and the death of Brian Epstein (1967)
The Beatles’ famous rock manager-commonly known as the “fifth Beatle” died of a drug overdose on August 27, 1967. The Beatles were in India at the time and did not attend the funeral-not wanting to attract press attention - but hosted a memorial later in London. Jimi Hendrix, another artist who worked closely with Epstein, cancelled a concert in Epstein’s Saville Theatre on the day his death was announced.
The Stones and the death of Brian Jones (1969)
He was the original band leader of the Stones, but soon became estranged from the group due to his drug dependency. He was found drowned in his swimming pool on theJuly 3, 1969 in a suspected drugs -related accident. The Stones performed a free concert in Hyde Park two days later as a tribute to Jones. Mick Jagger read out the Shelley poem Adonais beforehand and released hundreds of white butterflies .
The Doors and the death of Jim Morrison (1971)
The lead singer of the Doors died in Paris in July 1971 of a suspected heroin overdose. He was buried in the poets corner of Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris, now one of its most decorated and visited grave sites. The rest of the band performed for the first time in November 1971 - four months after his death-and continued as a three-piece without much success until finally disbanding in 1973.
The Who and the deaths of Keith Moon and John Entwistle (1978 and 2002)
Drummer Keith Moon died of a drug overdose on September 7, 1978. The band issued a statement the next day vowing to carry on and he was replaced by Kenney Jones in November. The new line-up of The Who performed for the first time after Moon’s death in May 1979. Tragedy struck the band again in 2002, with the sudden drug-related death of founding member John Entwistle. He died the day before The Who were to commence a US tour. The band went ahead with the tour - dedicating their first performance to Entwistle.
Led Zeppelin and the death of John Bonham (1980)
The group were preparing to embark on a tour of the US - their first since 1977 - when drummer John Bonham went on a fatal alcohol binge, dying on the September 25. Led Zeppelin were rehearsing at the time and, in the wake of the tragedy, decided to cancel the tour and disband.
Queen and the death of Freddie Mercury (1991)
After a long, but private, battle with Aids, the legendary frontman Freddie Mercury died on November 24, 1991. Bohemian Rhapsody was re-released as a tribute and topped the charts for five weeks. Six months later they held a tribute concert to Mercury at Wembley Stadium with performers including Elton John, David Bowie, George Michael and Guns N Roses. It is now cited as the “largest rock star benefit concert” and raised over £20,000,000 for Aids charities. Queen continue to perform with various different frontmen.
Eric Clapton and the death of his son Conor (1991)
Clapton secluded himself for months after his four-year-old son Conor fell to his death from a high-rise window in 1991. He didn’t resume performing until four months after the accident. Later that year he wrote the song Tears in Heaven in order to deal with his grief, but has refused to perform it live since 2004.
Nirvana and the death of Kurt Cobain (1994)
An icon for a generation, Kurt Cobain was found dead of a suspected suicide on April 8, 1994. His death shocked the music world at the time and his band Nirvana effectively disbanded, with only live albums and previously recorded material released after his death. The remaining members regrouped to perform with Paul McCartney in 2012 at the Concert for Sandy Relief in the wake of Hurricane Sandy.
Manic Street Preachers and the disappearance of Richey Edwards (1995)
Founding member of the group Richey Edwards disappeared on February 1, 1995. He has never been seen since and was legally pronounced dead in 2008. The group took a six-month break after his disappearance but, despite discussing disbanding, have continued to make music - still keeping a portion of the royalties aside for Richards should he ever re-appear.
Paul McCartney and the death of Linda McCartney (1998)
McCartney’s wife Linda died of cancer in April 1998. One year on, McCartney performed a tribute concert at the Royal Albert Hall, alongside George Michael, Elvis Costello and Tom Jones. The concert, as well as a tribute album calledA Garland for Linda in 2000, raised substantial money for cancer charities.
E Street Band and the death of Clarence Clemons (2011)
Clemons was a founding member of Bruce Springsteen’s E Street Band, and had a cult following among Springsteen fans. Various bands from Bon Jovi to U2 dedicated performances to him after he died of a stroke in 2011, with Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band performing a 45-minute set of his songs as a tribute a month after his death. The band took on Clarence Clemon’s nephew Jake Clemons as his replacement and dedicated his debut performance to The Big Man
Document TIMEUK0020140319ea3j0001x
