{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2476"}
____
  
Support Services
Scandals catch up with Serco as profits plunge 60%
Andrew Clark, Deputy Business Editor   
444 words
5 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The acting boss of Serco yesterday suggested that the troubled company had reached a “turning point" after revealing a collapse in profits prompted by its government over-billing scandal.
Serco is under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office for allegedly overcharging the Government to monitor electronically tagged convicts. It is also under scrutiny over a deal to shuttle prisoners between prisons and court hearings.
Costs of £90.5 million relating to the furore sent Serco’s pre-tax profits plunging by 62 per cent to £107 million for 2013 and the company admitted a further drop was likely this year.
Ed Casey, the acting chief executive, said: “We’re on the road to rebuilding trust. That trust doesn’t get rebuilt overnight — it’s going to take more time to recover. But where we are today is a great improvement on where we were in the summer or fall [autumn]. I think this is really a turning point."
Mr Casey added:“The private sector wanted to see a way through these issues before they wanted to engage with us on big transactions. We’re already seeing those customers re-engaging."
Serco’s operations include maintaining Britain’s ballistic missile early warning system, managing the Docklands Light Railway in London, administering President Obama’s healthcare reforms and operating immigration detention centres in Australia.
The Government is the company’s biggest customer. The fallout from the scandal prompted a management exodus with Chris Hyman, Serco’s veteran chief executive, leaving the company.
Rupert Soames, Aggreko’s chief executive, was named last week as Serco’s head from June and the company is boosting its board with non-executive names including Rachel Lomax, a former Deputy Governor of the Bank of England.
Serco has also been hit by a change in Australia’s immigration policy that will cut the number of asylum seekers housed at the detention centres it runs. Serco said that it expected its underlying operating profits to fall from £285 million to between £220 million and £250 million this year.
Sam Thomas, an analyst at Cantor Fitzgerald, said: “While we welcomed Friday’s announcement that Mr Soames would become group chief executive from June, he will have his work cut out. Serco is in need of serious repair, in our view."
The Cabinet Office gave Serco a green light last month to resume bidding for central government contracts.
Serco’s drop in profits had been anticipated by the stock market after two profit warnings. The shares reacted positively yesterday, rising by nearly 4 per cent to 467¼p.
Document TIMEUK0020140305ea35000mb
