{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3626"}
____
  
Politics
May risks new row with No 10 over increase in visa costs
Francis Elliott, Richard Ford   
572 words
24 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Theresa May is seeking to increase visa fees dramatically to help to plug a £50 million hole in the Home Office budget.
The plan, revealed in leaked documents, risks provoking a fresh row with No 10, which has made boosting student and business visits to Britain a priority. It will also be seen as a shot across the bows of George Osborne, who is being privately warned by fellow Cabinet ministers not to raid departments’ spending in the Budget next month.
The proposal for an across-the-board rise in visa fees is contained in a letter from a Home Office official circulated around Whitehall and seen by The Times.It reveals that the department is facing a £50 million shortfall and says that increasing visa fees by 4 per cent — more than double the rate of inflation — is among the least worst options.
At present, an overseas student applying for a six-month visa to the UK pays at least £80. The rise will anger businesses, tourist attractions and universities who depend on attracting foreign experts, clients, visitors and students.
The Home Office was among Whitehall departments to have its budget “top-sliced" by the Chancellor last autumn as part of the spending squeeze.
At the same time, David Cameron forced Mrs May to scrap plans to impose bonds of up to £3,000 on visitors deemed to pose a high risk of overstaying their visas. It had caused an outcry in countries such as India, putting at risk Mr Cameron’s efforts to boost British exports.
The Prime Minister has announced premium fast-track visa services for elite travellers from China, India and the Gulf states as part of his trade drive. The Home Secretary’s decision to raise visa fees will be seen by some as an act of revenge. It follows an on-going clash between Mr Cameron and Mrs May over curbs to the stop and search powers. The Prime Minister has vetoed proposals developed by Mrs May dramatically to reduce the police power that is blamed for straining community relations.
Mrs May is also facing a backlash from police commissioners, who say that she is making “stealth cuts" to frontline policing.
They say that the Home Secretary has undermined them by raiding their budgets to finance central government initiatives.
The “top slicing" of the £4.4 billion Home Office main grant to forces was announced before Christmas, with ministers claiming that the police budget was “protected from further reductions".
However, the detail of the statement revealed that more than £77 million had been diverted from the 43 forces in England and Wales to Whitehall.
A £50 million Police Innovation Fund — to which commissioners can apply to pay for collaboration projects to improve efficiency— is being set up. The Independent Police Complaints Commission is to get an extra £18 million, and HM Inspectorate of Constabulary will receive £9.4 million to inspect every force annually.
A Home Office spokeswoman said: “Visa fees are increasing because we are reducing the cost of the immigration system to the taxpayer. Immigrants and visitors should contribute their fair share to the system." She added that it was untrue that the department was facing a funding shortfall. “The Home Office — like the Government overall — is performing well in cutting spending while protecting and improving services."
Document TIMEUK0020140224ea2o000pf
