{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"806"}
____
  
Politics
Auction British visas for super-rich, say migration advisers
Richard Ford, Home Correspondent   
467 words
26 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Visas for wealthy investors should be sold to the highest bidder, the Government’s official migration advisers recommended yesterday, after finding that the current system offered few benefits to British people.
Hundreds of Russian oligarchs and Chinese millionaires have won the right to settle in Britain in return for a minimum £1 million investment in gilts. Professor Sir David Metcalf, chairman of the Migration Advisory Committee, said that this minimised the gains for the UK while maximising gains for migrants.
He recommended an overhaul of the system, with auctions for about 100 investor visas a year and the creation of a “good causes" pot into which any sum above the reserve price could be put.
More than 800 Russian and Chinese millionaires have won the right to settle in the UK in the past five years. The third largest group was US citizens, followed by Egyptians, Indians, Kazakhstanis and Iranians, the committee said.
Sir David said: “The present system, it seems, is designed to minimise the gains to UK residents and maximise the gains to the migrants. Indeed, we pay them for making the application. They get interest on their loan — the gilts."
He added: “Most of the gains go to the migrants. They get the rule of law, property rights, good schools, access to capital markets. The present route is a loan, not a gift."
Sir David said: “Some people say, ‘Isn’t it awful to sell visas?’ It’s better than giving them away, which is what we’re doing now."
The committee outlined a series of reforms, including doubling the minimum amount for an investor visa to £2 million. Investors would be allowed to put money into infrastructure bonds and venture capital.
At present, migrants who invest £1 million, £5 million or £10 million get permission to apply for permanent residence in the UK after living here for five, three or two years respectively.
A new “premium" route would replace the top two thresholds, with an auction offering about 100 visas to the highest bidders. A reserve price of £2.5 million would be set for sealed bids, with any sum above going into a “good causes" fund that could assist medical research, education and other projects.
The premium route would offer settlement in the UK after two years, and the number of days a person needed to be resident in the country would be cut from 185 to 90 days.
Sir David criticised law firms that had attacked the committee’s proposals before the report had been published. “The immigration lawyers are kicking the MAC and they don’t even know what’s in the report," he said.
The Home Office said that it would consider the report carefully.
Document TIMEUK0020140226ea2q0010u
