{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2328"}
____
  
Rachel Sylvester
Stop faffing about. We need a radical rescue
Rachel Sylvester   
1,152 words
20 May 2014
11:12
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Caution is the watchword at Westminster, but a Lib Dem ex-minister has risked alienating his party with a bold vision
These are big times and yet our politics seem so small. The challenges faced by the country after the economic crash are enormous, but minor solutions are proposed. The urgency of the change in the balance of global power caused by the rise of China is met with dither and delay in government. The multidimensional cultural revolution brought about by the internet, advances in genetic science and the rise of individualism is handled with moral equivocation at Westminster.
Politicians pander and prevaricate, hedge and haver when radicalism is needed, not reassurance. They get bogged down in rows over expenses and insult each other in the Commons rather than setting out positive ideas. People want honesty and authenticity, but party leaders are so nervous of offending grassroots supporters that they struggle to give voters the clarity they crave. There is an emphasis on tactics rather than strategy as ministers try to control the headlines for a day, rather than manage the country for a decade. It is no coincidence that all the parties are riven by disagreements about whether to be bold or cautious between now and the next general election. Angst is the political currency of the age.
This is an argument tackled head on by Jeremy Browne, the former Liberal Democrat minister, in a book, Race Plan, published today. The MP for Taunton, a surprise victim of the last reshuffle, criticises the coalition for a woeful lack of ambition which, he argues, puts both economic recovery and national stability at risk. “We cannot afford the political procrastination that is too often our default mode when faced with big decisions,” he writes, in a deliberate swipe at the Government of which he was a member. “Caution and conservatism are, paradoxically, the greatest danger. We either embrace innovative change or live with the consequences of our inertia.”
Having travelled the world during his time at the Foreign Office and seen the impact of immigration when at the Home Office, he argues that doing nothing is not an option if Britain is to survive in an interdependent world. In what he calls the Asian century, the global order is being turned on its head with astonishing speed, yet in this country the Government is dragging its feet when radical reform is needed.
While ministers faff around about whether to construct a third runway at Heathrow, China will build 82 whole new airports between 2011 and 2015. MPs agonise about the environmental impact of the HS2 rail link between London and Birmingham — the Chinese laid 10,000km of high-speed lines between 1990 and 2011 and are still whacking them down in the largest infrastructure project in history.
Twenty five years ago, China had 147km of motorway. By 2007 it had increased this to 35,000 and by 2011 it had created 85,000km of fast roads. In 1990 China’s GDP was $357 billion: it is now $8.23 trillion, roughly 23 times bigger. Over the same period, life expectancy rose from 69 to 76 years and the number of Chinese who travelled to a foreign country increased from 980,000 to 80 million. There is a “dangerous complacency” in Britain and a worrying lack of political urgency about the need to reassess existing assumptions, Mr Browne concludes. “Just as the alternative to being old is not being young but being dead, the alternative to embracing the future is not living comfortably in the past but failing in the future.”
The solution proposed by this former minister is an “authentic and unadulterated” liberalism of a sort he clearly feels is no longer on offer from his party under Nick Clegg. He calls for the reduction of the top rate of income tax to 40p — criticising the Government for “uneasily” splitting the difference at 45p. The top rate should have been lowered, he argues, only when the personal allowance was raised to £10,000, to demonstrate commitment to those at the bottom as well as at the top.
The same free-market liberal approach must also be extended to immigration and public service reform. On education, Mr Browne wants the introduction of vouchers and a vast extension of free schools, with profit-making organisations allowed to set them up. On health, he argues for more patient choice and the creation of new sources of revenue, including insurance payments. The NHS is, he writes, unsustainable in its current form and there should be a “restless and innovative search for improvement” in patient care. The ring-fencing of the health and international aid budgets should also scrapped.
He proposes a new hub airport in Kent with at least four runways, but preferably six, and a second runway at Gatwick as an interim measure. There should be an acceleration of HS2 and a great expansion of housebuilding, including on green- field sites, he adds. What is more, the Department for the Environment and Climate Change should be scrapped and the House of Lords reformed or even abolished to create a political system for the 21st century. Whitehall must lose the mentality of “I spend, therefore I care”, because outcomes, not input, matter in an increasingly competitive world. Such views would not be surprising from a Thatcherite Conservative, but they are fascinating from a Liberal Democrat.
This manifesto will not endear Mr Browne to his party — which he once compared to a supermarket trolley that always veers to the left — but his economic liberalism is matched by a social liberalism and a positive attitude to immigration and the EU that would alienate traditional Tories. He criticises the “nostalgic nationalism” of the Right as well as the “romantic social democracy” of the Left, arguing that the only solution for Britain is liberalism “with the handbrake released” rather than the faltering version on display from the coalition. Rather than being left- or right-wing, it is, he believes, a world view that might be shared by George Osborne, without the conservatism of David Cameron or Tony Blair, without the statism of Gordon Brown. It would probably be supported by Boris Johnson — and by Mr Clegg before he decided to position his party as the moderating influence on the Conservatives and Labour, rather than as a liberal force in its own right.
Ed Miliband is at his best when at his boldest — but he is clearly on the left, with his energy price freeze, bank bonus tax and talk of rail renationalisation. Mr Cameron is veering to the right on Europe, welfare and immigration to head off the Ukip threat. There is certainly a space to be filled in what Roy Jenkins called the “radical centre” of politics. Most importantly, though, this is a time for action, not angst.
Document TIMEUK0020140520ea5k000um
