{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"808"}
____
  
Need to Know
Need to know: High pound keeps rates low
888 words
26 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Sign up to The Business Briefing to receive the essential business news sent straight to your inbox weekday lunchtimes from The Times
Economics
Sterling: Further strengthening of the pound could force the Bank of England to delay lifting interest rates, Ian McCafferty, one of the Bank’s nine rate-setters warned after sterling’s 10 per cent rise since March to a five-year high.
Small companies: Leading business figures, including John Cridland, director-general of the CBI, have called on smaller companies and start-ups to be more ambitious and set their sights on global markets straightaway.
Banking & finance
Bitcoin: Mt.Gox, the oldest electronic market dealing with the virtual currency has deleted its Twitter account and wiped its website. A statement declared that the exchange was closed “to protect the site and our users".
Secure Trust Bank: The former Conservative Scottish Office Minister Lord Forsyth of Drumlean is to join the bank as an independent non-executive director on March 1.
Immigrant banking: British branches of foreign banks that take deposits from tens of thousands of people in immigrant communities are facing the brunt of a new regulatory crackdown.
Construction & property
Persimmon: Britain’s biggest housebuilder posted a 49 per cent jump in full-year profits to £330 million. Revenue rose 21 per cent to more than £2 billion.
Capital & Counties: Covent Garden’s owner said that the historic market was worth more than £1 billion. Successful lettings there and progress in Earl’s Court, where the group is planning a large housing scheme, lifted CapCo’s net asset value by 22 per cent to 249p a share.
CRH: The Irish building materials group announced the first results of a review of its businesses and said that it had identified about 10 per cent of its assets that could be sold.
Engineering
Cobham: The British defence company has become the latest to admit to irregular sales practices. It is under investigation by the US Department of Justice over sales of satellite tracking devices. used by spies and emergency services, It appears likely that the Serious Fraud Office will initiate its own inquiry.
BAE Systems: Research into the use of drones in civil aviation is among seven projects that have earned £30 million of Government funding in an attempt to boost the aerospace sector.
Health
AstraZeneca: A new drug to treat lipodystrophy, a rare metabolic disease, has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. The illness hinders the body’s ability to moderate fat tissue.
Industrials
Elementis: A planned shutdown at its US chromium plant left profits at the specialist chemicals business 2 per cent lower at $136 million last year.
Croda International: Adjusted profits at the speciality chemicals maker were up by 5.4 per cent in 2013 at £251.4 million but Croda warned of the effects in the current year of the high value of sterling.
Leisure
Ladbrokes: Profits slumped by a “disappointing" 66 per cent to £67.6 million after a dismal digital performance. The bookmaker also announced that it would attempt to deal with problem gambling by linking its reduction to executive pay.
Natural resources
Oil & Gas UK: The North Sea faces its “biggest challenge for 50 years", with tax receipts from the sector set to plummet in 2014, the industry body warned in its annual report on the state of the region. It said receipts would fall to £5 billion from £6.5 billion last year.
Retailing
Tesco: Britain’s biggest supermarket chain has scrapped a financial target set after a profit warning two years ago and says it will spend more than £200 million cutting prices. In a bid to undermine the initiative, Asda announced it would add £100 million to its planned £200 million price cuts this year.
Dixons: Directors wanting to merge the electrical goods chain with Carphone Warehouse will have to fight for Brussels’ approval, competition lawyers, say.
Support services
De La Rue: Tim Cobbold, who has been chief executive of the banknotes company for three years, has quit to take charge of UBM, the exhibitions organiser.
Technology
Weibo: The Chinese microblogging platform that has stoked public debate, embarrassed officialdom and suffered government meddling is to be spun off and floated in the United States. Sina Corp is hoping to raise $500 million from the initial public offering of the Chinese equivalent of Twitter.
Telecoms
BlackBerry: The mobile group is returning to its roots in an attempt to reinvigorate itself. The company will release a new smartphone in the style of its popular keyboard and trackball models. John Chen, the chief executive, dubbed the phone “the BlackBerry Classic", although, officially, it will be called the Q20.
Transport
Ferrovial: The Spanish group, which is the largest shareholder in Heathrow, announced a 5 per cent increase in annual profits to €727 million, aided by increased earnings from the London airport and from a Canadian toll road.
International Airlines Group: Cabin crew at Iberia have agreed a pay deal linked to improved productivity. The pact follows a similar agreement with pilots earlier this month, although talks with ground crew are ongoing. IAG, which owns Iberia and British Airways, is keen to avoid a repetition of strikes that disrupted the Spanish airline last summer.
Document TIMEUK0020140226ea2q0011i
