{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2325"}
____
  
Tim Montgomerie
Ukip voters aren’t racist. They’re in despair
Tim Montgomerie   
948 words
20 May 2014
11:29
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The way to stop the rise of Nigel Farage’s party is to start understanding its voters rather than hurling insults at them
Ukip can’t be surprised. If you style yourself as an anti-establishment party you can’t expect the establishment not to fight back. But what a fightback! It has had all the subtlety and sophistication of the Ukip oiks of the establishment’s caricature.
The crude attacks on Ukip echo those made by David Cameron eight years ago. The Tory leader dismissed Ukip as a party of “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists”. Ken Clarke dismissed Ukippers as clowns. Twitter is full of such insults. You’re racists! Homophobes! And, suggesting that many people have learnt little from Gordon Brown’s infamous encounter with Gillian Duffy — bigots! But Nigel Farage’s party can’t be so easily dismissed. Two new opinion polls suggest they might score 36 per cent or even 38 per cent in this month’s European elections.
Ukip represents something more enduring than an explosion of hate. If it is to be defeated it would be wise to investigate why so many voters are turning to it. There will be no cure without correct diagnosis. And lest readers be in any doubt, I want there to be a cure.
Ukip is not a grown-up party. There are huge contradictions in its spend-more, tax-less policy agenda. There’s Mr Farage’s own addiction to the EU gravy train. Ukip MEPs’ failure to turn up to crucial votes in the European Parliament when UK interests are at stake. The very real nastiness of some of their activists — and their nativism. But if patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel, shouting “bigot” has too often become the first resort of modern-day liberals when they are challenged by people they don’t understand.
If we do want to understand the Ukip phenomenon we should identify the errors being made by politicians and journalists that are helping to keep Mr Farage’s face on what seems like every TV broadcast. I suggest eight explanations:
Anger at globalisation The changing nature of the world economy meant wages for many low-skilled people were depressed even before the crash. Anger at this could have been a huge opportunity for Ed Miliband but his permissive attitude to welfare and immigration has alienated many heartland Labour voters and given Nigel Farage his opportunity. According to the academics Matthew Goodwin and Robert Ford, the profile of Ukip voters is the most working-class of all of Britain’s main parties. It’s why Mr Farage was so anti-big business in his recent debates with Nick Clegg.
Large-scale immigration Net immigration may be down but many Britons still see immigration into their communities taking place at near-record levels. They connect this phenomenon to their low wages and inflated housing costs. Much more than Europe, this is the policy issue that drives Ukip. Ukip’s voters note Mr Cameron’s promise to control immigration and they note it is not even close to being met.
Broken promises Not controlling immigration is not the only broken promise. Labour didn’t deliver an EU referendum in the previous parliament. Nick Clegg has dumped his tuition fees pledge. Compromises are necessary in real-world politics but what voters like least about politicians is broken promises. Unfortunately, the horse-trading you get in coalition governments only makes them more likely.
Protest voting The Lib Dems would be surging today if they hadn’t entered government, but Ukip is now the protest vehicle of choice. Episodes such as those involving Patrick Mercer and Maria Miller fuel one of the defining features of Ukip voters: boiling anger at rich politicians perceived to be on the make.
The emergence of a political class Ukip talks about a “LibLabCon” where the big party leaders share similar beliefs, are inauthentic because they’re poll-driven and lack experience outside politics. The truth is that there’s a widening divide between Labour and the Tories. The choice at the next election will be bigger than for many years.
An illiberal liberalism Even most ethnic minority Britons want less immigration. Many of the most decent, community-orientated Christians oppose gay marriage. But liberalism has become illiberal. Many remember that draft Clegg speech in which opponents of gay marriage were labelled as “bigots”. It is now “liberals” who need to condemn a little less and understand a little more.
David Cameron’s misdiagnosis of the Tory problem Ukip became a right-wing phenomenon when Mr Cameron was making a point of not “banging on” about Europe and other core Tory issues when he first became party leader. In fact voters generally liked right-wing Toryism but they wanted right-wingery with compassion for the low-paid; a Toryism that did not leave people alone in tough times. Mr Cameron got closest to the correct prescription with his commitment to the NHS. That’s why Andrew Lansley’s unheralded NHS reorganisation was such a gift to his opponents.
Pundits who hate “the right” Some pundits who complain about Ukip’s hatefulness are actually pretty hateful towards Ukip, but they kid themselves if they think a Tory majority is possible without catering to right-wing perspectives. Margaret Thatcher worked very hard to ensure that voters with right-wing views on issues such as crime voted Tory.
As much as some would wish otherwise, you can’t abolish Ukip-minded voters — you eventually force them out of the mainstream and into inventing their own party. And they have.
Document TIMEUK0020140520ea5k00105
