{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3506"}
____
  
Politics
Ukip unveils controversial Euro campaign billboards
Laura Pitel, Political Correspondent   
485 words
21 April 2014
10:50
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Stark warnings on the impact of EU migration will appear on billboards across Britain as part of Ukip’s campaign for next month’s European elections.
The party’s economics spokesman, Steven Woolfe, on Sunday night used Twitter to unveil a series of giant posters that he said would be “coming to you soon” in advance of next month’s poll.
One reads: “26 million people in Europe are looking for work. And whose job are they after?”
The adverts triggered instant controversy, drawing accusations of scare-mongering. Some compared them to previous campaigns used by the far-right British National Party. A Liberal Democrat peer branded them a disgrace.
Lord Deben, a Tory peer who served in John Major’s cabinet, also responded, saying that Ukip “stands for the worst in human beings: our prejudice, selfishness, and fear”.
Ukip’s popularity has surged in recent years, and the European poll on May 22 could result in the party claiming its biggest electoral triumph to date.
Nigel Farage, the party leader, has made clear that his party is aiming to come first.
An ICM poll published yesterday put Labour slightly ahead on 30 points to Ukip’s 27, but either way the Conservatives are likely to be forced into a humiliating third place.
David Cameron has sought to counter the growing success of Mr Farage’s party by promising an in/out referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU if he is re-elected in 2015. The prime minister has made immigration a cornerstone issue of the coalition government, with tougher rules on benefits for foreign workers accompanied by tougher rhetoric.
The approach has done little to dent Ukip’s appeal. While the party has the potential to do most damage to the Conservatives by splitting the vote on the right, it has proved capable of tapping into disillusion among voters across the political spectrum.
These new posters appear markedly more professional than the anti-EU party’s previous offerings, suggesting that funds pledged by Paul Sykes, a millionaire businessman, have borne fruit.
Neil Hamilton, the former Tory MP, said at the party’s conference in February that the Conservatives had yet to see “the colour of his money” despite a promise from Mr Sykes that he would bankroll the party’s campaign for the European elections.
He said: “He won’t be giving the money directly to Ukip. He has said he will fund certain things: for example, billboards or advertising vans.”
Mr Sykes told The Times last month: “I’m committed to spending millions on the Euro election campaign. We are not sitting there doing it on the back of a fag packet. I’ve got my own team, but Ukip are working with us to approve it as we are going along. The only purpose is to leave the EU.”
Document TIMEUK0020140421ea4l000dx
