{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1254"}
____
  
Music
Music has lost its anger, says Roger Daltrey
Kaya Burgess, Deputy Diary Editor   
447 words
28 February 2014
12:03
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Young people spend too long looking at their smartphones to be creative or to get angry about the world around them, according to Roger Daltrey, lead singer of The Who.
The singer was asked last night why young musicians like One Direction do not sing about social issues in the way that bands used to and why young people no longer voice their anger at the political system.
“It seems to me the world has gone bloody mad. Everywhere you look people are walking around like this..." he said, mimicking those who hold their smartphones up to their faces and tap away at the screen.
“There’s this whole wonderful planet and beautiful sea of humanity that’s out there, but people are like this for more than half the day and it does concern me. I know it teaches people to learn quicker, but where’s the time to contemplate? Where do the epiphanies come from? Maybe that’s why."
Some of The Who’s most iconic songs, including My Generation and and Won’t Get Fooled Again, drew heavily on the political and social issues of the time, but modern music has stopped commenting on the wider world, Daltrey explained at a Times+ event for Times subscribers last night.
“There’s an awful lot out there, if I was young, that I’d be extremely angry about in our society," he said. “There’s a lot of things that need fixing."
Asked if he liked the music of young groups like One Direction, he said he admired their hard work and their fanbase, but added: “Do I like their music? Not particularly. They haven’t done anything very creative."
Daltrey spoke out last year about the scapegoating suffered by immigrants, blaming politicians for failing to implement strict enough controls on pay.
When asked what issues were currently angering him, he replied: “Have you got all night?"
He went on to explain that, if human beings are responsible for climate change, we need to find a “real solution".
“What they’re throwing up at us with windmills and solar panels are chocolate teapots. We need to find a serious solution."
He also called on the NHS to treat teenagers differently from both children and adults and praised the work of the Teenage Cancer Trust, of which he is a patron, for recognising they had unique medical and psychological needs.
Daltrey confirmed that The Who was still an “ongoing" band and was speaking alongside Wilko Johnson, with whom he is due to release Going Back Home, a new album, on March 10.
Document TIMEUK0020140228ea2s003pe
