{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1427"}
____
  
Columnists
Exit Mayor. Enter Labour’s own female Boris; If Johnson’s appeal goes well beyond his party, the same is true of his possible successor – the scourge of tax avoiders
Rachel Sylvester   
1,143 words
4 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
If politics is “showbusiness for ugly people", as the American chat show host Jay Leno once suggested, Boris Johnson is that rare thing — a politician with star appeal. He may not quite be at the stage of doing selfies at the Oscars, but he catches attention as naturally as if he were wearing a sequinned frock on the red carpet. Amid a sea of grey suits at Westminster, he sparkles while shaking his tousled blond locks. The eye is drawn to the London Mayor, whether he is stuck on a zip wire, waving two Union Jacks, wearing a pink Stetson at a gay pride march, expounding on the merits of studying Classics or calling — as he did yesterday — for Muslim children who are radicalised by their parents to be taken into care.
David Cameron (or his family) paid for his place at Eton, but Mr Johnson was a scholarship boy who got to Britain’s top public school through wit rather than wealth. He is unconventional, which means he rises above stereotype. Although he is an Old Etonian former member of the Bullingdon Club, he is still adored by taxi drivers because he can seem both pleb and posh. An intellectual with the common touch, he is as comfortable discussing Aristotle as Arctic Monkeys.
Politically, he is a one-man coalition, a socially liberal Conservative who is in favour of the living wage, gay marriage, immigration and “stop and search" reform but also wants to cut the top rate of income tax to 40p and hold an early referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU. As Charles Moore, Margaret Thatcher’s biographer, once put it: “Mr Cameron is the moderniser, but Boris is the postmoderniser." If the Tory leader seems to attract trouble like iron filings to a magnet, the mayor repels it so that nothing sticks to him. He is the anti-politics politician for the anti-politics age.
The Prime Minister has sensibly concluded that he cannot fight fire with fire and decided to hug his potential rival close. Downing Street is letting it be known that Mr Johnson would be welcomed back into the House of Commons with open arms. Although some detect a sinister plot by George Osborne to scupper the Mayor’s chances of becoming party leader by binding him into an election campaign that the Tories might not win, the reality is almost certainly less Machiavellian. “Dave genuinely thinks Boris is an asset," one close friend of Mr Cameron told me. “He’s not threatened by him and so he wants him in the fold. He would love to have him back in Parliament." As if to make the point absolutely clear, the ally insisted: “He’d put Boris straight into the Cabinet if he were an MP."
No 10 is convinced that Mr Johnson, who has promised to continue running London until his term ends in 2016, could simultaneously hold down the posts of Mayor and MP. Aides point out that Ken Livingstone did both jobs at the same time for a year between 2000 and 2001. Although some Cabinet ministers — such as Michael Gove — remain sceptical about Mr Johnson, the atmosphere in Downing Street has changed, since the days when aides used to text insults about Boris to each other during his speeches. His brother Jo is head of the Prime Minister’s policy unit. Lynton Crosby, the Tories’ chief general election strategist, also ran Boris’s last mayoral campaign. “He’s a multigrain politician in an era of white-bread politicians," he once said. “He has character."
With the Conservative incumbent possibly heading for the exit door at City Hall, Labour is beginning to think it has the chance to win back control of the capital. On Saturday the party approved new rules for the selection of its mayoral candidate, as well as its leader: there will be a one- member, one-vote system and tough controls on spending in the primary election, which will limit the influence of the trade unions.
Potential candidates are circling. Already, Tessa Jowell, the former Olympics Minister, David Lammy, the Tottenham MP, and Sadiq Khan, the Shadow Minister for London, have made clear they would like the job. Perhaps the most interesting name being mentioned, though, is that of Margaret Hodge. Senior Labour figures believe the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) could have the “multigrain" quality required to win in London.
Like Mr Johnson, Mrs Hodge has risen above party politics and captured the public mood with her investigations on tax avoidance. Combining meticulous attention to detail with campaigning zeal, she became the tribune of the people when she grilled the heads of Google, Starbucks and Amazon, forcing millions of pounds out of the coffee chain on behalf of the taxpayer and embarrassing the other global corporates.
“Walking down the street with Margaret is quite an ordeal these days," one friend says. “People are always rushing up to her. She is loved by the Labour Party but her appeal goes beyond the tribe. Even lifelong Conservatives admire her."
At the Royal Albert Hall a few months ago, a member of the audience turned to Mrs Hodge during a rapturous standing ovation and said: “This is what you deserve." When she visited the OECD offices in Paris last month about changes to international tax law, the chief official asked to have her photograph taken with her at the end of the meeting. Bemused, Mrs Hodge asked her why. “You are the rock star of tax avoidance!" came the reply.
Her global reputation is about to be further enhanced. The PAC has just agreed to host an international conference on tax avoidance in September, bringing together parliamentarians around the world to compare notes and cross-examine corporate bosses such as Eric Schmidt, of Google. “It’s Parliament talking on behalf of ordinary people," the chairman likes to explain.
Seventy this year, Mrs Hodge arrived late to politics, having put her career on hold when her children were young. When Labour was in power, she gave up her ministerial job to nurse her husband Henry through a long battle with leukemia, and only returned to the fray after he died in 2010. As well as becoming the unlikely figurehead of a populist tax campaign, she has also masterminded a successful drive against the BNP in her constituency. “There’s life in the old ones yet," says this energetic grandmother of ten.
Like Mr Johnson, Mrs Hodge is unconventional, happy to ruffle feathers and one of the few politicians who has captured the anti-politics mood. She could yet be Labour’s star turn in London.
Document TIMEUK0020140304ea34000yq
