{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"455"}
____
  
Columnists
Those fake passports were always a red herring; My Week
Matthew Parris   
687 words
12 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
I was always sceptical about those two on flight MH370 to Beijing, carrying forged passports: sceptical, anyway, that this might be linked to the aircraft’s disappearance. It might be, of course — but have you considered the possibility that a 0.8 percentage figure for passengers carrying dodgy passports may not be unusual on a flight? About 5 per cent of most passengers probably have prohibited items in their carry-on luggage. A good 10 per cent will have forgotten to turn off their mobile phones.
Were we to freeze-frame a moment on a bus, train or plane and conduct an exhaustive investigation into the lives of everyone thrown randomly and temporarily together there, I bet the proportion who had shoplifted (say) or committed adultery, or taken drugs, kicked the cat or viewed pornographic images might surprise you. It used to be a joke among Tory whips that if someone were to rush into a crowded 1922 Committee meeting of all Conservative backbenchers, and shout “Fly! All is revealed!" about three quarters of them would jump out of the window.
Anyway my theory, on no evidence at all, is that the Chinese military blew that plane up, by mistake.
Sedimentary, my dear
My cousin Andy is neither religious nor mystical. A quarryman, and celebrity author of the standard industry work Sand and Gravel Production, he surprised me last week with the news that he has given instructions for his ashes to be scattered in a Dorset bay.
“Isn’t this a bit misty-eyed for you, Andy?" I said.
“After some research," he replied, “I’ve concluded that Mupe Bay is the point on the British coastline where my ashes will be consolidated fastest into sedimentary rock."
Proper opera
‘If any group can make opera converts, this one can," says one website for music lovers. On Monday night, in what appeared to be a converted bath-house near King’s Cross station in London, I joined a capacity audience of about 80 for the Popup Opera company’s fizzy performance of an early little opera, Bizet’s Le docteur Miracle. I paid £20 for a ticket; the maracas they gave me to play were free.
A handful of talented young would-be opera stars, frustrated with living on hope, noodles and the next audition, tour the country with an electronic keyboard and lively contemporary versions of smaller-scale operas. They pop up in bars, cafés and pubs across Britain, singing their hearts out.
And so well! But the best of it is this: do you struggle to suspend disbelief as an overweight middle-aged soprano and a balding tenor try to convey the pangs of a first romance between two beautiful young starvelings in a garret? The joy of Popup is that these musicians really are beautiful young starvelings. Aurélia Janvaux and Robert Lomax, the lovers, looked about twenty years short of their first mortgage; and Joseph Kennedy’s corrupt, anti-immigrant, French Mayor was dangerously attractive for the slob he played.
A Wow! from this newspaper once helped the group to establish itself. Well, readers, they’re still around, better than ever, and coming soon to a transport café near you.
Advance and return
In a London post office to buy dollars for a trip abroad I was departing with my stash when I overheard an African accent: “Please," a well-spoken and neatly dressed black man was saying to the (black) counter assistant, “I have to get to Milton Keynes tonight, and I lack sufficient money. If I give you credit cards and mobile phone, will you advance me £20 until tomorrow?"
She couldn’t, of course. But something about this man struck me as genuine. Oh what the heck, I thought, and held out a £20 note. He was insistent we exchange addresses, promising to return the money.
Well, maybe, I thought.
This Monday morning, three weeks later, I’d forgotten all about it, when in the post arrived a £20 note and a thank-you card.
Thank you, Galvin.
Document TIMEUK0020140312ea3c000le
