{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"485"}
____
  
Politics
Miliband’s ‘shoddy EU compromise’ gets mixed reviews from business
Francis Elliott, Political Editor   
633 words
13 March 2014
00:50
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Ed Miliband’s move to all but rule out a referendum on EU membership until 2020 got a mixed response from British business yesterday.
Many industry leaders gave at least partial support to his commitment not to hold an in/out vote except in the ­“unlikely" event that Brussels seeks more powers from Westminster.
However, the Institute of Directors said that changes to Britain’s relationship were necessary and should be put to a vote. Mr Miliband’s move was ­described by one backbencher as a “shoddy compromise".
With most of Britain’s trade taking place within the EU, many businesses dislike the uncertainty that surrounds the Conservatives’ policy of renegotiation and a subsequent referendum.
Taking a vote off the table is intended to repair some of the damage caused to Mr Miliband’s relations with business by his ­attacks on “broken markets" in energy and banking. It also puts Labour in lockstep with the Liberal Democrats on the issue of Europe, helping to smooth the path to a future coalition.
David Cameron mocked Mr Miliband’s formulation as “designed by committee", saying it made no sense whatsoever. However, he professed to be delighted that Labour had not matched the Conservative pledge to hold a vote by 2017. “The British people now have a very, very clear choice at the next election," he said. “If they get a Labour government, they will get no referendum, no choice, no reform, nothing. It is the classic Labour ‘we know best’ approach to politics."
Wary of being cast as a supporter of the status quo, Mr Miliband backed some of the reforms to the EU being pushed by Mr Cameron — and in some cases went farther. He said that immigrants should have to wait six months, not three, before qualifying for jobseeker’s allowance and said there was no justification for child benefit claims for ­dependants not living in Britain. New EU members might have to wait longer ­before being allowed to join existing states’ jobs markets.
Senior Conservatives, however, ­queried how the Labour leader would win support for such reforms without wielding the threat of an in/out vote.
Labour Eurosceptics were not pleased, with the backbencher Graham Stringer denouncing it a “shoddy compromise". He said: “I think the public are very clear that they want a referendum. This is so ambiguous as to be ­impossible to sell on the doorstep."
John Mills, the chairman of Labour for a Referendum, warned that the public would feel “short changed" if they were not given a vote. “I want to see a Labour government in 2015 and, as the party that trusts the people, I think we should recognise that the growth of the EU’s influence over Britain in the past 40 years warrants a referendum ­regardless of future events," he said.
Sir Mike Rake, the CBI president, said: “Business will welcome Labour’s decision to make its policy ­position on Europe clear. Any uncertainty is ­unhelpful."
Simon Walker, the director-general of the Institute of Directors, disagreed with Mr Miliband on whether meaningful reform could be achieved without a referendum vote.
“Miliband says he would not want a ­Labour government to be deflected from its economic agenda by pursuing an in/out referendum in 2017, but Britain’s economic interests are intricately bound up in the debate surrounding EU reform," he said.
More than 40 per cent of people think that Mr Miliband’s decision to all but rule out an EU referendum until 2020 is cowardly, according to a YouGov poll for The Sun today. Nearly twice as many people regard it as a cowardly move rather than a bold one, with 50 per cent disagreeing with the policy.
Document TIMEUK0020140313ea3d000p3
