{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2018"}
____
  
Support Services
Challenge for Soames as Serco issues surprise profit warning
Robert Miller   
453 words
29 April 2014
08:18
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Shares in Serco are expected to come under severe pressure today after the troubled international services company issued a shock profit warning last night, after the London stock market had closed.
Rupert Soames, a grandson of Sir Winston Churchill, is to take over as chief executive of the FTSE 250 outsourcer on Thursday. Serco said in its statement yesterday that it was reviewing its financial performance ahead of his arrival.
“It has now become evident in the light of recent performance that we may need to reassess the level of risk implicit in the assumptions underlying our forecasts,” the company said. “This may, in turn, require a material downward revision to expectations, and for us to review the appropriateness of our financing position.”
Serco, which will further update the market on the state of its business “as soon as possible this week”, is under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office and City of London Police over accusations that it has defrauded the Ministry of Justice over prisoner escort and electronic tagging contracts. The scandal cost Chris Hyman his job as chief executive of Serco last autumn.
The company hopes that hiring the impeccably connected Mr Soames will signal the beginning of its recovery.
Mr Soames, the younger brother of Nicholas Soames, the former Conservative defence minister, and a brother-in-law of Philip Dunne, the present Conservative defence procurement minister, was headhunted from Aggreko, the FTSE 100-listed supplier of mobile generators. He has been its chief executive for 11 years.
Last month, Serco admitted that costs relating to the police investigation were £90.5 million, which helped to send Serco’s pre-tax profits plunging by 62 per cent to £107 million for 2013.
Ed Casey, the acting chief executive, said: “We’re on the road to rebuilding trust. That trust doesn’t get rebuilt overnight — it’s going to take more time to recover — but where we are today is a great improvement on where we were in the summer or fall [autumn]. I think this is really a turning point.
“The private sector wanted to see a way through these issues before they wanted to engage with us on big transactions. We’re already seeing those customers re-engaging.”
Serco’s operations include maintaining Britain’s ballistic missile early warning system, managing the Docklands Light Railway in London, administering President Obama’s healthcare reforms and operating immigration detention centres in Australia. The British government is its biggest customer.
In the past year Serco shares have fallen by 34 per cent and closed yesterday at 405½p, giving the company a stock market value of about £2 billion.
Document TIMEUK0020140428ea4t0031k
