{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1771"}
____
  
UK News
UK citizen awaiting extradition on Syria chemical smuggling charge
David Taylor   
377 words
24 April 2014
01:28
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A UK citizen has been charged and is awaiting extradition to the United States for his part in an alleged operation to smuggle chemical laboratory equipment into Syria for possible use by the Assad regime.
A federal indictment unsealed in the US yesterday revealed details of the alleged conspiracy to export lab equipment and items designed to detect chemical warfare agents.
Ahmad Feras Diri, who lived in Muswell Hill, north London, was arrested by Scotland Yard officers in March last year, the indictment said, but his brother, named as Moawea Deri “remains at large and is considered a fugitive”, US immigration and customs enforcement said.
According to the charges, the men conspired to export items from 2003 to 2012, shipping them from the US through Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the UK to Syria.
US officials said: “The indictment alleges that federal legislation and export controls seek to shut down the supply chain used by the Syrian state to support terrorism and to develop and proliferate weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons.”
The indictment says items included a portable gas scanner for detecting chemical warfare agents’ equipment for detecting chemical warfare agents in laboratories, a rubber mask to defend against chemicals and gases, and a stirrer for mixing and testing liquid chemical compounds.
It is not clear who the items were destined for, nor what quantities were successfully exported. But the court papers unsealed yesterday show the indictment against the three men was returned by a grand jury in Pennsylvania in November 2012.
“No good comes of illegal exports to Syria during this time of gross mis-government and civil strife,” Homeland Security Investigations Philadelphia special agent in charge John Kelleghan said.
The man are charged with criminal conspiracy, wire fraud, illegal export of goods, money laundering and false statements.
Diri and his brother used a London company called d-Deri Contracting and trading to purchase and transfer goods from the US to Syria.
The charges came after a joint UK/US operation, the US immigration statement said.
The case comes as Syria is dragging its feet in the disposal of chemical weapons following international outrage over their sustained use by the Assad regime.
Document TIMEUK0020140424ea4o00002
