{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1773"}
____
  
Life
Deborah Ross: Dear Nigel Farage, can I be your PA?
Deborah Ross   
1,030 words
24 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage was accused of hypocrisy this week when, having launched Ukip’s anti-immigration campaign, it emerged he employs his German wife as his secretary. His wife, Kirsten, is paid £27,000 a year by the European Parliament and has amassed more than £200,000 since she began working for him, but Farage insisted no Briton could do the job.
“I don’t think anybody else would want to be in my house at midnight going through emails and getting me briefed for the next day,” he said. Yet I believe a British person could happily be employed by Nigel Farage, and have sent him an application letter as follows:
Dear Mr Farage
I am writing to you to in the hope of convincing you that a British person could be your secretary and to express my interest in the position.
I believe I would be an excellent fit, given that I have considerable experience both in staying up quite late and attending to emails, even though I am not German. I would also be able to brief you for the next day and, better still, brief you from the perspective of a British person. That is, a fourth-generation British person, which I am sincerely hoping is British enough. What if you made us all count back and we found we were all immigrants somewhere along the line? If I am successful in this application and if my job description allows, I would advise you to steer clear of that discussion as it will probably only end in tears.
I have much to offer. I can work as part of a team, have excellent interpersonal skills, once stayed up until nearly 3am (a significant achievement for a non-German) and also share your profound love of this country. Although at present I struggle to misremember it nostalgically as the most perfect place on Earth until foreigners mucked it up, I am a quick learner and believe I could remedy this in no time.
Why do I want the position? I am currently working as a journalist, but am seeking a new challenge that would allow me to use my creativity and imagination more fully, with less recourse to the facts, preferably to Europhobic ends. And I believe working with you would afford me this opportunity.
As you will see from my attached CV, I did once work for Dolcis, the shoe shop, but only for a week. This is because as soon as I discovered it was all about selling shoes to people with smelly feet and that there would be no opportunities for deploying my creativity and imagination to Europhobic ends, that career held no further interest for me. I also once had a Saturday job in Garfunkel’s, but left for the same reason. A help-yourself salad bar is no consolation in such instances and I would say the same even if the salad bar hadn’t simply been a few upturned tins of sweetcorn.
I believe if I were your secretary it would provide exactly the right environment for my creativity and imagination to fly and I could make a significant Europhobic contribution. What if, for instance, we were to say that Brussels plans to ban scones? Or take the orangey bit out of Jaffa Cakes? That it just isn’t orangey enough to count as actual orange, according to European law?
Mr Farage, at the risk of sounding presumptuous, aren’t I already sounding like someone you’d enjoy having around the house? Aren’t I already sounding like someone who would go beyond sometimes staying up a bit late? Germans are all very well, but just how much distance can they realistically put between the whipping up of nationalism and xenophobia and its ultimate consequences? This is why you need a British person for the job!
Lastly, I should say that although your current secretary goes to bed with you (or so I assume), I won’t. However, on those occasions when I’m not too busy still being up at midnight, I will certainly clean behind the fridge. I’ll pull it out and everything.
I look forward to hearing from you, etc . . .
It’s a dog’s life in the big city
I am a Londoner. I have been a Londoner all my life and we go back a few generations (just so you know). I love London. I adore it. Yet the one thing other Londoners always say that makes me mad is this: “I would have a dog, but not in London.”
I have a dog. My dog has a brilliant life. Like most dog owners, I tend to go to the same parks, on the same walks, much of the time, right from the door. So my dog knows most of the other dogs we encounter and, I’m telling you, it’s like a neverending cocktail party for him. It’s: “Hello. Yes, fine. You? Fluffy had the op. Nasty. Still on the dry food? Ever see the kids? Sex? No? OK, I won’t press it this time. Now, must mingle.”
This is, of course, all done by bottom-sniffing, but you get my drift. And then it’s on to the next dog: “Been away? Like your hair. Where do you get it done? Sex? No? Not my day! Now, must mingle.”
And country dogs? I recently visited some friends in the country and they had to get in the car and drive miles to walk their dog because the surrounding fields were either private property or populated by sheep. Here we were, in all this magnificent countryside, and where did we end up? In the playing field of a closed school, walking the same fenced perimeter, over and over. Also, the dog was woefully undersocialised and barked at my dog non-stop, ceasing only to lunge at his throat. (A very relaxing day out, this was.)
So I was glad to return to London and our cocktail-party circuit. “Stolen any pizza lately? Raided any good bins? Nah, me neither . . .”
Document TIMEUK0020140423ea4o003i8
