{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"32"}
____
  
Scotland
Scotland ‘would face higher taxes or immigration to fund pensions’
Lindsay McIntosh, Scottish Political Correspondent   
484 words
25 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
An independent Scotland would have to raise taxes or attract hundreds of thousands of immigrants to pay the state pension currently offered within the UK, a new study has found.
An analysis by a leading pensions consultant found that Scotland’s ratio of pensioners to workers is already higher than the UK’s and would worsen significantly after a “yes” vote.
David Davison, a director and owner of Spence & Partners, the actuaries and pensions specialists, said that just 20 years after Alex Salmond’s intended independence day, Scotland would need 272,200 extra workers to keep up with the UK. By 2066, this would be 301,420.
His report lays bare the issues that Scotland’s ageing population would create after independence. The Scottish government’s White Paper admits that the so-called pensioner dependency ratio — the working age population divided by the pensioner age population — is worse for Scotland than the rest of the UK and likely to deteriorate more quickly. Mr Davidson said: “The issue of the Scottish pensioner dependency ratio is one which will have to be dealt with regardless of Scottish independence but independence could exacerbate an already difficult problem.”
He has used Office for National Statistics figures to calculate the pensions funding shortfall. He said that by 2066 there would be only 2.4 working Scots paying for each pensioner, compared with the current rate of 3.1. “In simple terms, if the state pension is around £7,500 per annum, this would mean that currently each worker would pay around £2,420 of this via tax, whereas they would in future be paying the equivalent of £3,125, an increase of £700 or approximately 30 per cent,” he said.
“While Scotland’s lower life expectancy may serve to reduce the burden of costs for state pensions in the short term, the medium and longer term outlook appears much less favourable unless very significant additional worker population growth can be achieved and the associated implications effectively dealt with. Should the strategy prove unsuccessful, the result will undoubtedly be lower pensions or higher taxation costs to maintain pension levels.”
Gregg McClymont, Labour’s pensions spokesman, said: “The Nationalists must be honest with Scots about the levels of immigration needed to make Alex Salmond’s numbers add up on state pension funding. The experts are clear — Alex Salmond could not afford to pay Scots the same pension as the UK unless he raised taxes, cut public spending or increased immigration.”
A Scottish government spokesman said that in an independent Scotland pensions would be fully protected, paid in time and in full, and more affordable. “An independent Scotland would address long-term pension affordability by focusing on boosting sustainable economic growth through increasing productivity, the working age population and labour participation in Scotland,” he said.
Document TIMEUK0020140325ea3p0004o
