{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3612"}
____
  
Politics
Clegg has ‘tough gig’ in debate with Farage, says senior Lib Dem colleague
Fariha Karim   
513 words
23 February 2014
14:36
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nick Clegg will have his work cut out when he goes head-to-head with Nigel Farage in a debate on Britain’s membership of the European Union, a senior Lib Dem colleague has warned.
The Lib Dem leader challenged Mr Farage to a public debate on the EU last week, with the UKIP leader responding by saying that he had “absolutely no choice" but to pick up the gauntlet.
Simon Hughes, former deputy leader of the Lib Dems, admitted today however that it would be a “tough gig" for Mr Clegg.
“Of all the people that’s equipped to know the history and the workings of the EU and its benefits and has also had to argue this case lately, I think Nick is hugely well qualified," he said on the Andrew Marr Show on BBC One.
“He can speak as a solid Brit who understands the benefits. I think it will be great television."
He added, however: “It will be a tough gig and he knows that, and Nigel is a difficult opponent, but Nick has never been afraid. He wouldn’t be in government with the Tories if he was afraid of tough gigs."
Lord Heseltine, the Tory grandee and former Cabinet minister, went even further, suggesting that Mr Clegg should not be giving UKIP legitimacy by holding the debate.
“I wouldn’t do it if I was him [Mr Clegg]," Lord Heseltine said. “I think that it’s a misjudgment, frankly, to equate the leadership of a party which is part of government with a protest group, particularly a protest group which, frankly, is more about immigration than it is about Europe."
He said that UKIP should be treated the way Margaret Thatcher’s Government treated the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) in the 1980s.
“There were things that are worth doing about UKIP — the first of all is to tell people what UKIP is really about.
“The way to do that, of course, is to stop talking about the United Kingdom Independence Party and start talking about the United Kingdom isolationist party.
“It’s exactly what we did with the CND in about 1983, I think it was. We stopped talking about the campaign for nuclear disarmament and started talking about one-sided disarmament ... and everybody realised then what it meant."
The Clegg-Farage debate, set to take place next month, is likely to increase the number of calls for Mr Farage to be included in future leaders’ televised debates before the 2015 general election.
David Cameron and Ed Miliband look unlikely to take part in the Europe debate, because both face divisions within their own parties over the issue. Mr Farage said that he “nearly choked on my bacon roll" when he heard Mr Clegg’s challenge.
“At no point in the 15 years that I’ve now been an MEP ... have we ever had a full national debate about the merits or demerits of EU membership," he said last week.
Document TIMEUK0020140223ea2n002jr
