{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"157"}
____
  
Politics
Clegg and Farage are extremists on Europe, says Cameron
Jenny Booth   
1,072 words
3 April 2014
13:49
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron today dismissed both Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage as “extremists” on Europe, after the Ukip leader won last night’s second leadership debate on the subject.
The Prime Minister has been accused of running scared because of his refusal to debate Britain’s European Union membership ahead of next months’s European elections.
Today Mr Cameron hit back, claiming that both Mr Clegg, who is pro-European, and Mr Farage, whose party is bleeding the Conservatives of votes and members, had “extreme views” on the EU.
“I didn’t have a dog in the fight, as it were,” said Mr Cameron.
“The problem with this debate is both of the people taking part actually have quite extreme views. Nick thinks there’s nothing wrong with Europe and we shouldn’t have a referendum; Nigel thinks there’s nothing right with Europe and we should just get out and leave. They’re both wrong.
“The right answer is to be tough for Britain, renegotiate, get a better deal and then give people the choice in an in/out referendum. And that is what I will do, if I’m prime minister after the next election, before the end of 2017.”
Mr Farage struck a chord with viewers last night as he put immigration at the heart of a populist pitch to leave the EU.
The Ukip leader said that EU membership had left Britain unable to control the number of migrants from Europe, and that immigration had been a disaster, leaving the “white working class effectively as an underclass”. He later conceded that black British youths were also disproportionately likely to be jobless.
Turning on Mr Clegg, he said: “What you have done is give us a cheap-labour economy . . . we need to find a way to give those at the bottom of our society and our young people jobs. It’s about putting our country first.”
In his most personal attack on the Lib Dem leader, he accused him of lying by suggesting that only a fraction of laws were driven by Brussels.
“I said yes to these debates. I thought you would honestly make the pro-EU case. By saying 7 per cent of our laws are made in Brussels, you are wilfully lying to the British people about the extent to which we have given away control of our country and our democracy and I’m really shocked and surprised that you would try and do that.”
Mr Clegg replied: “I don’t think in a debate like this, Nigel Farage, you should start making things up to make a point.”
Mr Farage, who last week accused the EU of having “blood on its hands” for encouraging Ukrainians to defy the Russian President, came under pressure for subsequent interviews in which he has expressed admiration for Mr Putin and cast doubt on President Assad’s culpability for the Damascus gas attack.
Mr Farage tried to deflect this criticism by attacking the Liberal Democrat leader as a warmonger who backed bombing in Libya and Syria. He sought to embarrass Mr Clegg, whose party’s reputation was defined by its opposition to the Iraq war, when challenged over his views on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
“You were absolutely hell bent on getting involved militarily in the war in Syria and I personally am delighted we didn’t go to war in Syria and we’re not going to get involved I hope in military conflict in the Ukraine,” he said.
Mr Farage appeared to predict violent revolution if nations in the EU were denied a chance to leave by democratic means. “If it doesn’t end democratically, it will end very unpleasantly. If you take away people’s ability to decide their future, then I’m afraid they resort to unpleasant means.”
Mr Clegg described his opponent as a “dangerous fantasist” whose opposition to gay marriage and views on maternity leave meant he was out of tune with a compassionate, diverse modern Britain.
“I wouldn’t be surprised if Nigel Farage soon tells us that the Moon landing was a fake, that Barack Obama is not American, that Elvis is not dead,” the Lib Dem leader said as he tried to portray Mr Farage as a fringe figure.
Using what appeared to be scripted material, Mr Clegg accused his opponent of dishonestly selling voters a vision of Britain with the clock turned back, asking: “Are you going to say we’re going return to the gold standard, or get W. G. Grace to open the batting for England again?”
A YouGov survey for The Sun suggested 68 per cent preferred Mr Farage’s message to 27 per cent for Mr Clegg, a margin significantly higher than last week in which Mr Farage was backed by 57 per cent and the Lib Dem leader by 36 per cent.
This morning Mr Cameron said he did not mind opinion polls showing that his coalition partner had been comprehensively defeated.
“It doesn’t concern, me because on this one I do not agree with Nick,” said Mr Cameron.
“I have a very different view about Europe: I want real change in Europe; I want us to change our relationship, I want a renegotiation and then I want an in/out referendum.”
He also distanced himself from Mr Farage’s views.
“He wants to get out altogether; he just wants to turn his back on Europe and not recognise the fact that we’ve got to trade and compete in Europe,” said the Prime Minister.
“The problem with the UKIP is it’s sort of ‘stop the world, I want to get off, Britain can’t succeed’. It’s deeply pessimistic.
“I’m very optimistic. We can, if we take the right decisions, secure a really strong and stable future for the families of our country, but that means being strong for Britain, not saying ‘no change in Europe’, saying ‘yes, we need change and when we get that change, we’ll give you, the British people, a choice’.”
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
This article has been chosen as today’s Talking Point by The Times community team for the quality of the comments left by readers. Vote for your favourite comments by clicking on the ‘Recommend’ button and get involved in the debate below (read our house rules if you’re new to commenting).
Document TIMEUK0020140403ea43000um
