{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2370"}
____
  
Leading Articles
Political Class
693 words
16 April 2014
14:48
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage’s appeal rests on him being the anti-politician in a time of political disillusion, but the truth is emerging
The appeal of Nigel Farage is based on a trick. The trick is to appear as the politician who is not a politician. Mr Farage’s most common and most effective shtick is to parade himself as the representative of the ordinary person against the gilded establishment from which the political class draws its recruits. It is a fraudulent prospectus and the sleight of hand is starting to show.
Today we report that Mr Farage faces an investigation into the whereabouts of almost £60,000 of EU funds which were paid into his own bank account, ostensibly to run an office which had been provided to him free of charge. The office in question is, remarkably enough, a converted grain store near Bognor Regis which was given to Ukip by some of its supporters 15 years ago. A former senior Ukip official has filed a formal complaint about Mr Farage’s conduct to OLAF, the body which investigates European Union fraud.
This is, of course, merely a complaint and an allegation. The stakes for Mr Farage, though, are very high. Ukip has made a great deal of the mess that the three main political parties got into over their expenses. Mr Farage’s comment in the wake of Maria Miller’s resignation was typical of his attitude: “Yet again, this is the political class looking after its own and letting down the electorate.”
This is not the first time Mr Farage has encountered trouble. Last year it was revealed that he had established the Farage Family Educational Trust on the Isle of Man to allow him to mitigate his tax liability. Mr Farage has also strongly denied claims by former staff members of Ukip that he transferred European funds into offshore accounts located in the Cayman Islands.
It is probable, even if these allegations prove to be true, that Mr Farage has done nothing illegal. The political charge against him will stand in any case. These are not actions becoming of a politician who has styled himself as the anti-politics candidate, somehow above and beyond the allegedly low standards of the political class.
At the time of writing, with the European elections on the horizon, Ukip has hit 20 per cent in some opinion polls. It is widely expected to perform very well in the May elections and beat the Conservative party into third place even if victory over Labour may be out of reach. Mr Farage is thus in danger of becoming exactly what he says he is not — a mainstream politician. For someone who draws his salary from the European exchequer and who has no occupation other than politics, that is not before time.
Ukip has benefited more than any other political party from the demise of the Liberal Democrats once Nick Clegg chose to join the coalition. Until 2010 the Liberal Democrats were a repository for protest votes. They were the “none of the above” party. Once they took office that source of support fell away, never to return.
This is a time in which disenchantment with politics is a major theme of public life. Mr Farage has been an effective spokesman for that discontent. It is also a time in which the unevenly distributed benefits of globalisation have produced losers as well as winners. The experience of immigration, in particular, has led some voters to be tempted by a strong voice purporting to offer splendid isolation and patriotism.
In truth, Ukip have proved poor patriots. Measured by their voting record in the European Parliament, Ukip MEPs have been weak ambassadors. When vital legislation has passed, on financial services for example, Ukip MEPs have been absent. There is genuine concern in the City of London that, with regulation on the stocks which will affect the competitiveness of the UK’s financial services industry, a further battery of Ukip MEPs would have a material and detrimental impact on the nation’s prosperity. Mr Farage is not an ordinary politician — he’s not that good.
Document TIMEUK0020140414ea4f00379
