{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2071"}
____
  
Crime
Immigrant language test sale under investigation
Tony Bonnici   
377 words
18 May 2014
13:23
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Home Office staff today searched the language school at the centre of claims migrants who speak no English are able to buy a guaranteed pass in a “secure” language test.
James Brokenshire, the immigration and security minister, confirmed that an investigation into the allegations was under way, following a report in the Daily Mail that certificates were being sold for £500.
The documents are required by anyone wanting to remain in the UK permanently or to apply for British citizenship.
Mr Brokenshire told the Mail: “The Home Office takes any allegation of fraud extremely seriously and we have already begun a full investigation.
“We will take the strongest possible action against anyone who is found to have abused the rules – including the possibility of criminal prosecutions for fraud.”
Ofqual, the examinations watchdog, was also said to be aware of the allegations and was seeking further information “as a matter of urgency”.
The Mail said that it had carried out its investigation into the examination centre at Upton Park, East London, which is run by Learn Pass Succeed (LPS), following information from a whistleblower. It is this school that was seached today,
One worker is filmed telling an undercover reporter that any applicant could be coached to pass the test or have another candidiate take the test on their behalf.
He is quoted as saying: “We can do a guaranteed pass...where he doesn’t turn up, nothing, and will just receive a certificate.”
Uzwan Ghani, one of the directors of LPS, which has four branches in London, told the paper the problem was confined to the Upton Park branch and that it had suspended tests taken at the centre.
“I’m shocked that this has happened and am very concerned as to how it could have happened,” he was quoted as saying.
“We are very thorough when it comes to checking IDs of candidates before they take the test, so I will have to investigate which of the centres the test was taken in and who the assessor was.
“I’ve been in the business for five years and I’ve never come across something like this and I would not allow it. It is wrong and ridiculous.”
Document TIMEUK0020140517ea5h000jh
