{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3618"}
____
  
Politics
Alarming immigration figures altered at Home Office request
Dominic Kennedy, Investigations Editor   
564 words
23 February 2014
22:59
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A census report about immigration was amended when the Home Office complained that it looked too alarming, newly released e-mails disclose.
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) changed the tone of its report about a huge rise in migration in the past decade after suggestions from Whitehall.
A leading academic research group said it was troubling that pressure had been put on the ONS to present data in a way that would receive a better response from the public.
The Home Office denied it had tried to minimise the impact of immigration, and the ONS rejected any suggestion that it had toned down the statistics.
In a separate development, evangelical campaigners reacted with dismay to the disclosure that the ONS had demoted Christianity from the country’s “main religion" to just its largest.
A rare glimpse behind the scenes of the Census was provided in the response to a Freedom of Information Act request made by The Times. The ONS was preparing to publish a paper last year based on migration statistics and sent a draft to the Home Office. The Census had found that half of all immigrants had arrived in the previous decade. The newly released e-mails had been marked “Restricted".
Jon Simmons, head of migration and border analysis at the Home Office, wrote that the report “focuses on what could be seen as more alarming statistics, and could easily introduce more balance by adding in the alternatives . . . It’s just a matter of tone really".
He noted that the passage “starts with country of birth — and obviously I think we should be giving more weight to foreign nationals than this does".
The issue of nationality versus birthplace is a sensitive part of the immigration debate. Many people born overseas acquire British passports, so migration figures can be reduced if nationality is used to count immigrants rather than country of origin.
Following the Home Office suggestion, the ONS inserted a passage stating that almost half of residents born outside the UK had British passports. The ONS promoted this on the front page of its bulletin as a “key figure".
Mr Simmons went on: “When it mentions ‘half coming in the last ten years’, why not also say half entered in previous decades?" The ONS declined to take this advice.
He also objected to a sentence highlighting that more European-born immigrants had entered the UK in the past decade than in previous years combined, saying that “some of those who had entered in earlier decades will have died".
Scott Blinder, director of the Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford, said: “It is troubling to see any pressure on the ONS to manage public responses to data."
The Home Office said: “It is completely untrue to suggest Home Office officials have attempted to influence the ONS in an improper way. Nor has any attempt been made to minimise the impact of immigration in independent statistical releases. The ONS are not experts in migration research and we work with them to provide additional insight on statistical issues."
The ONS said the Home Office had been calling for additional information, not alternative data. “Any amendments they suggest are agreed exclusively on the basis of sound statistical practice, free of any political influence," it said.
dkennedy@thetimes.co.uk
Document TIMEUK0020140224ea2n000dy
