{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"115"}
____
  
Politics
Farage triumphs again in TV battle as he attacks ‘liar’ Clegg over Europe
Francis Elliott and Sam Coates   
792 words
3 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Nigel Farage claimed Brussels had turned Britain’s “white working class” into an “underclass” last night as he put immigration at the heart of a populist pitch to leave the EU that forced Nick Clegg on to the back foot.
The Ukip leader accused Mr Clegg of “wilfully lying” and warned the EU could end in violent disorder, as the pair clashed during the second televised debate ahead of European Parliament elections in May.
Polls suggested that the Liberal Democrat leader lost last night’s head-to-head and lost ground on last week’s showing. A YouGov survey for The Sun suggested 68 per cent preferred Mr Farage’s message to 27 per cent for Mr Clegg, a margin significantly higher than last week in which Mr Farage was backed by 57 per cent and the Lib Dem leader by 36 per cent.
In a more assured performance, Mr Farage sidestepped an attack over his admiration of Vladimir Putin, hitting back at the Deputy Prime Minister’s support for “foreign wars”. He also turned the economic arguments for EU membership against what he described as the “elite club of career politicians and big business” benefiting from a “cheap-labour economy”.
Mr Clegg described his opponent as a “dangerous fantasist” whose opposition to gay marriage and views on maternity leave meant he was out of tune with a compassionate, diverse modern Britain. “I wouldn’t be surprised if Nigel Farage soon tells us that the Moon landing was a fake, that Barack Obama is not American, that Elvis is not dead,” the Lib Dem leader said as he tried to portray Mr Farage as a fringe figure.
Using what appeared to be scripted material, Mr Clegg accused the Ukip leader of dishonestly selling voters a vision of Britain with the clock turned back, asking: “Are you going to say we’re going return to the gold standard or get W. G. Grace to open the batting for England again?”
He was notably less dismissive on the subject of immigration, however, even when Mr Farage spoke of people’s “shock” at the cultural changes seen across Britain in recent years. The Ukip leader said EU membership had left Britain unable to control the number of migrants from Europe, and that immigration had been a disaster, leaving the “white working class effectively as an underclass”. He later added that black British youths were also disproportionately likely to be jobless.
Turning on Mr Clegg, he said: “What you have done is give us a cheap-labour economy . . . we need to find a way to give those at the bottom of our society and our young people jobs. It’s about putting our country first.”
In his most personal attack on the Lib Dem leader, he accused him of lying by suggesting that only a fraction of laws were driven by Brussels. “I said yes to these debates. I thought you would honestly make the pro-EU case. By saying 7 per cent of our laws are made in Brussels, you are wilfully lying to the British people about the extent to which we have given away control of our country and our democracy and I’m really shocked and surprised that you would try and do that.”
Mr Clegg replied: “I don’t think in a debate like this, Nigel Farage, you should start making things up to make a point.”
Mr Farage, who last week accused the EU of having “blood on its hands” for encouraging Ukrainians to defy the Russian President, came under pressure for subsequent interviews in which he has expressed admiration for Mr Putin and cast doubt on President Assad’s culpability for the Damascus gas attack. Mr Farage tried to deflect criticism over his views of President Putin by attacking the Liberal Democrat leader as a warmonger who backed bombing in Libya and Syria. He sought to embarrass Mr Clegg, whose party’s reputation was defined by its opposition to the Iraq war, when challenged over his views on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
“You were absolutely hell bent on getting involved militarily in the war in Syria and I personally am delighted we didn’t go to war in Syria and we’re not going to get involved I hope in military conflict in the Ukraine,” he said.
Mr Farage appeared to predict violent revolution if nations in the EU were denied a chance to leave by democratic means. “If it doesn’t end democratically, it will end very unpleasantly. If you take away people’s ability to decide their future, then I’m afraid they resort to unpleasant means.”
Document TIMEUK0020140402ea43002yx
