{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1459"}
____
  
Politics
Cameron on defensive over using foreign nanny
Sam Coates, Deputy Political Editor in Bethlehem   
605 words
13 March 2014
13:39
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
David Cameron has defended his employment of a foreign nanny after it was linked to his struggle to meet a target for migration.
The Prime Minister, who appeared rattled, gave a passionate defence of the work of Gita Lima, who looks after his children.She originally comes from Nepal but is now a British citizen after passing the citizenship tests.
Members of the Cabinet have been answering questions about the employment of domestic staff after James Brokenshire, a newly promoted junior home office minister, claimed immigration was benefiting the middle class at the expense of the working class.
Speaking at a press conference alongside the Palestinian President, Mahmoud Abbas, Mr Cameron was asked why he had employed a foreign nanny if he wants to reduce net migration figures.
He said: “I have an excellent woman Gita Lima who looks after my children who is a British citizen.
“She came originally from Nepal. She has carried out exams and become a British citizen and she does a fantastic jobs.
“She certainly fits the description of someone who works hard and wants to get on.
“I can confirm, as well, that I did not give her any assistance in these exams she had to take to become a British citizen."
Last week it emerged Samantha Cameron was involved in the family’s foreign-born nanny securing British citizenship while she was working for the Prime Minister.
Mrs Cameron allowed her name to be entered on an application form for British citizenship for her long-term nanny Ms Lima four years ago.
Mr Cameron said he did have conversations with Ms Lima about the exam. “She did once ask me one of the questions in the exam, what is the role of the British Cabinet? “I will not share the answer I gave."
Mr Cameron has employed Ms Lima for several years since recruiting her from Kalayaan, a charity that helps immigrants to escape abusive bosses. She took a temporary leave of absence in 2012, during which an Australian nanny filled in.
Annual net migration to Britain rose more than 30 per cent in to 212,000 over the last year. The figures, released last month, all but dashed Conservative hopes of meeting their target of bringing the figure below 100,000 before the general election.
Mr Cameron made the personal pledge to bring down migration to the tens of thousands by 2015 shortly before the 2010 election campaign, but it does not represent official government policy because Liberal Democrats thing the target is misguided and unachievable.
The Office for National Statistics said the unexpected rise of 58,000 in the 12 months to last September has mainly been fuelled by migrants from the recession-hit southern European countries of Spain, Portugal, Italy and Greece, as well as Poland.
Mr Cameron said they had succeeded in bringing down immigration from outside the EU, raising questions about what he can do about the flow from the EU.
He said: “We have a clear position on immigration which is that it has been too high and needs to come down and it has come down.
“It has come down across the course of this Government by almost 20 per cent.
“If we look at the components of that immigration, we have actually brought down immigration from outside the EU by something like a third."
He said the Government had achieved this by putting a cap on economic migration from out of the EU, closed down 700 bogus colleges and changed the rules on family reunions.
Document TIMEUK0020140313ea3d002s3
