{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"113"}
____
  
Law
First victims of trafficking — then victims of the UK courts
Frances Gibb   
855 words
3 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Hundreds of cases of potential miscarriages of justice are stacking up. Frances Gibb reports
T was a young African girl who had been trafficked from her village into this country. She was 15 when she was brought here, then imprisoned in a house, repeatedly raped, brutalised, beaten, tied up and forced to work as a prostitute. Her imprisoner had told her that he was a juju witchdoctor and she was in fear for her life.
She was found, aged 17, trying to escape via Heathrow with a stolen passport. She took her lawyer’s advice and pleaded guilty in a youth court, where she was sentenced to four months in detention and given a training order.
In another case, J, a Vietnamese national, was arrested in a house that had been adapted for growing cannabis plants. He pleaded guilty in the youth court to producing the drug, and sentenced to a six-month detention and training order. His trial went ahead despite evidence that should have alerted the authorities to the fact that he, too, was a child victim of trafficking.
Both cases found their way to the Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC), which referred them to the Court of Appeal. The convictions in both have since been quashed.
The cases are among potentially hundreds of wrongful convictions in asylum, refugee or trafficking cases. So far 14 have been referred by the Commission to the Court of Appeal: of these 12 have been quashed (some provoking scathing comments by appeal judges), one was abandoned and one is outstanding.
Since 2011, however, there have been more than 80 applications made to the CCRC — the statutory independent watchdog over potential miscarriages of justice. Many more are stacking up: the CCRC has reviewed 23 so far, with a further 59 under consideration.
Richard Foster, the chairman of the CCRC, says that some of the cases are shocking. Of T, he says: “She did it. She admits it. She pleads guilty on legal advice. It’s a relatively minor offence. Why the fuss? But why was T boarding a plane to Canada? A cheap, spur of the moment holiday? No. Was she a drug mule travelling on false papers? No. Running away from home then?No, not that either. It was far more serious. She was fleeing in terror of her life.”
Such cases have common features: the “offenders” entered the UK either as asylum seekers or refugees, or victims of trafficking. They were prosecuted for offences such as not having a passport; working on cannabis farms; or (with trafficking) offences involving the sex industry, or domestic servitude and slavery. They are advised to plead guilty, and end up in jail.
Yet, Foster insists, they should never have been prosecuted in the first place, because many are likely to have had a defence to the charges but were not even told of it by their lawyers.
In the immigration cases, there is a possible defence to some offences such as possessing a false passport under section 31 of the Immigration and Asylum Act, which draws on the Refugee Convention.
It is also an abuse of process to prosecute someone without considering, under article 26 of the Trafficking Convention, if there is evidence that he or she was a credible victim of human trafficking and compelled to commit a crime as a result. It is not a defence; but does place a duty on the Crown Prosecution Service to consider whether a prosecution is in the public interest.
In the case of T, Foster says there was “plenty of evidence in front of the numerous lawyers and police officers” that should have alerted them. “Even a pre-sentence report which said that an older man had brought T to the UK and used her as a prostitute failed to ring alarm bells.”
He has taken up the issue with the Crown Prosecution Service, which is keen to prevent further wrongful prosecutions. It has issued guidance, asking prosecutors actively to consider if there is reason to think someone is a victim of trafficking, bearing in mind that he or she may be inhibited from complaining because of fear of authorities and ignorance about their status.
If there is evidence of a credible common law defence, the case will be discontinued and even where there is not (but the offence may have been committed under compulsion) then prosecutors must consider if it is in the public interest to prosecute.
The cases are adding to the CCRC’s workload: at any time it has some 400 cases under consideration, referring 30 to 40 to the Court of Appeal a year. That is not, though, why Foster is keen to alert prosecutors and lawyers to his message.
“No one who has been treated as T was treated, and was as badly brutalised as a young girl can be, should have as their only experience of British justice prosecution for such an offence when they are trying to get away from such persecution, and when the perpetrators and their crimes go unpunished.”
Document TIMEUK0020140402ea43002vc
