{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3302"}
____
  
UK News
Call for Farage apology as Romanian and Bulgarian migrants fall
Richard Ford, Home Correspondent   
846 words
14 May 2014
21:02
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The number of Romanian and Bulgarians working in the UK has fallen since labour market restrictions were lifted, figures showed today, prompting calls for Nigel Farage to apologise for scaremongering.
Official statistics show that the number of migrants from both countries working in Britain fell by 4,000 to 140,000 in the first three months of the year compared with the final quarter of 2013.
But labour market statistics show a jump of just under 75,000 in the number of migrants from eight former Soviet bloc states, including Poland, working in the country.
Year on year the number of Romanians and Bulgarians employed in the UK rose from 112,000 in the first three months of 2013 to 140,000 in the same period this year.
Restrictions on Romanians and Bulgarians having full acccess to all jobs were lifted on January 1, leading to warnings of a surge in migrants heading to the UK seeking jobs.
Today’s figures indicate that predictions of a surge in numbers coming from both countries has not yet happened.
Anna Soubry, a Conservative defence minister, accused Mr Farage of peddling “nonsense”. Speaking on World at One on BBC Radio 4 she said that the official figures showed “Ukip preys on people’s fears, it preys on prejudices in many people. And they make these wild, actually rather offensive claims, and hey, what happens? It was all a load of nonsense.”
The minister said, however, that the Conservatives were unlikely to meet their pledge to reduce overall net migration to the tens of thousands by next May.
Keith Vaz, chairman of the Commons home affairs select committee, said: “These figures are unsurprising. The committee viewed for itself how the supposed flood of immigration from Romania and Bulgaria was little more than a trickle. It would appear now that many may have actually left the UK.
He added: “Those, including Ukip, who promised the end of the world on 1st January, now owe the public and those from Romania and Bulgaria a full apology.”
The year on year figures suggest however that tens of thousands of migrants from both countries had already arrived in Britain to work. The self employed were not covered by the labour market restrictions.
Danny Alexander, chief secretary to the Treasury, said that the figures gave the lie to Ukip’s scaremongering on immigration.
“The very modest numbers of Romanians and Bulgarians coming to work in Britain this year is in stark contrast to the inflammatory rhetoric of earlier this year,” he said.
Ukip responded by highlighting the overall rise to 4.5 million in non-UK born workers.
“Huge increase of 292,000 foreign workers in past year demonstrates that the coalition immigration policy has been an abject failure,” tweeted Nigel Farage.
Dr Carlos Vargas-Silva, senior researcher at the migration observatory at the University of Oxford, said: “The changes that we see in today’s data cannot really be seen as a result of the end of controls on the employment opportunities of A2 migrants.”
Until there were complete figures for the year, he said, it would be impossible to achieve any definite conclusions about the impact of the end of labour market restrictions.
The figures also show that British workers took more than nine out of ten of new jobs in the UK economy in the last year.
The overall labour force survey figures show that British workers took more than 90 per cent of new UK jobs during the past 12 months.
UK nationals took 563,000 of the 741,000 extra jobs created, and 178,000 went to foreign nationals.
Peter Wilding, director of British Influence, a campaign to keep Britain in the EU, said that today’s figures, which relate to people who are in work and pay taxes, and actually show a drop in numbers, are the exact opposite of the “invasion” and the “opening floodgates” Nigel Farage predicted when transitional controls were lifted
Sir Andrew Green, chairman of Migration Watch UK, said that quarterly statistics always fluctuated.
He stood by his organisation’s estimate that 50,000 Romanians and Bulgarians would come to the UK each year for the next five years.
• Mr Farage today blamed a “media campaign” against his party after a brick was thrown through the window of one of a Ukip MEP.
The living room window of Gerard Batten’s east London house was smashed in the attack, which occurred while he was asleep upstairs.
Mr Batten claimed the incident was part of a pattern of intimidation aimed at Ukip and Mr Farage said it was a “direct consequence” of media attacks on the party.
London MEP Mr Batten said the incident happened in the early hours of yesterday morning, when he and his wife were woken by a loud noise.
“On rushing downstairs, we discovered that a house brick had been thrown through our living room window. The police were informed and are currently investigating,” he said.
Document TIMEUK0020140514ea5e000xe
