{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3559"}
____
  
Columnists
The British live upstairs, and Poles downstairs; We no longer feel embarrassed to hire cleaners and other domestic help — but only foreign workers are happy to live with us
Janice Turner   
986 words
22 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
When watching Downton Abbey, I know my place. The likes of my ancestors weren’t clinking crystal in the great hall but scrubbing the scullery below stairs.
My late aunts were in service. My Auntie Nora cared for an old lady in Middlesex until her death, then her two adult sons. My Auntie Olive, a cook, is described in references as of “good honest character". There was high demand for solid, hard-grafting Yorkshire girls in middle-class southern homes. And until the Second World War drafted you off to pack parachutes or roll cordite, it was the best job available if you’d left your pit village school at 14.
Did my aunts mind living far from home with a strange family? Did they find it degrading to clean for their “betters"? As members of that deferential, modest war generation, I’d guess not. Besides, these girls had skivvied at home, black-leading grates and cranking mangles. At least in service they got paid.
This week the Labour MP Frank Field declared that the problem with today’s young British people was that they were too grand. “A new servant class, equal to that of Downton Abbey times, has been re-created," he said. “It’s not upstairs and downstairs any more, though. The elite bring the servant class in when they want cleaning done, ironing, gardening . . ."
But alas, says Mr Field, the rich take on cheap immigrant labour to wash dishes and change nappies. Youth unemployment sits stubbornly at about a million because even in London — which is bursting with the wealthy and domestically indolent — young Brits feel drudgery is beneath them. Cut off their benefits, Mr Field says, then they’d swallow their pride. And Home Office figures confirm that last year 100,000 fewer British people were in unskilled jobs than in 2011, with one job in ten going to Bulgarians or Romanians, even before restrictions were lifted.
As Voltaire said: “The comfort of the rich depends upon an abundant supply of the poor." The more unequal a society, the more it spends on household help. In 1978, when a CEO earned about 30 times more than his average worker, domestic services as a proportion of expenditure were at their lowest. This has quadrupled in real terms now that a CEO brings in 200 times his employee. There are now as many domestic workers in London as in Victorian times.
So what are the new rules for employing servants? No one seems to care, feasting on this cheap convenient labour, barely checking if it’s legal, as shown by the resignation of Mark Harper, the Immigration Minister whose Colombian cleaner had no work permit, and the fining of Baroness Scotland for employing an illegal immigrant. David Gauke, the Exchequer Secretary, has said it is “morally wrong" to pay cleaners cash but who doesn’t leave a handful of tenners under the fruit bowl?
Twenty years ago, in liberal circles, a cleaner was your shameful secret. Too lazy or posh to Jif your own bath? Hark at Lady Muck. Some of my friends insisted that doing housework kept them “grounded". Those who had a cleaner rushed around guiltily before she arrived.
Perhaps only egalitarian societies feel servant-shame. Recently, I asked Adam Price, the creator of the Danish political drama Borgen why Birgitte, his fictional Prime Minister, didn’t solve her childcare headaches with a nanny. He said that in Denmark a nursery or grandparent was fine. But employing a nanny would be seen as putting on airs. Indeed, when I met the real Danish PM, Helle Thorning-Schmidt, she was aghast when I joked that her bodyguards could help to carry her supermarket bags.
Over the past decade one million more British people have started employing a cleaner. For couples, it is worth £10-plus an hour to sidestep marital disputes about bin-bags and skid marks. The head of Molly Maid, a huge domestic cleaning agency, told me that even in the recession her clients rarely cancelled but switched from a weekly to monthly service. (Pity the poor cleaners!) Agencies with their anonymous operatives, eliminate an awkward relationship with the woman who sees your most intimate stains.
Coexisting with those who serve you has always been tricky. In Mrs Woolf and the Servants, Alison Light traces the tempestuous relationship between the author and her cook Nellie, who she alternately sacks and begs to return. An unintentionally hilarious 1899 book, The Servant Problem: An Attempt at its Solution, is a treatise on how lazy, feckless maids damage your mental health. “Servants are the pest of my life and yet I cannot do without them," says one mistress. A thought echoed recently in TheWall Street Journal where the Manhattan super-rich, their apartments staffed by cooks and maids, mourned their lost privacy.
As Frank Field notes, the trend has been for servants to live out. But the head of a large London nanny agency tells me that this is reversing. Not only the super-rich but any family with a box room is clearing it out because, while a day nanny costs £600 a week, if you provide board
it is only £400. And given London’s high rents, this also appeals to the nannies.
So are Yorkshire girls still coming down to work in London homes, like my aunts? “They come over from Poland or even Brazil," says the agency, “but we rarely get English girls from beyond the Home Counties." Back in Doncaster, every home-help or hospital cleaner I come across is a local person. It’s a fallacy that our young don’t wish to work hard: they just don’t want to do it below stairs.
Document TIMEUK0020140222ea2m001cf
