{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2858"}
____
  
Politics
Migration cuts ‘make Britain look nasty’
Michael Savage   
341 words
29 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Attempts by ministers to reduce immigration are creating a “nasty Britain” feeling among foreign students and businesses, a Tory peer has warned.
Lord Howell of Guildford, the former Foreign Minister and George Osborne’s father-in-law, said that there were frustrations about the tightening of British visa rules.
Restrictions have been reinforced as the Government struggles to meet David Cameron’s goal of reducing net migration below 100,000 by next year. Ukip is campaigning on the issue ahead of the European elections in May.
Lord Howell said that restrictions on student and business visas were creating a “blot” on Britain’s international reputation. “This country has got to be open for business, our leaders say that all the time,” he told the Today programme on Radio 4.
“Being open for business means we’ve got to welcome the right people, including a lot of students and brilliant skilled people who add to our power in the world; and we’ve got to keep out those obviously who would do bad things to Britain and damage us.”
The peer, who heads a Lords committee on Britain’s “soft power”, said that a string of witnesses brought up the issue of Britain’s stance on immigration.
“We are not getting it right,” he said. “All our witnesses who came before us . . . said the visa policy and some of the handling of immigration policy was creating rather a blot, creating a ‘nasty Britain’ feeling. In fact, we’ve got all these fantastic assets which, if we handle them right and tell the story right, can promote a very positive image for Britain, increase our trade, enable us to export more, invest more.”
He said that some students wanting to study in Britain were finding it “a matter of despair trying to get in”.
There is little chance of the Prime Minister achieving his target. Both the Budget and the Office for National Statistics assumed that net migration would stay well above 100,000.
Document TIMEUK0020140329ea3t00078
