{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"633"}
____
  
Families
Three Pounds in my Pocket: my father and the first Asians in Britain
Kavita Puri   
1,595 words
10 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
I’d heard many £3 tales throughout my childhood. Stories of starting a life with nearly nothing. Of the women who sewed money into the lining of their saris to smuggle a little extra cash into the country. Or the taxi drivers at Heathrow fleecing new Indian arrivals for a quick trip to Southall, despite knowing they all arrived with £3. The stories seemed slightly preposterous. I mean, how could you start a new life in a new country with so little?
It was during a funeral that I realised the stories could be true. A family friend began paying tribute to his father by talking about how much he had achieved given that he came to Britain with just £3 in his pocket. I realised it wasn’t just a family myth and that I needed to find out more about these postwar arrivals from the Indian subcontinent who, unlike the Windrush generation, are a strangely forgotten part of history. Before the last of that pioneering generation passed away I decided to make a Radio 4 documentary about my findings.
In the 1950s, the UK Government opened its doors to Commonwealth citizens and a generation of young men from the Indian subcontinent came to Britain to seek their fortune. They were needed to help to rebuild the economy after the Second World War through working in factories, foundries and public services. But there was a snag. Those coming from India could bring only £3 — equivalent to £50 today. Like most developing countries, India faced an extreme shortage of foreign currency, so rationed it with a strict quota. Those young men who arrived with a suitcase and a few pounds could never have imagined that one day they would break long-established racial boundaries — many of those I interviewed would go on to become pillars of the British establishment.
My father, Ravi Datt Puri, a pure-maths graduate from New Delhi, was one of them. He arrived in November 1959, aged 24. He’d tired of his job working for Pfizer in India and was lured by an attractive graduate traineeship at a well-known engineering company in Middlesbrough. He imagined Britain “would be very nice, posh, clean, tidy and wherever you go it would be fantastic, but I was disappointed. The buses were exactly the same as they were in Bombay."
Arriving at Heathrow airport, he was expecting to meet a family friend who would take him to Middlesbrough. But the friend was out on a date and my dad had to make his way alone to Yorkshire. Waiting on a platform at King’s Cross station on a winter evening, he was bitterly cold. He had no overcoat, having been told by his family that he wouldn’t need one. From his one suitcase he took out a brown dressing gown that he’d recently bought in Kashmir. He wore it on the platform while waiting for his train. He only took it off once he arrived at the home of his English landlady in Middlesbrough. Not surprisingly, my father soon developed a raging fever. It rained non-stop for days while he was recovering. In one of his first letters home he wrote: “It is nearly a week now and I have noticed the sun never rises in the British Empire."
Unlike the Windrush generation, the postwar arrivals from the Indian subcontinent are a largely forgotten part of history. Dr Florian Stadtler, from the University of Exeter and co-author of Asian Britain, explains this anomaly. “There was no Windrush moment. That’s why the process of South Asian migration, particularly pre-1960, has fallen under the historical radar."
Mohammed Ajeeb came from Mirpur, Pakistan in 1957. Like most men at the time he came in search of a better life and to provide for his family back home. He arrived with £5 — as the Pakistani authorities allowed you to bring a few pounds extra. He recalls: “You could not expect any better jobs than all the jobs refused by the white people; the most dirty, difficult and dangerous jobs." Paula Sanghera was 2 when she came to Coventry in 1953 with her mother, to join her father who’d arrived three years earlier. At that time it was extremely unusual for families to join the men in Britain. Her father worked at the Sterling Metal foundry and she remembers how he would come home on his bike “in the evening covered in dirt. He worked on the furnace. It was the worst job in the foundry and I can actually remember him coughing up blood. He couldn’t speak English, he couldn’t read or write and that was the best job he was capable of getting."
Kulwant Selhi came here by ship from Bombay in 1954 when he was 18. Luckily for him he arrived with £17. He’d paid a shilling to enter a competition to guess the speed of the ship to England and won. He arrived at Tilbury docks on November 5. Walking off the ship there were fireworks and he assumed the British must celebrate Diwali. He came to Britain to join his father who was working at the Indian High Commission. His father wanted him to learn “British ways". These men in the 1950s had been born during the British Raj. The idea that they could pay the British, in their own country, to do menial things for them, was unimaginable. Selhi remembers going to Charing Cross to have his shoes shined so his brother could “take my picture. I wanted to send it to India to show that the English people are polishing my shoes."
For many years, I’d hesitated to ask my father of his early days here. I was afraid he’d tell me stories of bitter racism. He genuinely can’t recall any in Middlesbrough. It is kindness he remembers. He had a good boss, Vincent Thompson, whom my father describes as a “godfather". A month after my father arrived in England, Thompson invited him to join his family for Christmas lunch so he wouldn’t be alone. He went every year after that, long after he’d left the company, and until I was born.
At the beginning of the 1950s there were only 43,000 people from the Indian subcontinent in Britain. They were greeted with curiosity. Selhi was the only Indian in Charlton, South London, in the mid-1950s and remembers the children following him around the street, thinking his turban meant he was a Maharajah. Sanghera remembers her English neighbours in Coventry asking where her family came from and why they were here. “I would make up all these stories: my mum and dad were a prince and princess in exile. We haven’t got many things because they were chucked out of their kingdom." These stories her neighbours believed.
But there was racism. Ajeeb’s first house was in Nottingham; 28 men lived there. He recalls sometimes there were four in one bed, with day and night shifts. “The conditions were atrocious," he says. “After six months half of us caught TB because of the overcrowding and lack of fresh air". They lived like this because of the low rent, but also because “the white people didn’t want us. In the shop windows the adverts were placed freely, saying: ‘No blacks, no dogs, no Irish’." In those days Asians were classified as blacks and it wasn’t illegal to discriminate on the grounds of race, ethnicity or nationality in housing until 1968.
At the beginning of the 1960s the number of migrants from the Indian subcontinent had risen to 112,000. Amid much public anxiety about the arrival of immigrants from the former colonies, the Government imposed restrictions on new entrants. Gurparshad Bance travelled in 1954, aged 13, from Ambala in Haryana state to Shoreditch. His father wanted him to come to get a good education. He remembers towards the late 1950s a shift in attitudes as attacks increased in East London. One day he was hurt, not only for being Indian, but also for wearing a turban. “The English boys, they grabbed me and said: ‘Why you wearing this? You got a sore head?’ They keep calling you a black dog or they took your turban off. We went through a lot of things."
Not one of these men thought they would stay. Ajeeb remembers crying at night, wanting to go back. But he made a pact with himself: “I will succeed in this country by hook or by crook." My father only planned on being here two years — “I am still here," he says. Once the pioneer men decided to stay their wives joined them, many arriving in the 1960s.
These forgotten stories are part of British history. These early pioneers paved the way for the three million Indians, Pakistanis and Bangladeshis who live in Britain today. Of these men, Ajeeb became the first Asian Lord Mayor in Britain, Bance a successful businessman, Selhi a college lecturer and Sanghera a deputy headteacher. My own father finished a PhD and became a prize-winning engineer. Not bad for £3.
Three Pounds in My Pocket is a three-part series. Listen to the first episode today at 5pm on BBC Asian Network. Listen to episodes two and three at 11am on Friday March 14 and 21 on Radio 4. The whole series will also be available on iPlayer.
Document TIMEUK0020140310ea3a000s3
