{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3058"}
____
  
Europe
Britain will get a fair deal, vows EU hopeful
David Charter, Berlin   
561 words
26 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The leading contender for the European Union’s top job has pledged to work for a “fair deal for Britain” in a boost for David Cameron’s plan to negotiate looser membership terms.
Jean-Claude Juncker, the former prime minister of Luxembourg, said that he would make keeping Britain in the 28-member club one of his top priorities if he became president of the European Commission. His promise will be regarded by Downing Street as a significant concession because Mr Juncker is regarded as an arch-federalist who has previously warned that Britain will not be allowed to rewrite EU rules.
“No reasonable politician can ignore the fact that, during the next five years, we will have to find solutions for the political concerns of the UK,” Mr Juncker told a press conference in Brussels. “We have to do this to keep the UK in the EU. As commission president, I will work for a fair deal with Britain.”
Mr Juncker, 59, is the leading candidate of Europe’s centre-right parties for the top job when the successor to José Manuel Barroso is selected in the autumn, but he has not been endorsed by the Conservative party in Britain. He was previously regarded as hostile to Mr Cameron, who pulled his MEPs out of the main European conservative group five years ago in protest at its commitment to building a federal Europe.
Mr Juncker’s change of tone towards Britain will be seen a sign of the success of Mr Cameron’s policy of renegotiating a new deal on EU membership before holding a referendum on EU membership in 2017. The prime minister has said that his key demands include tighter immigration rules, new powers for national parliaments to change EU law and abolishing the principle of “ever closer union”.
“I will be ready to talk to him about these demands in a fair and reasonable manner,” Mr Juncker said, in contrast to his earlier dismissal of fundamental changes. In return for “a deal that accepts the specificities of the UK”, Britain will need to allow the 18 eurozone countries to integrate further.
“The other EU countries will have to accept that the UK will never participate in the euro, even if we may regret this . . . and it will stay outside new EU institutions, such as the European Public Prosecutor’s Office,” he said. “My red line in such talks would be the integrity of the single market and its four freedoms”, including freedom of movement.
Mr Juncker’s mood of compromise reflected a more accommodating tone in leading EU capitals including Warsaw, where Radek Sikorski, the Polish foreign minister, told The Times: “We are perfectly willing to help you fix some of the problems of the EU.”
Mr Juncker is campaigning across the EU during the European parliament election campaign but has not scheduled any meetings in Britain.
His case to become the next commission president will be strengthened if the centre-right parties win the most MEPs in the voting on May 22 and May 25.
Europe’s centre-left parties have nominated Martin Schulz, the German president of the European parliament, as their top candidate.
David Charter is Berlin Correspondent of The Times and author of Europe: In or Out? published by Biteback
Document TIMEUK0020140425ea4q003ag
