{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2989"}
____
  
Education
Free schools are expensive and fail communities, claims report
Nicola Woolcock, Education Correspondent   
393 words
9 May 2014
13:24
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Free schools are not opening in the areas of greatest need and their soaring costs threaten to outstrip the available budget, according to a report by an influential committee of MPs.
Standards of financial management and governance are “not up to scratch” in some free schools, while whistleblowers have uncovered recent scandals that should have been identified by officials, the Public Accounts Committee said.
Its report, published today, claims mistakes have arisen because the free schools programme has been rushed and schools have taken advantage of their autonomy.
Margaret Hodge, chair of the committee, said: “Opening new kinds of schools as such speed inevitably gives rise to risks.
“The Department for Education and the Education Funding Agency’s oversight arrangements for free schools are not yet working effectively to ensure that public money is used properly.
“The agency relies on high levels of compliance by schools, yet fewer than half of free schools submitted their required financial returns for 2011/12 to the agency on time.”
School places, particularly primary, are under immense pressure from a baby boom and immigration, especially in major cities and the south east of England.
Mrs Hodge said: “We are also concerned that applications for new free schools are not emerging from areas of greatest forecast need, for more and better school places.
“The department has received no applications to open primary free schools from half of districts with a high or severe forecast need for extra school places.”
She claimed the department was not being open enough about its reasons for making decisions in favour of certain free schools.
She added: “Capital costs of the free school programme are escalating. The most recent round of approved free schools had a greater proportion of more expensive types, such as secondaries, special and alternative provision, located in more expensive regions. If this mix of approved free schools continues, there is a risk of costs exceeding available funding."
However, the report also praised the department for making clear progress by opening new free schools quickly, and for strengthening the way it approved applications.
Tristram Hunt, the Shadow Education Secretary, said: “This report is yet more evidence that Cameron’s free school programme is diverting precious resources away from areas in dire need of more school places.”
Document TIMEUK0020140509ea59001b9
