{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"688"}
____
  
Rachel Sylvester
Don’t laugh at Ukip – it’s a serious force; The fruitcakes may provide light relief, but the party represents a powerful voice that feels ignored in Britain
Rachel Sylvester   
1,173 words
11 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
It’s easy to sneer at Ukip. David Cameron called them “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists", Michael Howard dismissed them as “gadflies and cranks". Nigel Farage’s barmy army looks like a one-man-pint-in-hand-band, combining golf club bonhomie with shock-jock prejudice — reactionary, swivel-eyed, out of touch.
Although the country is struggling at the edge of recession, Ukip has no economic policy and its leader has disowned his entire 2010 manifesto. Of the party’s 21 MEPs elected since 1999, almost half have defected, resigned, been suspended or gone to jail. The Ukip headquarters has been described as “Carry On Politics" — ill-disciplined and unprofessional. Even the leader’s wife, Kirsten, has described the party’s operation as a “freak show". These rebels with a cause seem to revel in their eccentricity: at Ukip’s recent spring conference in Torquay there was fruit cake on offer to delegates at the door.
And this is not just harmless fun, a Monster Raving Loony Party in pinstripes. There is bigotry behind the comments blaming the floods on gay marriage and suggesting that women are sluts if they do not clean behind the fridge. There is cynicism and hypocrisy lurking below the surface, with MEPs happily riding first class on the Brussels gravy train even as they express their disgust at the House of Commons expenses scandal. They stay in smart Strasbourg hotels and dine in fine restaurants, slurping Chteau Margaux at taxpayers’ expense, while condemning the waste of money by the EU. The party is also facing a European Parliament investigation into allegations that it improperly diverted public money to pay its staff in London. With a higher profile comes greater scrutiny and there is a bad smell around the Kippers.
I have spent the past two months investigating Ukip with Alice Thomson and it is clear that these anti-Establishment insurgents are guilty of appalling double standards. There is also a clear streak of nastiness running through the party. And yet, I can’t help feeling that it would be foolish and dangerous for the mainstream parties to ignore the Faragistes. It’s not just that the insurgents could steal their votes at the European elections in May, almost certainly forcing the Tories into third place and possibly beating Labour to the top spot. Nor is the issue that Ukip is expanding its base in local government, raising the prospect that it could soon be involved in council coalitions, wielding actual power.
What really matters is that the rise of Ukip exposes deep social and economic divisions in Britain. It points to a profound sense of alienation among certain sections of the population. Mr Farage may be a flawed character, more knave than fool in my view, but he is like the canary in the mine who is picking up on the poison gas of class and wealth inequality. His party is full of idiots, but its success is a serious warning to the political establishment and the “metropolitan elite" that includes the media.
Russell Brand touched a nerve when he declared himself “utterly disenchanted by politics", condemning politicians as “frauds and liars" and the political system “nothing more than a bureaucratic means for furthering the augmentation and advantages of economic elites". Now Ukip is tapping into this mood — Neil Hamilton, the party’s deputy chairman, claims that 40 per cent of the party’s supporters did not vote at the last election. Ukip is not, however, just the “none of the above" protest party, it is also playing on the economic disadvantage and educational exclusion felt by a minority of the electorate as the country returns to growth.
It is striking — but no coincidence — that, according to YouGov polling for The Times, Ukip is the most working-class party, with 52 per cent of its supporters coming from the C2DE social groups, compared with 46 per cent for Labour, 43 per cent for the Tories and 32 per cent for the Lib Dems. Its voters are also the least well educated of any party apart from the BNP — 52 per cent of Ukip backers left school at 16 or earlier.
As you might expect, these voters are Eurosceptic, hostile to immigration and culturally conservative; they are more likely than others to oppose gay marriage and to think mothers of young children should stay at home. What is more surprising, though, is that they are to the left on economics. In our poll, 57 per cent of Ukip supporters favoured increasing the top rate of tax to “at least 50 per cent". Meanwhile, 72 per cent opposed the HS2 rail link, a position that would put them closer to Ed Balls than George Osborne. The over-riding sentiment among Ukip voters is pessimism — on the economy and prospects for their own family. Eighty per cent think it will be difficult for today’s young adults to prosper over the next twenty years and 56 per cent believe Britain’s best years are behind it.
In their new book Revolt on the Right, the academics Matthew Goodwin and Rob Ford track the demographic changes that have created such fertile conditions for Ukip. Although in 1964 working-class voters outnumbered middle-class ones by 2 to 1, by 2010, the middle classes had a 4 to 3 advantage. When Harold Wilson won power, almost half of workers were in blue-collar jobs and more than 70 per cent of voters had no formal educational qualifications; by the time Tony Blair became Prime Minister 33 years later, a third of the electorate was in professional middle-class jobs and one in five had university degrees, a trend that has continued.
In the past 50 years, in other words, Britain has changed from a country where blue-collar workers determined elections to one where the aspirational middle classes decide the outcome. As David Cameron, Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg — all well-educated, wealthy metropolitan liberals — focus on wooing Middle England, Ukip is appealing to the “left behind" working-class voters who feel ignored by the political elite.
“Ukip’s emergence is not primarily the result of things the mainstream parties or their leaders have said or done," Goodwin and Ford write. “This revolt is the result of their inability to articulate and respond to deep-seated and longstanding social and political conflicts in Britain." It is the same desire for a voice that led to the blip in support for the BNP a few years ago.
Mr Farage is completely wrong in his analysis of the problems the country faces and the solutions he proposes. His party is cynically exploiting vulnerable people and playing on their worst instincts and fears. But the rise in Ukip reveals a deeper truth that cannot be laughed off or ignored. Britain is still two nations.
Document TIMEUK0020140311ea3b000cy
