{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2569"}
____
  
Columnists
In the age of post-moral politics, cynicism rules; Farage and Boris are immune to scandal because they seem to connect with ordinary people
Melanie Phillips   
818 words
17 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
In scurrilous publications, insurgent politicians accuse their rivals of class privilege, sexual debauchery and political corruption. Hitting back, the toffs accuse the radicals of being idle, licentious and unprincipled.
No, not Gove v Boris or the Tory party v Farage. This was the 18th century, when the political class tore itself apart in roaring denunciations of sexual scandals, establishment cartels and endemic corruption.
What was demanded instead was a new politics based on transparency, reason, fairness, honesty and the national interest. Sound familiar? A lot of mud is being chucked around the political playground now, much of it aimed at Nigel Farage, whose Ukip presents such a threat to the Tories and the political order.
He has been compared to a “1950s insurance salesman" with a “weakness for crumpet’"and a “terrible temper", and is said to run a “chaotic’"party, which troughs boorishly on the EU gravy train he denounces. A disaffected former Ukipper has made accusations, robustly denied, that Farage had an affair with a party aide and used his European parliamentary expenses to employ both his “former mistress" and his wife.
In another corner of the playground, the hitherto unfailingly polite Michael Gove has been getting in touch with his inner hooligan in fisticuffs with the Mayor of London. The Education Secretary thinks Boris Johnson, who is reportedly eyeing a path to the leadership, is conducting a whispering campaign against him.
So we learn that Mr Gove said at a private dinner that the Eton-educated Boris would be a disaster as prime minister, and criticised as “preposterous" the domination of Mr Cameron’s inner circle by Old Etonians. And he reportedly said, after a glass or three, that Boris had “no gravitas," was “unfit to lead the nation" and “plays to the gallery".
Yet neither Nigel Farage nor Boris has been remotely damaged by these attacks. According to a ComRes poll, Ukip is now in the lead for May’s European elections with 30 per cent, two points ahead of Labour, with the Tories a bad third at 21 per cent and the LibDems written off at 8 per cent. In a YouGov poll, 43 per cent of respondents said Boris would improve the Conservatives’ chances in the general election; only 24 per cent said he would decrease their chances.
These attacks bounce harmlessly off their targets because of a profound change in the public view of politics.
Voter disaffection is the defining fact of today’s political life. The Conservative and Labour parties have fewer than 150,000 and 200,000 members respectively, compared with about 3 million and 1 million in 1951.
The public think mainstream politicians have failed to address the issues voters care deeply about, such as EU membership and mass immigration, and lie about them. Hence Ukip’s success.
Class is no longer the issue. No one cares that Boris went to Eton. The resentment against “toffs" is not about where politicians went to school but arises if they seem not to connect to ordinary people, which Boris most certainly does.
The culture of permissiveness has also destroyed the shock effect of personal scandals. Boris is unscathed by revelations of his affairs. Adultery, unmarried motherhood and homosexuality were once covered up. Now it is those who are judgmental about them who get stick.
In 2010 the Education Minister, David Laws, was suspended from Parliament after wrongly claiming expenses for renting a room in the house of his male lover. No one seemed to care much about either the revelation of his sexuality or his expenses claims. Everyone assumed he’d return to office because of his demonstrable ability. So it proved.
What voters want today is to be able to recognise something of themselves in a politician, and know that they can therefore be trusted when they say they will address what is important to you. Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson have this in spades.
The idea that, if a politician betrays a spouse, you can’t trust that character in public life either has been eroded — surely because marriage itself has been stripped of its deepest meaning, having been redefined to a merely contingent contractual arrangement.
Even financial irregularities are no longer toxic. As a result of the parliamentary expenses saga and cash for questions, voters believe politicians are all the same and now take it for granted they are dishonest.
What damages politicians today is the perception of incompetence, hypocrisy or disdain for ordinary people. Public cynicism is total. Pragmatism rules.
In the 18th century scandals opened political debate to the masses and led to political reform. Today, in our anti-politics, post-moral society, they play very differently. Whether that makes for a healthier society is quite another question.
Document TIMEUK0020140317ea3h000q1
