{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2526"}
____
  
Columnists
Can the rest of Britain compete with London? The world economy is changing radically but the British state is largely unreformed, trapped in a different timezone
Tim Montgomerie   
966 words
6 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Seven years ago London was hit by the economic equivalent of a force 12 gale. The financial services sector that helped to power the boom years experienced a hurricane-strength lashing. As economic waves larger than anything we’d seen since the 1930s crashed and then retreated from across our capital city they left behind huge debts, discredited banks and a great deal of soul-searching.
Yet remarkably quickly London is now back on its pre-crash trajectory. It’s growing faster than any other part of the UK. Above its streets cranes fill the skyline. Below those same streets an underground network is bursting at the seams as it ferries people from every part of the world to every part of the city. London is more productive, more vibrant and more hip than any other part of Britain.
The London phenomenon is being explored by Evan Davis in a fascinating two-part documentary series for BBC2 that began earlier this week. In Mind the Gap, London versus the Rest, Davis explains London’s success by asking us to think of a town with five nightclubs. Everyone flocks to the popular, crowded club, not to the empty ones. That’s where all the energy is. That’s where it’s all happening. London is only one outstanding example of a wider global trend where great cities such as Istanbul, Shanghai and Mumbai enjoy supercharged growth as they act as magnets for talented, inventive people.
A new report from the Centre for Entrepreneurs finds that nearly half of the UK’s immigrant-founded businesses are in London. These immigrants aren’t taking our jobs, but creating them and, interestingly, most British voters seem to appreciatethis contribution. While opinion polls find opposition to immigration in general, the CFE found that four times as many Britons thought immigrant entrepreneurs made a positive contribution to the UK than made a negative one (45 per cent to 11 per cent). This isn’t the first opinion poll to find that the British people may not much like immigration in the abstract but are sympathetic to it when it’s broken down in terms of, for example, providing nurses for the NHS or highly trained engineers to fill industrial skills gaps.
The immigration disliked by the public is lower-skill immigration. In so far as people believe this kind of immigration brings any benefits they believe that the cost is too great. What the rich might gain in terms of cheaper domestic staff, for example, the poor lose in terms of depressed wages and in competition for public services and housing.
Scepticism about the benefits of mass immigration has been expressed most assertively by UKIP’s Nigel Farage. “If you said to me," he told Radio 4, “would I like to see a further five million people come in to Britain and if that happened we’d all be slightly richer, I’d say . . . I’d rather young unemployed British people had a realistic chance of getting a job."
Mr Farage speaks for a large number of people, represented by UKIP in Britain and the Tea Party in America, who worry that deeper things are happening to our economy than the Great Recession. These megatrends include the growth of global cities and the hyper mobility of talented people. London looks set to do well in this age but it’s far from clear that Preston, Swansea or Corby will prosper.
I’m writing before part two of Davis’s documentary has aired, in which he moves outside London in search of solutions. I don’t know what he will recommend but we do know that no government will adopt what he describes as the “really mean solution" — abandoning the likes of Hull to Detroit-scale decline.
If our Government did not have a deficit I suspect there would be broad agreement about the kind of interventions that, on the margins, might help the places and people who aren’t benefiting from these extraordinary times. We would be spending much more on infrastructure in the North, for example, and vocational education.
Given that the age of austerity has at least five years to run we should probably do what Ed Balls has promised to do and conduct a zero-based review of public spending. Most of the time government operates on tramlines; never travelling in a fundamentally different direction. Some budgets get a little smaller and some a little bigger. Aside, perhaps, from its welfare reforms this coalition hasn’t undertaken a fundamental review of the State and its purpose. It has protected some budgets and salami-sliced others.
If it was thinking about London versus the Rest it would switch spending as much as cutting it. Reducing benefits to wealthier pensioners, for example, and using the savings to build university technology colleges. It would introduce new council tax bands on high-value properties and build starter houses so the low-waged could at least afford a home. It would scrap HS2 and share the savings across all northern cities — not just the ones due to be connected to London.
Beyond such interventions we should let northern counties keep all the proceeds from the exploitation of the shale gas beneath them. The Treasury shouldn’t get a penny. Northern Ireland should set its own level of corporation tax. And what about an English Parliament, based in Manchester, Leeds or Sheffield, to counter political centralisation?
Too much political energy is spent discussing the level of spending or immigration. We would be better served thinking a lot more deeply about the quality and purpose of both.
Document TIMEUK0020140306ea36000np
