{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"844"}
____
  
Columnists
Only the State can protect the poor in this crisis; Huge changes in the global labour market mean millions of families are living on the edge
Jenni Russell   
861 words
27 February 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Many years ago a man I know, then an undergraduate at Oxford, found himself badly short of money, halfway through the term. The only solution was to sell all the expensive textbooks he had bought earlier in his course. He was sorting through them when a wealthy friend, an heir to a family fortune, asked what on earth he was doing. My friend explained. The heir was completely baffled. “What? Do you mean you haven’t even got the odd few thousand lying about?"
That same tone of lofty incomprehension characterises some of today’s debate about poverty in Britain. Lord Carey of Clifton, the former Archbishop of Canterbury, attacks the “gargantuan" welfare system and says that it cannot replace kinship and neighbourliness. He bemoans the extent of poor people’s debts, and recommends that extended families do much more for poorer members.
The Times believes it is simplistic to blame the growth in food banks, with half a million people using them since Easter, on changes to welfare. Although it regrets that the loss of a “a few pounds in benefits" may force some to have to choose between necessities, it thinks there is “little doubt" the increased supply of food banks has stimulated demand, and believes the answer to the welfare state’s problems is to shrink it further.
The Chancellor intends to do just that with an unprecedented pruning of the welfare budget over the next five years. The impression is that if only poor people would organise their lives more effectively, work harder at work or at finding work, and help each other out a little more, the problems would disappear.
This is not just a comforting fantasy for the comfortably-off, it’s a dangerous delusion. It ignores the huge structural changes affecting the British economy, thanks to technology, international competition and immigration. The top 1 per cent have seen their share of earnings increase from 7 to 10 per cent in two decades, but median pay has been static or falling for ten years. The decline is sharpest for those at the bottom of the scale.
Poor people are getting poorer because full-time jobs are disappearing or wage rates are being cut. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation shows that the income of those in the bottom tenth of the income range peaked in 2004 and has been falling ever since. At the same time there have been above-inflation rises in essential costs. Since 2008 gas and electricity prices have risen by almost two thirds, food by a third, transport by a quarter. The result is that incomes and wealth are being squeezed as never before. Half of all families on average to low incomes have no savings whatsoever.
The financial crisis has hit most people’s assets hard. The Resolution Foundation shows that the bottom 80 per cent of people with a mortgage saw their net worth, in savings, shares and property, fall from 2005 to 2013. People in the bottom half lost an average of £30,000. The top 20 per cent, in contrast, have become much richer.
This is making life unbelievably tough for ordinary people. Poor families now live in communities where no one, extended families or not, has any money to spare.
A girl I know from a deprived area of London won a place at a Russell Group university last year. She literally couldn’t get there. Her father was a mechanic, her mother was unemployed and the family had already built up credit card debt that they could not pay just to keep up with the bills. Student loans don’t pay out until the week after getting to university. There was no car and not a penny spare to pay up front for a train ticket, a duvet, or the first week’s meals — everything that a prosperous person takes for granted. Eventually her boyfriend’s family agreed to borrow to lend her £200 until her loan came through.
When money is this tight, even lending is perilous. A young man from a poor area tells me flatly that the biggest social gap he has discovered since arriving at a middle-class university is the attitude to loans. At home he would never risk lending money, because £20 can break a friendship; recipients will lie, row and never speak to you again rather than repay it. The prosperous borrow and repay without a thought.
Understanding what’s driving these divisions is vital because they will not disappear as the recession ends. Forecasts tell us that the market is going to create many more low-wage, low-skill jobs, and a much smaller number of highly paid, high-skilled ones. Self-help for the poorest is no answer in an economy that will increasingly reward a lucky minority. For the sake of all those who don’t happen to have a few thousand lying around, we have never been more in need of a strong, supportive, redistributive welfare state.
Document TIMEUK0020140227ea2r000wh
