{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"3724"}
____
  
Law
Foreign couples in the divorce courts: welcome or not?
William Healing   
705 words
22 May 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
There are good reasons why people seek to litigate in England and Wales — and are perfectly within their rights to do so
You would be forgiven for thinking that some High Court judges want to put up a “closed to foreigners” sign over the family courts, such is their apparent frustration with wealthy international couples who take up precious court time with their high-value divorce cases.
Comments from Mr Justice Holman presiding over the attempt of Pauline Chai, a former Ms Malaysia, to divorce in England her husband Khoo Kay Peng, who owns a huge stake in Laura Ashley International, are the latest evidence of such.
Mr Justice Holman has reportedly expressed the view that there are many more deserving cases that will find it hard to get court time, due to this case. Other judges have also complained of this recently.
We have a Ukip-dominated EU election with themes of immigration and racism — and have lived through a controversial process of “delawyering” in family law where legal aid has been scaled back and mediation is being heavily promoted. But there is a danger of confusing two important issues.
The first are the real reasons why people, many of them foreign born, will litigate in England and Wales and have the perfect and proper right to do so. The second is the funding of the family courts.
The Peng divorce actually hinges on whether Ms Chai satisfies the criteria for jurisdiction here under the relevant EU regulation (Brussels II bis Regulation 2001/2003) and under the doctrine of forum non conveniens.
The Pengs are currently arguing over the choice of jurisdiction between England and Malaysia because there is a lot at stake. What makes England and Wales the divorce “capital” of the world is its relative generosity in the financial result it will offer the weaker spouse.
Should we now consider a wealthy couple’s jurisdiction battle “undeserving” of court time?
The answer is no. Complex points of private international law are often under scrutiny. The law progresses through these decisions and my firm will see at least three of them in the High Court this year (although most of our cases settle out of court).
As Lord Wilson, the recently appointed Supreme Court judge, himself once a family lawyer in divorce cases, said not so long ago at a “collaborative law” event for out-of-court settlement process, there are many reasons why parties will need to go on litigating.
The reasons for going to court may vary from moving forward complex areas of law (jurisdiction points are a good example), to complex evidence that needs testing, to the unreasonableness or dishonesty of one party that needs to be brought to book.
Our rules and court system apply to both rich and poor in the same way healthcare in this country is available and open to all via the NHS.
As this year’s Rich List illustrates only too well, our jurisdiction attracts international couples from all over the world to live and litigate here, at least in part because of a reliable and fair legal system. London has been a trading city for many centuries and is now a global financial centre. It is only natural that wealthy international couples who live here want to litigate here in the event of family breakdown.
So while Dr Peng was rightly chastised recently for not attending court, let’s not tar all rich foreigners with the same brush.
As a very separate issue, there is the question of resourcing the family courts. There is already talk of increasing court application fees for certain couples (means testing may be an option).
There is a problem where a court fee costing a few hundred pounds bears no relationship whatsoever to the cost of a judge’s salary, staff salaries and keeping the courtroom and back-office lights on. This may need looking at soon. Meanwhile long live international litigation in the English family courts provided such cases pay their way.
William Healing is a family law partner at Kingsley Napley LLP and a member of the firm’s international families and investors programme
Document TIMEUK0020140521ea5m0034i
