{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"484"}
____
  
Columnists
Labour doesn’t need a referendum life raft; Forty years ago, an EU vote rescued the party. This time around it’s a Tory problem that Miliband is right to ignore
David Aaronovitch   
1,181 words
13 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
‘There is no crisis in the party about Europe," the senior Labour man told the press, “because there is going to a be a referendum." It was early 1975 and Ron Hayward was the general- secretary. The tactic that saved Labour from splitting had originated in an idea of Tony Benn’s at a Shadow Cabinet in late 1970, three year before the Conservative Prime Minister, Edward Heath, negotiated Britain’s entry into the EEC, as it was then called. Benn recalls James Callaghan remarking: “Tony has launched a dinghy into which we one day may be very happy to climb, to escape the storm."
And climb into it they did. When Labour came back to power, just, in 1974, a quarter of Harold Wilson’s Cabinet favoured withdrawal from Europe. At a special conference held in April 1975 in a sports centre in Islington, the party voted 2-1 against remaining in the community. Only two months later the “Yes to Europe" campaign, led by a Prime Minister who was in a minority in his own party, won 67 per cent of the vote. The referendum saved him.
In fact the red-sailed dinghy floated only for another six or seven years. The overwhelming result in the referendum didn’t stop the Labour Left from continuing to press successfully for withdrawal to be party policy and this led to the split that created the Social Democratic Party and helped Labour to stay in the wilderness.
It is all so long ago. Then it was Labour, now it’s the Tories, and has been for more than 20 years. It’s been so long that the very passage of time has become one of the most poignant arguments for a new in/out referendum. No one under 55 has had a chance to vote directly for or against our membership of the EU. And that, goes the complaint, is undemocratic.
If that’s true, almost all of our arrangements are undemocratic. There has never been a referendum on the monarchy, the second chamber, membership of Nato, the WTO or the UN, capital punishment, privatisation, the NHS or an English parliament. All these things we have been content to leave to our elected representatives.
In fact direct votes on some of those might have been no bad thing. Several times in the past few years I have found myself becoming what might be called a “soditall" referendite. As in: “Sod it all, they’re never going to shut up about it until we have a referendum, so let’s do it and get it over with."
A version of this mentality, albeit dressed up in language about “seeking legitimacy" and suchlike, has even seduced sensible people at respectable left-of-centre think-tanks. Yet there is a problem with this thinking. Why, unless there is a specific and new reason for a referendum, should a government put the stability of the economy and business investment temporarily at hazard? Why, unless there is a specific and new reason, spend a year campaigning one way or the other on continuing something when there are so many other things to be done?
The bully reason, of course, is that you should because it’s what people want. Or, from a political party’s outward perspective, because they will vote for someone else if you don’t offer it. Or, from a party’s inward perspective, because your members will revolt if you don’t. Of course, those doing the revolting will claim that these two perspectives mesh together. They are usually wrong.
When polled, 58 per cent or so of the British people say that they’d like an in/out referendum on Europe. Presumably such a figure fortified the Conservative Party when it assaulted Ed Miliband yesterday after his “no referendum without a good reason" speech. As David Cameron put it: “At the next election, voters can elect a Tory government that will renegotiate Britain’s position in Europe and give people a guaranteed in/out referendum by the end of 2017. If they get a Labour government they get no referendum, no choice, nothing."
For Cameron in 2014 read Wilson 40 years earlier. Like Wilson, Cameron wants to stay in the EU, using renegotiation to disimpale himself from his party’s hook. He may also believe, as many of his troops do, that votes leaching off to Ukip will return if he sounds referendumy enough. Those Labour figures critical of Miliband’s decision fear Cameron may be correct, that the Tory vote may recover and that, therefore, Labour should match his offer.
Five reasons say not.
First, this is not a Labour problem. Labour’s soluble problem (as opposed to its obvious insoluble one) is credibility on the economy and public and private services. Any time that it spends discussing the theology of future referendums is time wasted. We have far too many underskilled young people, a housing crisis, low productivity and an ageing problem. Labour must be the party that focuses on the fundamentals.
Second, although the public may want a referendum on Europe as opposed to not wanting one, they don’t actually seem to care much whether one actually happens. Europe is not even in the top 15 of issues that voters think most matter, and currently runs at a salience of about 6 per cent (only 2 per cent think it the top issue). To the voters anyone who spends a lot of time banging on about Brussels looks a bit eccentric. Most Tory MPs look a bit eccentric. Dare I say it, some newspapers look a bit eccentric.
Third, by far the highest salience — 13 per cent — is among ABC1 voters aged 55 and over. At a guess, I’d say that those are Tories. Possibly Ukip. Ukip voters only want a referendum because they burn to leave the EU, whatever Mr Cameron renegotiates. Anti-Europe Ukippers and ABC1 Tories (as opposed to anti-immigration Ukippers) are never going to vote Labour and probably won’t vote for Cameron.
Fourth, if Labour had promised a no-new-reason referendum then — whatever else it wanted to do when it got into office — it would have to expend political capital and energy while operating in a climate of uncertainty. As things now stand, not subjecting the economy to this unnecessary uncertainty becomes a real and pretty powerful reason not to vote Conservative in 2015.
Fifth (and this should inform Miliband over immigration too), the 21st century, as suggested by the way younger voters see the world, does not belong to Little Britain. True, youngsters vote less than their parents and grandparents, but their values are probably those of the near future. Best to embrace them now.
That’s why Ed’s right to chill. The man’s got other stuff to do, other people to see.
Document TIMEUK0020140313ea3d000fm
