{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2176"}
____
  
Columnists
Panicked Tories are attacking their own voters; James Brokenshire blames the ‘metropolitan elite’ for fuelling immigration. He’s either suffered a brainstorm or gone rogue
Matthew Parris   
1,084 words
8 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Does your shower leak through your kitchen ceiling? Then do the patriotic thing. Put a bucket under the leak and wait months for an expensive plumber with an English surname. Or so the Government seems to be urging.
Ye gods, panicking Tories are now turning their guns on their own voters. Apparently we are traitors for giving work to Eastern European jobseekers, suggests a Home Office minister this week. It’s our fault.
Did somebody put the pitiable James Brokenshire up to this? On Wednesday the startled mole of a junior minister morphed into an demented ferret and went on a rampage against those he accuses of fuelling immigration from Europe: “the wealthy metropolitan elite". As if millions of Eastern European immigrants throng the halls and line the marbled stairs of the rich in London. I hadn’t realised Downton Abbey was a documentary. Then he widened his attack to the use of “cheap labour" generally.
Tipping a French waiter becomes a betrayal of our own countrymen. The railway refreshment trolley pushed by a Czech woman is a weapon of mass destruction trained on British workers. What next? A giant white builder’s van packed like a Trojan horse with invading Poles? An army of Estonian chambermaids insinuating themselves into our seaside hotels ready to break cover and overwhelm us? The film industry should get on to this: When Nannies Attack; Revenge of the Cabbage Pickers.
Don’t bother with the Brokenshire speech. I’ve read it in full. It’s half-witted, disjointed, cliché-ridden nonsense. When I hear the phrase “for too long we have . . ." I begin to twitch. When it is suggested we do something because “it’s the right thing to do . . . " I grimace. When I encounter “let’s face it . . . " the pain grows. And when we hit “I’m sorry, but . . . " I reach for my revolver. Are we listening to a government minister or minicab driver? “I’m sorry but . . . " encapsulates the snarl masquerading as a whimper that forms the stock-in-trade of rancid populists, from Juan Perón to Nigel Farage.
To the extent that Mr Brokenshire’s speech to the Demos think-tank contains an argument, the argument collapses. The minister tries to insist that the recent Labour Market Displacement Report does not contradict an earlier report (itself carefully worded) that had suggested immigrant workers could cost native workers jobs. In fact, the LMD report concludes that there is “relatively little evidence that migration has caused statistically significant displacement of UK natives from the labour market in periods when the economy is strong". At times of recession, it says, some displacement may occur; but as the economy recovers the effect disappears.
That’s just common sense. When jobs are plentiful, immigrants don’t displace natives; when jobs are scarce, they may. For a period, cheap immigrant labour may “force down" (as Mr Brokenshire put it) some wages. Since this Government has from the start, rightly, been forcing down wages — forcing down the remuneration of millions of its own often low-paid employees — this should come as good news to the Chancellor, whom I notice goes silent when these disputes break out.
In the name of all that’s sane and civilised, what are the Tories doing whipping up resentment of European immigrants when our growing economy needs them and there’s no way anyway of keeping them out? No way, that is, except by choosing to quit the European Union after a referendum that David Cameron himself has conjured from nowhere and in which he would be recommending that we stay? Is Mr Cameron’s compass broken? Is there a wobbly needle somewhere in his brain, whizzing helplessly round and round, lost to magnetism and prey to every gust from the Tory right? The effort to resist that conclusion is becoming harder to sustain.
Yet still I try to resist it. Maybe (I tell myself) Mr Brokenshire was freelancing? Maybe he had gone rogue in that speech accusing a Lib Dem Cabinet minister (Vince Cable) of lying, and insulting both immigrants and those who give them work? Maybe Cabinet ministers didn’t know he would claim that the authors of immigration are our “metropolitan elite"?
It’s possible. A speech on immigration by a Minister of State would normally be cleared by seniors, but given that it would take the average journalist about seven seconds to unearth Tories with foreign home helps, you do have to wonder if Mr Brokenshire suffered a brainstorm? If so, why didn’t the PM or the Home Secretary immediately disown these ravings? When ministers on the Tory left speak out of turn they feel the force of Mr Cameron’s displeasure within hours.
So maybe Mr Cameron actually believes this stuff? Or maybe he doesn’t believe anything?
Or maybe (I tell myself) this was intended as nothing more than a sop to the irreconcilables on the Tory benches: a bit of dog-whistling to UKIP-inclined Conservative voters?
Clinging desperately to my faith in Mr Cameron’s rationality and liberalism, I plump for this last option: a sop. The thing about sops, though, is they have to satisfy. Immigrant-bashing from Tory ministers doesn’t. Nobody is fooled; the irreconcilables smell fear in Downing Street and their contempt grows.
Here’s an analogy fanciful enough to distance us from our own affiliations. Imagine that a small, single-issue party threatened a governing party by talking up popular concern about possible brain damage from mobile phones, promising in its manifesto to issue the entire population with lead-lined helmets. And suppose the governing party regarded that as impractical. Would you be recommending the governing party to talk up the possible dangers, sympathise with popular worries, rage against the threat of radiation, and make noisy speeches listing all the legislative tweaks they would make, marginally to reduce the electronic menace?
And would you have advised them, early on, to promise huge cuts in electronic radiation from phone use?
The Tories have no answer to European immigration. For Mr Cameron to demand serious curbs would fail, wreck negotiations and diminish chances of achieving the achievable. He know this. Voters do, too. It isn’t ideal but the best the Tories can do now on immigration is put that one down to experience and shut up.
Document TIMEUK0020140308ea38000i8
