{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"185"}
____
  
Asia
I’m alone and scared, says student deported to Mauritius
Lucy Bannerman and Vel Moonien, Mauritius   
695 words
4 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The teenager who was deported to Mauritius despite a campaign to keep her in the UK long enough to finish her exams said that she felt alone and frightened last night on arriving in the country without her mother.
Yashika Bageerathi, 19, landed in Mauritius yesterday after the failure of several last-minute attempts by teachers, classmates and politicians to postpone her deportation until she had finished her A levels.
“I’m just all alone here. Everyone is in England. I don’t know what to do,” she said via a Skype link to ITV News. “I really want to complete my education. It’s just so hard being here. I want to be there, with my friends, in school, with my teachers.”
She said that she felt “very frightened” during the Air Mauritius flight, on which she was accompanied by four security guards. “I was really scared because I was feeling really alone. Even today I was told media people [were] waiting for me at the airport, and even walking in the airport people were looking at me like I was a criminal.”
Asked what she was going to do now, she said: “I don’t know, still trying to make arrangements.”
She said she did not think she could complete her education in Mauritius. “I don’t think I can, with all the people watching me and all the media wanting to talk to me. I don’t know. It’s just so annoying and unfair.”
Miss Bageerathi came to the UK with her mother, sister and brother in 2011. They claim that they moved to escape a relative who was physically abusive. They overstayed their visas and eventually claimed asylum last summer.
Last night her father and grandfather told Mauritian reporters that they were baffled by the claims. Her father, Dinesh Bageerathi, who lives in the small town of Triolet in the north of the island, said he did not know which relative was alleged to have been abusive.
He added that he had not seen his daughter for three years and that she was welcome to visit him. “I don’t understand why she is saying what she is saying,” he said. However, he added: “The authorities should have given her some time to finish her exams. It’s quite an injustice.”
Her grandfather, Bodhun Bageerathi, told reporters she kept in regular contact with him while living in the UK. “She called me regularly each week and was very happy. She used to say, ‘Dada [Grandad], this is the school of my dreams.’”
Lynne Dawes, the principal of Oasis Academy Hadley in Enfield, North London, said that the school was in regular contact with the promising student, and that her most immediate concern was to find a safe place to stay.
She said the school was working to ensure that Miss Bageerathi would still be able to complete her A levels. A spokesman for the Oasis charity, which runs the academy, said it was supporting her mother, who was “very upset understandably, she’s very emotional and she’s very worried. Worry is the overriding feeling”.
Miss Bageerathi, whose case sparked a petition that has attracted around 178,000 signatures, had been detained at Yarl’s Wood Immigration Removal Centre since March 19.
Paul Nettleship, a solicitor for the family, said that her mother, Sowbhagyawatee Bageerathi, was also facing deportation but that because her younger daughter, Shaivya, was only 16, the threat was not imminent. Mr Nettleship said the family were looking into pursuing an out of country appeal.
Previous attempts to deport Miss Bageerathi were thwarted when Air Mauritius refused to fly her out, following an earlier refusal by British Airways, but Air Mauritius confirmed that it had received a “directive” ordering her to be deported before she was flown out.
The Labour MP Keith Vaz, chairman of the Home Affairs Select Committee, intervened in the case at the last minute to no avail, writing to the Home Secretary to ask her to “urgently reconsider” the decision, which he described as “needlessly cruel”.
Document TIMEUK0020140403ea440042k
