{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1443"}
____
  
Support Services
Scandals catch up with Serco as profits plunge 60%
Andrew Clark, Deputy Business Editor   
392 words
4 March 2014
08:54
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A costly government over-billing scandal at Serco sent the outsourcing company’s profits plunging by 60 per cent last year and prompted a warning of further financial pain in 2014.
Serco is under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office for allegedly over-charging the Government for a deal to monitor electronically tagged convicts. It is also under scrutiny over a deal to shuttle prisoners between prisons and court hearings.
A furore surrounding the scandal has prompted a management shake-up with Serco’s veteran boss, Chris Hyman, leaving the company. Aggreko’s chief executive, Rupert Soames, was named last week as Serco’s new head, effective in June.
The full cost of Serco’s mishandling of its Ministry of Justice deals was laid bare today as the company revealed that its pre-tax profits for 2013 dived by 62 per cent to £107 million.
Alastair Lyons, chairman, said: “It is hard for those outside the company to appreciate how disruptive were the events of last year."
He continued: “Our pipeline of UK government opportunities was impacted; reputational damage adversely affected our ability to win contracts with the private sector; and there has been significant management change at the most senior level."
Serco’s operations include maintaining Britain’s ballistic missile early warning system, managing the Docklands Light Railway in London, administering President Obama’s “Obamacare" US healthcare reforms and operating immigration detention centres in Australia.
The company’s revenue rose by 5.6 per cent to £4.29 billion. However, investigations, compensation and legal costs surrounding its dispute with the Government cost £90.5 million.
Mr Lyons admitted that Serco had experienced a “material loss of momentum". The company said it expected its underlying operating profits to fall from £285 million to between £220 million and £250 million during 2014.
Sam Thomas, an analyst at Cantor Fitzgerald, said the company still faces significant challenges: “Whilst we welcomed Friday’s announcement that Mr Soames would become group CEO from June, he will have his work cut out. Serco is in need of serious repair, in our view."
Serco’s woes had been anticipated by the market following two profit warnings. The shares opened slightly higher this morning, rising by 2p to 451.8p in early trading.
Document TIMEUK0020140304ea3400232
