{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1512"}
____
  
Politics
Gove takes aim at ‘ridiculous’ Old Etonian circle at No 10’
Francis Elliott, Rachel Sylvester Alice Thomson, Laura Pitel   
719 words
15 March 2014
00:13
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
Michael Gove last night took aim at David Cameron for surrounding himself with Old Etonians, describing it as ridiculous and preposterous.
The Education Secretary said that no other developed country was run by such a close-knit group of people.
He drew parallels between the Prime Minister’s Downing Street team and the Cabinet of the former Conservative Prime Minister Lord Salisbury, Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, whose supposed nepotism is one theory for the expression “Bob’s your uncle".
Mr Gove told the Financial Times: “It doesn’t make me feel personally uncomfortable, because I like each of the individuals concerned," referring to Mr Cameron and his team. “But it’s ridiculous. I don’t know where you can find a similar situation in any other developed economy."
He added: “I don’t blame any of the individuals concerned, that would be equally silly. But it’s a function of the fact that, as we pointed out a couple of years ago, more boys from Eton went to Oxford and Cambridge than boys eligible for free school meals."
His intervention is further evidence that tensions have heightened among some of the most senior Conservatives. In an interview with The Timestoday, Boris Johnson, the Mayor of London, dismisses claims that he has fallen out with Mr Gove. “Everybody would benefit from focusing on the re-election of David Cameron," Mr Johnson says. “Old friends of mine around the Cabinet table all want to work together for a Tory victory. We all want to unite."
However, Mr Johnson also underlines his ability, despite having attended Eton, to escape the associations of privilege that dog Mr Cameron and George Osborne. “I am a scholarship boy. I was educated by the State — if Henry VI [the founder of Eton] is not an emanation of the State I don’t know what is — and I went to Primrose Hill Primary School. If I connect with working people it is because we have done a lot for London," Mr Johnson says.
After an outbreak of Tory infighting between his allies and those of Mr Osborne, Mr Johnson delivered a teasing reply to the question of whether he will be a parliamentary candidate next year.
“I’m not saying," he says, before joking that he might contest one of the safest Labour seats. “Maybe I should stand in South Shields". That will be seen as a riposte to Mr Osborne, who reportedly urged him to campaign as a Conservative candidate and so bind his fate to that of David Cameron.
The London mayor also says that leaving the EU would not be as “traumatic" as some make out, in a message that will be welcomed by Eurosceptic Tory MPs eyeing potential replacements for Mr Cameron.
“There wouldn’t be a great implosion, just as there wasn’t when we refused to join the euro," he says.
While making clear that he is not in favour of withdrawal now, he argues that leaving would be “much more neutral" than some people claim.
“It would be more democratic [and] the advantages of London would continue. We have the right time zone, the right language . . . I don’t think being in the EU is the be-all and end-all. The EU is shrinking, our horizon should be global."
However, Mr Johnson mocked a recent speech by James Brokenshire, the Immigration Minister, that blamed the wealthy elite for enjoying the benefits of cheap labour. “Of course it isn’t wrong to employ a foreign nanny or cleaner," Mr Johnson said, revealing that he has for 20 years employed a Filipina woman who became a British citizen about five years ago.
“Labour made a catastrophic mistake when they decided to open the floodgates," he says, “but what I don’t think we should do is slam the door on immigration."
He said that he supported the Home Office’s controversial “Go Home" vans — “Lynton [Crosby] rang me up and said, ‘Jeez mate, why are you in favour of that?’
“But if you’re in breach of the law and you need to know how to get out of the mess, it’s helpful to have someone saying, ‘Ring this number’."
Document TIMEUK0020140315ea3f000p3
