{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"517"}
____
  
Politics
Ukip face frowns on party over migrants
Michael Savage, Chief Political Correspondent   
429 words
9 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
A prominent Ukip supporter who was promoted as a “future face” of the party has revealed that she will no longer campaign for it because of her concerns over the party’s stance on immigration.
Alexandra Swann, whose defection from the Tories to Ukip was revealed personally by Nigel Farage in 2012, said she struggled with the party’s toughened rhetoric on EU migration.
The 25-year-old, who served as deputy chairwoman of Conservative Future before joining Ukip, said she had not left the party and expected to vote for it. However, she said that its focus on immigration concerned her.
“I agree with Ukip’s points system [allowing in migrants with the right skills] until we leave the EU,” she said on Twitter. “I just don’t like the rhetoric.
“I’ve no problem with the points based policy, I just really dislike that immigration has become main topic . . . I support [other Ukip policies of] leaving EU, flat tax, grammar schools and energy policy.”
Mr Farage has made immigration from the EU the main thrust of his party’s pitch before local and European elections in May. He said this year that he felt “slightly awkward” when he could only hear languages other than English spoken on trains in London.
He has also claimed that parts of Britain are being “taken over” by migrants, making parts of the country “frankly unrecognisable”.
Ms Swann’s concerns emerged after she told a presenter on the London Live television station that she did not want to be introduced as a member of Ukip.
“I haven’t officially left or fallen out with anyone, but I can’t bring myself to campaign for them,” she told The Independent.
She said later that she had been misrepresented and that her decision not to campaign for Ukip was down to a “career shift”. She added: “I haven’t left Ukip. I will still vote for them. I just have no desire to be affiliated with any political party in an ongoing way.”
Her move is a blow to Ukip in its quest to boost support before next month’s elections. Ms Swann almost won a council seat in Surrey for the party last year. She was defeated by the Tory incumbent by 43 votes. In a speech to the party’s conference in 2012 she said that only Ukip could be trusted to “put the human rights of British people over the apparent rights of convicted terrorists and illegal immigrants”.
Document TIMEUK0020140408ea49003sl
