{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"2739"}
____
  
Politics
Live: Farage accuses Clegg of ‘wilful lie’ to British people over EU
Laura Pitel   
1,495 words
2 April 2014
22:43
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
2100: UKIP deputy leader Paul Nuttall has denied that Mr Farage had delivered a “low blow" to his Lib Dem counterpart over the allegation he had lied to the public.
He said: “I think you can have as much passion as you want, but if you’re wrong, you’re wrong. Nick Clegg is wrong on this."
2050: John Redwood MP, the Conservative representative in the spin room, said he felt tonight’s debate did not live up to last week’s, and identified the “nasty" way in which the two speakers took each other to task.
The Wokingham MP said: “There was too much shouting. I thought it was a very disappointing debate. We don’t want liveliness of that kind, it was just people being rather nasty to each other."
2040: Reaction from Danny Alexander, the Liberal Democrat Chief Secretary to the Treasury, who described the Ukip leader as “Nigel Mirage".
“I think tonight Nick Clegg demonstrated the real passion he has for this argument," he said. “The strong basis of his argument - and ours as Liberal Democrats - is that we will be stronger and more effective in the EU."
2022: Host David Dimbleby, summing up at the end of the contest, described the hour-long stand-off as “an interesting debate", but added: “I don’t know if it made things any clearer or not."
2018: The results of two snap polls are in - and it’s a second resounding win for Nigel Farage.
On the question of who performed best, YouGov say that 68 per cent think Nigel Farage won, 27 per cent think Nick Clegg won, and 5 per cent don’t know.
A Guardian/ICM poll puts the figures at 69 per cent for Mr Farage and 31 per cent for Mr Clegg.
2005: Closing statements now. Nigel says that Britain should take control of its own laws and engage with a world beyond Europe. He ends with a rousing rallying cry: “Come and join the people’s army. Let’s topple the British Establishment!”
Clegg says that Ukip wants to return to a world where women knew their place, gay people could not marry and we didn’t have to worry about climate change. He prefers the modern world, he says, and he will do everything he can to make the UK stay in the EU. “That is how we protect the Britain that we love.”
1957: We’re onto the last question from the audience: what will the EU look like 10 years from now. Nick Clegg says it will look pretty similar to today’s incarnation. Nigel Farage says that Britain will no longer be a member, nor will many other countries. He adds: “If it doesn’t end democratically it will end very unpleasantly.” He is worried about the rise of extremist parties across the continent, he says.
1952: Nick and Nigel are arguing over the coalition’s law that promises a referendum if new powers are transferred from London to Brussels. Clegg says it’s a clear guarantee to the public. Farage retorts: “Nobody believes you.”
1948: Ouch. Farage tells Clegg: “You are wilfully lying to the British people”. The two men are engaged in a testy row over how much British legislation is made in Brussels in a reprise of an argument last week. Nick says the figure is just 7 per cent. Nigel accuses him of flat-out lying.
1946: Nick accuses Nigel of “dishonestly” selling a vision of Britain with the clock turned back, asking: “Are you going to say we’re going return to the gold standard or get WG Grace to open the batting for England again?”
1938: Onto the subject of energy, Nigel Farage is singing the praises of nuclear energy and fracking and railing against wind farms and other green technology.
Clegg uses an argument about Europe’s dependence on Russian gas to have another dig at Farage with a reference to “Nigel’s friend Vladimir Putin.”
1937: Nigel Farage says that a white working class has been left as an “underclass” thanks to the impact of migration. He also singles out the Afro-Caribbean community in London, which he says suffers from massive unemployment.
Nick Clegg says: “It’s all very well for Nigel Farage to pontificate from the side lines with his EU taxpayer-funded job in Brussels” but the Government is working to sort of Britain’s economic woes and create jobs and apprentices for young people.
1930: The think tank Demos is trying out some new software to analyse the live Twitter reaction to the debate.
In the first 10 minutes, out of 14,000 tweets only 60 were directly supportive of Nick Clegg, it says, compared to 8,781 that were negative. But there was a burst of positive support for the Lib Dem leader when he spoke about jobs, and 935 positive tweets in reaction to his answer about Europe’s role in protecting British employment.
1926: Now onto EU migration. Nick Clegg produces a Ukip leaflet (a trick he pulled last week) as evidence of what he says are attempts by Ukip to mislead voters. This one shows a picture of a Native American that reads: “He used to ignore immigration. Now he lives on a reservation.”
He can hardly hide his disbelief that this suggests that British people will end up “cooped up on a reservation.” “What are you going to say next?” he asks. “That you’re Crazy Horse or Sitting Bull?”
Mr Farage says that he doesn’t recognise the leaflet nor would he condone its sentiment. He says that the problem is that Britain has no idea how many people will arrive “this year, next year or the year after.” We have no control of our borders, he says.
1918: Nick Clegg says that Britain only has clout in foreign policy because of its membership of the European Union. “We won’t have that if we isolate ourselves from our European neighbours,” he says.
Nigel Farage argues that the EU has expanded over the past 40 years from a common market into an expansionist body that wants its own air force and navy. He goes on to attack the coalition Government over its failed effort to persuade Parliament to back missile strikes on Syria. “This country has had enough of getting involved in endless foreign wars,” he says.
1915: We’re onto the subject of foreign policy now. Farage has repeated his condemenation of the “expansionist” policy of the European Union which he said has been “deeply provocative” to Putin and gave “false hope” to Ukraines wanting to join the EU.
Clegg hits back with strong words, describing the Ukip leader’s position on Putin as “indefensible.” He accused Mr Farage of loathing the EU so much that it lets him justify the actions of Putin. Russia’s stance on Ukraine is one thing, he says, “but what about Syria?” where Moscow had the power to bring Assad to the negotiating table and stop the suffering.
1911: The first question from the audience asks the two men what their principles on Europe are based on.
Nick Clegg is having a go at being more passionate, pumping his fist as he explains that membership of Europe is all about keeping Britain safe, strong and ensuring enough jobs.
Nigel Farage says that it’s about expanding Britain’s horizons beyond the boundaries of Europe and trading with the whole world.
1906: In his opening statement Nick Clegg says that the idea that Britain can leave Europe and still punch above its weight is a “dangerous con”.
1905: Nigel Farage starts us off and begins with an attack on Nick Clegg. The majority of Britons want to get out of Europe, he says, but the main obstacle is the Lib Dem leader. Mr Clegg, he says, part of the “political class and their friends in big business” who want to stick with the status quo.
1900: It’s round two of Clegg vs Farage and the stakes are high for both men. The Liberal Democrat leader is under pressure to come top after his Ukip counterpart secured a clear win in last week’s clash over Britain’s membership of the European Union. Mr Farage, meanwhile, has found himself in hot water over his views on Russia and Syria after declaring Vladimir Putin to be the world leader he most admires.
We’re expecting tonight’s encounter, the second of two debates, to be more fiery than the first one. Mr Clegg is said to have felt that he got too caught up with statistical battles in the first encounter and has vowed to get his passion across more clearly. Ukip, meanwhile, have suggested that they plan to go in for more personal attacks on the Lib Dem leader. Crash helmets at the ready.
Document TIMEUK0020140402ea42002gz
