{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"116"}
____
  
UK News
Student taken to Heathrow for expulsion to Mauritius
Richard Ford and Philippe Naughton   
415 words
3 April 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
An A-Level student was understood to have been deported to Mauritius last night after a High Court judge refused to grant an emergency injunction blocking the move.
Yashika ­Bageerathi, 19, was last seen boarding a plane to be flown out of the country after the failure of a last-ditch application made to Lord Justice Richards, the appeal judge at the Royal Courts of Justice in central London.
The application was made while Miss Bageerathi was being driven from Yarl’s Wood Immigration Removal Centre in Bedfordshire to Heathrow airport.
The teenager’s battle to stay in Britain had become a cause célèbre, with a protest outside Parliament and a petition attracting 175,000 signatures.
Lord Justice Richards refused to order the stay in a telephone hearing. In such cases, deportation orders are only stayed if a judge decides that the case raises issues that are arguable and merit a further hearing.
Sowbhagyawatee Bageerathi, Yashika’s mother, said: “I am very sad for my daughter. I am very worried. I want everybody to go together and not to send her alone. “
Mrs Bageerathi promised that she would leave Britain with her two other children who are at school in England, if the authorities had a change of heart and did not deport her daughter.
Yashika arrived on a six-month visitor visa in December 2011, following her mother who had arrived on a similar visa two years earlier. Both women were overstayers when they claimed asylum in 2013. Some 170,000 people have signed an appeal.
An Air Mauritius spokesman said the airline received “a directive from UK authorities for the repatriation of Miss Bhageerathi”. He said: “All conditions having been satisfied, the company had no other choice than to abide by the directive.
“Air Mauritius regrets this situation, but as all airline companies cannot but abide by decisions taken by relevant authorities.”
The Home Office would give no official confirmation that the deportation had been carried out but a spokesman said: “The case has gone through the proper legal process and our decision has been supported by the courts on five separate occasions.”
Earlier in the day, Keith Vaz, chairman of the Home Affairs Select Committee, wrote a letter to Theresa May saying that it would be “needlessly cruel” to deport Miss Bageerathi, who was due to begin sitting her A levels at Oasis Academy Hadley next month.
Document TIMEUK0020140402ea42001s4
