{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"1044"}
____
  
Need to Know
Need to know: Your 5-minute digest
1,239 words
19 May 2014
01:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The week ahead
Monday, May 19
The cheap-fares, no-frills formula that served Ryanair so well for two decades has been overhauled over the past six months after an admission by Michael O’Leary that his airline was “unnecessarily pissing people off”. Two profit warnings last year were a wake-up call for the Irish carrier, which has faced tough price competition from budget offshoots of traditional national flag carriers across Europe. Annual results are likely to reveal a rare fall in earnings, with net profit forecast to drop from €569 million to about €520 million. Much has changed at Ryanair: fines have been reduced for passengers who forget to print out their boarding passes and flexible tickets are being introduced.
Full-year results Ryanair; Mitie; Babcock International; Cranswick; Gable Holdings; Tissue Regenix; Tangent Communications; e2v
Interim results Shaftesbury; The Innovation Group; ITE
Trading updates Chesnara; Alent; DRS Data & Research Services; Charles Taylor Consulting; Irish Continental Group
Tuesday, May 20
Marks & Spencer reports full-year profits that are likely to confirm that Next has overtaken the high street retailer for the first time.
Citi and Nomura, joint house brokers for M&S, cut their annual profit forecasts to £615 million in March, well below the £695 million profits made by Next. Since then, M&S has updated investors on its trading performance in the fourth quarter. It stripped out the sales performance of clothing from its general merchandise business for the first time since they had dipped soon after Marc Bolland arrived in 2010.
Full-year results Marks & Spencer; Vodafone; BTG; Entertainment One; Babcock International; Bloomsbury Publishing; Homeserve; Big Yellow Group; Intermediate Capital; blurGroup; First Derivatives
Interim results Topps Tiles; Victrex; Paragon; Greencore; Renew Holdings; Driver Group; AFI Development
Trading update Spirax-Sarco; Afren; APR Energy
Economics 09.30 UK CPI (Apr); 09.30 UK RPI (Apr); 09.30 UK PPI (Apr)
Wednesday, May 21
All eyes will be on the latest minutes from the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee, looking for clues to when the policymakers might raise interest rates from the record low of 0.5 per cent, unchanged since March 2009. Economists believe that the nine members of the MPC voted unanimously in favour of keeping the rate on hold and the size of its quantitative easing asset purchase programme at £375 billion this month, but expect there to be some differing views among the members regarding when the time is right for the first increase. At last week’s inflation report, Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, accepted that Britain was edging closer to the point at which the bank rate would have to start rising.
Full-year results Cable & Wireless Communications; Burberry; UK Mail; FirstGroup; Great Portland Estates; Stobart; SSE; Pennon; Telecom Plus; Vectura; DC
Interim results Britvic; Frutarom Industries
Economics 09.30 UK retail sales (Apr); 09.30 UK Bank of England MPC minutes; 19.00 US FOMC minutes (April 29-30)
Thursday,  May 22
The margins will be the key as Royal Mail reports its maiden full-year results. The privatised national postal network has committed to raising its profit margins to the high-single-digit levels of its peers on the Continent. At its half-year stage, the company reported margins of 5.2 per cent. Investors will want to see how rising stamp prices have offset falling letter volumes.
Full-year results Royal Mail; Mothercare; SABMiller; QinetiQ; United Utilities; Halfords; Dairy Crest; Hogg Robinson; Investec; Booker; Electrocomponents; Hydrodec; Max Property
Interim results Daily Mail & General Trust; M&B
Trading update Amlin
Economics 09.30 UK GDP (Q1 2nd release); 09.30 UK: public finances (Apr); 09.30 UK: index of services (Mar); 11.00 CBI industrial trends; 09.00 eurozone PMI surveys (May, preliminary)
Friday, May 23
HSBC faces investors at the annual meeting at the Barbican in London. Britain’s biggest banking group will be hoping that a late concession from Douglas Flint, the chairman, will help to defuse a shareholder revolt over pay. HSBC has downgraded a planned share award for Mr Flint of up to £2.25 million to a maximum of £1 million and promised that the payment will be a one-off. The climbdown is understood to have been agreed last week during a meeting between the bank and the Association of British Insurers. Shareholders will be given a vote on whether HSBC should be allowed to pay bonuses of as much as twice base pay. Without that permission, it is restricted to bonuses no larger than base pay. The bank is also paying new allowances to star traders and dealmakers to get round European Union rules on banker bonuses.
Full-year results Quintain
Trading update Close Brothers
What the papers said
The Sunday Times
Pfizer is mulling a last-minute increase in its offer for AstraZeneca. Bankers think £53 a share might be enough to bring Astra to the table, with the Americans tipped to increase the cash element of its bid.
Pfizer is not the only US group with an eye on Britain’s lower corporate tax rate. Walgreens, the drugstore giant, is examining a £10.5 billion bid for Alliance Boots, in which it holds a 45 per cent stake.
Elsewhere, Zoopla is poised for a stock flotation that will value the property website at about £1 billion. The company is set to unveil its plans this week.
The Observer
MPs are to investigate Serco after the outsourcing company was forced to disclose an internal report revealing that it failed to properly investigate a claim of repeated sexual assaults against a female resident at an immigration detention centre. Keith Vaz, chairman of the home affairs select committee, said he would be summoning Serco executives to explain their actions.
Co-op members have voted to accept a controversial plan by Lord  Myners to overhaul the 150-year-old organisation, which has been hit by crises.
The Sunday Telegraph
Marks & Spencer will move to appease investors upset by the retailer’s performanceby hinting that it is to boost shareholder returns and focus on improving profit margins. The chain is expected this week to report a decline of nearly 8 per cent in its headline annual pre-tax profits.
SSE is braced for calls to cut prices this week when it is expected to reveal that its profits surged by 9 per cent to £1.5 billion last year. Britain’s second-largest energy supplier announced in March that it would freeze prices until 2016.
PizzaExpress, owned by Cinven, has attracted interest from a number of large private equity groups, with bids starting at £1 billion.
Mail on Sunday
Energy bills are set to rise after Ofgem said that it would proceed with plans to shake up the energy market, which will end up helping Scottish wind farms at the expense of power stations in England. The changes could raise prices by as much as £20 a year on average, according to critics of the industry.
Adventure Forest Group, the company behind Go Ape treetop safaris, has reported rising sales and profits, and claims that the green shoots of recovery are at last boosting business.
The founders of Silversurfers.com, a website that features the interests of over-50s, intend to raise £1 million through a fundraising to expand the business.
Document TIMEUK0020140518ea5j002lc
