{"newspaper":"thetimes.co.uk","id:"634"}
____
  
Families
Here’s why the posh London set all want an Aussie nanny; David Cameron’s choice reflects a trend to be seen across the capital. So why are English girls not good enough?
Damian Whitworth   
1,683 words
10 March 2014
00:01
thetimes.co.uk
TIMEUK
English
© 2014 Times Newspapers Ltd. All rights reserved   
The immigration debate has taken one of its stranger turns with calls for David Cameron to explain why he employed an Australian nanny rather than a British one. Talk to weary veterans of the childcare market, however, and they would wonder why he hadn’t done it sooner. An informal survey suggests that most parents can’t (or won’t) afford a British nanny and, given a choice, nine out of ten would go for an Aussie. And if you can’t get one of those a Kiwi will do.
“They speak the language and are generally can-do and energetic, and very practical ," says one North London mother who has hired British nannies but swears by the athletic girl from the Outback who looked after her daughter while she was working long office days. “Australians come on two-year visas and they live in your house because they want to save every penny and ‘do Europe’ while they are here. They knuckle down and work because they don’t want the hassle of looking for another job. And they aren’t looking for promotion or a new career. English nannies are always looking to up their status."
We don’t know why Cameron employed an Australian woman. Probably she was simply the best candidate that he and Samantha interviewed. But there are some very good reasons why British families rely on an international brigade of nannies and carers.
For a start British nannies are expensive. “People get the best person they can get with the money available. Childcare is very expensive in the UK and in London in particular," says Fiona Neill, the author of What the Nanny Saw. “A top nanny costs a lot. A really good, well-educated, fully trained British nanny can cost £60,000 a year and that is a lot of money for any family. Only UHNWIs [ultra high-net-worth individuals] are going to pay that."
Often these are foreign families living in London who want an English-speaking nanny. “They have homes that are the modern equivalent of Downton Abbey with a Filipino housekeeper, a gardener, a driver and a handyman. An English nanny is a brand, so in that sense it is a nanny’s market. They are unaffordable for English people."
As well as cost there is the small matter of the job description, Neill says. “Lots of people have Filipino nannies who are also housekeepers. Some foreign nannies are more amenable to doing more mundane domestic tasks. British nannies won’t do that — not out of a sense of entitlement, but because they don’t consider it part of their job description. They will do things that are childcare related but they won’t do things that a housekeeper or a cleaning lady would do."
A mother-of-three in Camden says she found herself competing against neighbours for the services of a Norland nanny. She won the battle but says: “When you are trying to get a top-notch British nanny it is the inverse of the normal relationship. When they come for the interview they are interviewing you. They are visiting five or six families and choosing their employer. This is based on salary and what other perks you are offering such as gym membership or use of a car, but also whether they think you are going to be interfering in the way they look after the children. They don’t want to kowtow to the parents on matters like discipline."
Sometimes ambitious nannies select a family that will provide the right challenges, such as looking after three children or children under school age, which they can then put on their CV. Foreign nannies, however, “mostly just want a job and will do what you ask them to do; they accept a broader job description. They might not scrub the floors but they will tidy up and wait in for the Ocado delivery. A British nanny might do that but they will let you know that they have done it as a favour."
We British can get ourselves in a terrible, angst-ridden, class-conscious tangle when it comes to hiring people. “Employing people from abroad sits more easily with your liberal sensibilities," a South London mother says. With British employees it can feel more awkward.
“It’s easier to tell someone foreign to do more," says an East London mother of two with a demanding media job. “It’s our awkwardness about the feeling of employing servants. You just feel more comfortable telling a Bulgarian to empty the dishwasher. It feels more awkward with an English girl and they seem less ready to do it. The Filipinos on the other hand go the whole way and do everything."
Many British nannies see caring for children as treading water until something better comes along. Neill observes that students and graduates, who used to work as nannies a generation ago, are now being hired as tutors.
“I had one nanny who wanted to be a child psychologist; this was just a second job for her," the East London mother says. “Another wanted to be an actress. It’s an insecure feeling with someone like that. You want someone who will be there for a while and build a relationship with your children."
Even career nannies can come with an unsettling attitude. “We had a fully qualified Welsh nanny who claimed to have looked after the children of a famous pop star and cost an absolute fortune," the woman from South London says. “It turned out that for her everything was too much trouble. She had been doing it for years but she had an ideological problem with people who were rich enough to employ nannies, which is not an ideal starting point if you want to be a nanny." Since then she has had 14 nannies and au pairs “of every nationality and religion". The best? “The Eastern Europeans are unbelievable: they work so hard. The Germans are a bit stern but generally very good."
Almost a match, in fact, for the Aussie nannies. “We had a wonderful British nanny for years and she travelled round the world with us," says one globe-trotting businessman now settled in North London. “But British nannies are quite expensive so meanly we went for the cheaper option. We had a succession of Australian nannies, each more muscular than the next. We both travel a lot for work at short notice and they lived in and were always there, able to paint toenails and talk about cricket."
“My Australian nanny was unfazed by wildlife," says the North London mother happily. “We had mice. She was used to ensuring rats didn’t get into the house back home. The other thing about Australians is that their grammar tends to be better than British nannies. The only slight irritation is that my daughter keeps saying ‘I’m good’ all the time, which drives me slightly mad."
Any nanny will do, as long as you get on
Without Filipinas to do the cleaning and Eastern Europeans or Antipodeans to look after childcare, it’s fair to say that my neighbourhood would grind to a halt as mothers checked themselves, all making Munch’s scream-face, into the Priory.
After all, most households in Notting Hill comprise a high-rolling daddy, a highly educated yummy mummy, a litter of children (four is the minimum), a nanny, a housekeeper, and a tutor — with invariably only the last speaking English as a first language because all four children have to get into St Paul’s or Westminster or heads will roll.
When I was working and breeding at the same time, I could only afford an English nanny when I was at the Financial Times and had only one placid baby boy. I inherited her — and I can’t resist putting this in — from Mr and Mrs Martin Amis, whose two boys were past the nanny stage.
Nadine was a vegan from Nottingham, which meant that most of our time was spent worrying about the ingestion of animal products, but she was tremendous and we loved her even if she was expensive, because she was English. But as good nannies go, 14 months after she arrived she sensibly went, after the arrival of my daughter.
After that, broken and broke, I had a score of au pairs, mothers’ helps, and live-ins, and my childcare was like cheap honey — the product of many countries. A Colombian, an Irishwoman, a Slovakian, a Moldovan who was using her nanny bedroom as a knocking shop, and Karolina, who went home to Warsaw one Christmas and was then detained on her return in Calais by the UK Border Agency. Poles were not allowed to be au pairs in the UK in 1999. I went to France to try to spring her. My last sight of Karolina was through my tears, standing in the rain, by the detention centre.
The years passed and eventually, after a score of nannies, I could manage just with “mannies" in the summer. Disregarding the gender-equality laws, I would advertise — but only for male Aussies or Kiwis who could drive and surf. My heart soared when these tall, sun-bronzed young men strolled into our life, often carrying guitars, the Jack Johnson songbook and surfboards, and whatever I asked them to do, however awful, they would reply, “No wucking furries mate."
The thing is, when you need a nanny, it doesn’t matter what nationality the nanny is. It’s whether you can live with her, she with you, and whether she will be kind and loving to your children. I quite sympathise with politicians’ nanny-gates because I’ve been there myself, and every day I thank God I don’t need “help" (not of that sort anyway) any more.
Rachel Johnson
Document TIMEUK0020140310ea3a000s8
